    Friday, 16 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. As you are aware, we are here to pay our last respects to the hon. Obonyo Jabwor who passed on. Being who he was until he passed, it was necessary for this House to convene and give him the respect that is due to him. For that reason, we were not able to prorogue Parliament yesterday since if that had happened, we would have had difficulty convening today. So I will use this same special sitting of Parliament to later prorogue Parliament. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor)

National Anthem 

East African Anthem

Laying of the wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CLEMENT HENRY OBONYO, FORMER MEMBER OF THE FOURTH PARLIAMENT AND CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DELEGATE FOR KOTIDO SOUTH

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the motion is read, honourable members, let us recognise the former Members of this House and former ministers of this country. I recognise hon. Patrick Mwondha, hon. Anthony Butele and also the family members who are on the technical bench directly behind me. I see other people in the gallery; I am sure they are part of the family that have come to observe our proceedings as we honour the late Jabwor.

Honourable members, this particular person has brought some very interesting developments in the House that are worth noting. Given the history of this country, what you are seeing today could be happening for the first time - that the wreath that was supposed to be laid by the DP Chief Whip was laid by a Member from UPC. I think that is worth noting. (Laughter)

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor. I move under rules 47, 48 and 51 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of the late Henry Clement Obonyo Jabwor, which occurred on the 10th day of May 2014;

AND WHEREAS the late Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor was born on 8 April 1944 in the village of Oliabong in Abim District to the late Mzee Joshua Okello and the late Balinda Akello;

RECALLING THAT the late hon. Clement Obonyo Jabwor had his formal education at Kiru Primary school in Abim District, Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School in Gulu District, Namilyango College in Mukono District and eventually graduated from Nairobi University in Kenya in 1969 having attained a Bachelor of Commerce degree with honours;

NOTING THAT the late Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor pursued his professional career as an accountant and worked with several reputable organisations at both national and international levels;

AWARE THAT the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor was a Member of the Parliament of Uganda for Kotido South Constituency from 1980 to 1985, and also a delegate to the Constituent Assembly from 1994 to 1995;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the demise of the late Henry Clement Obonyo Jabwor.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor to Uganda and other countries.

3. 	That his soul rests in eternal peace.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by hon. Peter Lokeris, hon. James Mutende, hon. Ayepa, hon. Sam Otada, hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, hon. Okuonzi and hon. Aleper.

Honourable member, I have a problem with the last prayer of your motion; we cannot by resolution declare that his soul rests in eternal peace. We can only resolve collectively that we pray to the Almighty God that his soul rests in eternal peace; otherwise, we would have a problem. That mandate is not given to Parliament even under the Constitution or the Bible.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Honourable members, I appreciate the Speaker’s advice and I want to amend the third prayer of the motion to say, “We collectively pray for his soul to rest in eternal peace.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to justify my motion. I want to inform Parliament and the country at large about our colleague who has gone to meet our Creator. 

It is with great sadness that Parliament learnt of the demise of the late Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor, which occurred on 10 May 2014 at Mulago Hospital. The late was born on 8 April 1944 in Oliabong in Abim to humble parents, the late Mzee Joshua Okello, of the Kapuru clan and the late Balinda Akello of the Kapuru clan. 

The late Obonyo was raised from a very humble background. He started his primary school education in Kiru Primary School in Abim District from 1952 to 1960. He attended Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School in Gulu District and while pursuing his O’level education, he was invited and he accepted to attend an American student exchange programme under the American Field Service in New York in the USA. His study under the exchange programme lasted for only one year, after which he returned to Sir Samuel Baker to finish his studies. He then proceeded to Namilyango College for his A’level. In 1967, he enrolled for a Bachelor of Commerce degree at Nairobi University where he graduated in 1969. 

The late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor’s endless pursuit for education saw him enrol for an accountancy course, ACCA, at Wolverhampton College for foundation A and B. He then went to North East Polytechnic for levels 1 to 3 between 1971 and 1973. It is during his time in the United Kingdom that the late hon. Clement Obonyo Henry Jabwor met his dear wife, Lydia Akina, who is from the Republic of Tanzania. They agreed and got married on 21 September 1974 at Eastham, London.

He worked in various places. The late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor began his working experience in 1976 where he served in both the private sector and in Government. His contribution in serving particularly came to light at the time he served on various commissions of inquiry on behalf of the Government of Uganda, especially between 1981 and 1987.

He was involved in many commissions of inquiry that unearthed corruption related activities. I want to mention some of the commissions of inquiry on which he served. He was an investigator in financial and personal management in Pemba Textile Ltd from April to August 1981. He also served as an investigator in the mismanagement of the Wood Industry Corporation from July to August in 1981 and he was the chairman of the commission of inquiry. He was also involved in the investigation of resources mismanagement of Nyanza Textile Industries from September to November 1985. Here he was a member of the commission of inquiry. He was also involved in an investigation of financial mismanagement in Ryan Textile Industries from March to August 1986. He also served on the ad hoc committee of inquiry on corruption in the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) and its subsidiaries from August 1986 to July 1987.

I also want to inform the House that hon. Clement Henry Jabwor also served on different Government parastatals during the period 1981 to 2008. We have also to thank God for that. He served as the chairman of Pamba Textile Ltd from 1981 to 1983. He also served as a member of the Nyanza Textile Industries board from 1983 to 1985. He served as chairman of the Uganda Tea Authority from 1981 to 1985 and a member of the Libyan Arab Bank board from 1982 to 1985. He also served as a member of the Uganda Development Bank board from 1981 to 1985 and also member of Kilembe Mines Ltd board from 1992 to 1994. He served as a member of the Uganda Land Commission from 1995 to 2008.

The contribution of the late Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor in unearthing corruption scandals on commissions of inquiry came at a time mostly when he was serving as a Member of Parliament for Kotido South Constituency, presently called Labwor, in Abim District from 1980 to 1985. Because of the faith the people had in him, the late hon. Obonyo Jabwor was returned to Parliament as a delegate of the Constituent Assembly, a body which was charged with making a new Constitution for the Republic of Uganda. The Constituent Assembly gave him a platform for making a very big input in establishing constitutional order in this country, and the Constitution was promulgated in 1995.

The late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor is survived by a widow, eight children and 10 grandchildren. Rt Hon. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Uganda, on behalf of the people of Uganda and on my own behalf, I want to extend my sincere heartfelt condolences to the family of the deceased, the people of Abim, the people of Karamoja, and the people of Uganda at large for the big loss of our gallant son.

I also want to bring apologies from the Leader of Government Business who is out of the country but sent apologies to the family. I want to thank you, Mr  Speaker, for having accepted to accord hon. Clement Jabwor an official burial and also accepting, despite the busy schedule, to accord him this time in Parliament. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much mover of the motion. Honourable members, we have a request from the family that this House should rise just before 4.00 p.m. because they would like to move at that time. I am going to ask the people who are going to second the motion and the people to debate to be brief so that we can share the time.

The motion before the House, which I now propose for your debate as the seconders come up, is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the demise of the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor; that Parliament takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor to Uganda and other countries; and hat it collectively prays that his soul rests in eternal peace. That is the motion for your debate. I will have the first seconder and then the second seconder and we shall see how to proceed.

2.56
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to start by extending the apologies of the Leader of the Opposition who has been held up by some personal problems but he may join us at some point. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to pay tribute to my dear friend and brother.

Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, lying before us here is a gentleman and an elder statesman I knew quite well and I associated with very closely. The late hon. Jabwor Clement was a Member of Parliament who participated in the December 1980 elections on the UPC ticket. He defeated Mr Ariono in the UPC primary elections and Mr Peter Lokiru who was a Democratic Party candidate in the general elections.

It is important to note here that hon. Obonyo Jabwor worked so hard to look for employment for the two persons he defeated. He succeeded by getting a job for Mr Ariono at the African Textile Mills based in Mbale and Mr Lokiru Peter at the Kotido local government. This gesture brings out the unique reconciliatory and all-involving attributes of coexistence of the late hon. Jabwor. He used to say, “If I get a bigger piece of bread, we shall all share it.” 

He was one of the few professionally qualified accountants in the entire East African region at the time. He studied in the North East London Polytechnic in Stratford, England. It is there that he met his dear wife, Lydia, who was also studying accountancy. They both graduated with distinctions and went ahead to marry in the UK in September 1974.

Uganda’s political and even social conditions having been very volatile due to the brutal Iddi Amin regime, Jabwor was accepted by his in-laws and he lived with them in Tanzania. Because of his distinctive qualifications in accountancy, which were quite difficult and rare to come by at the time, he was offered a job in the position of chief accountant in one of the leading industries in Tanzania called the Tanzania Leather Associated Industry. He worked there for five years until he chose to return to Uganda to represent the people of Kotido in the Parliament in the general elections of December 1980.

The UPC Government benefited greatly from Jabwor’s skill as a professional accountant. The late Jabwor as a legislator was very passionate about a low taxation policy for workers. He vehemently supported concessions on income tax for civil servants. On 11 August 1982, he submitted thus: “The tax concession, the income tax concession, given to the civil servants and also the reduction in the minimum rate applicable itself is a positive step which the Government has fulfilled when it made its promises to the electorate.” In this era of one-term taxation rise and also a rise in equal measure of the theft of the resources collected, it is important that the demise of the late Jabwor Obonyo reminds us as Ugandans of the silent reasons for low taxation and effective accountability for our limited resources. 

As a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kotido South Constituency, it was also important to remember that the constituency was made up of two communities that had a long history of hostility towards each other, that is, the Karimojong and the Jabwor. The late Jabwor displayed a high level of nationalism and reconciliation and he used approaches that made the two communities live in harmony under his leadership. 

He used to say that the behaviour of the Karimojong can only be changed by education. During that time, the late Chaudhry and even the late Jabwor used to say that we, the Langi, should not be proud because we are basically Karimojong but we were too lazy to move on so we settled on the ground. So the late Jabwor worked tirelessly to ensure that the people of Karamoja changed their mind-set in favour of agricultural activities, using education as a powerful weapon.

To this end, the people of Karamoja will remain grateful to hon. Jabwor for having played a critical role as a Member of Parliament in establishing the first secondary school in Kotido based in Abim, Abim Secondary School. He also played a role in ensuring that Kotido teacher training school was established to help broaden the educational base of the Karimojong.

The late hon. Jabwor also represented the people of Kotido South Constituency in the Constituent Assembly that debated and promulgated the 1995 Constitution. Although some of us vehemently refused to sign the Constitution because we disagreed on the system of Government, the late Jabwor signed the Constitution. Although the Government at that time wanted Ugandans and the world to believe that there were no parties, it was very clear that there were two sides to the debate.


Jabwor, like many others, was being persuaded by the Movement bigwigs to join them and he made a fundamental statement in one of his contributions. I want to read what he said: “The devil you know and lived with is better than the angel you do not know.” He used to tell his friend, hon. Patrick Mwondha, that he lived with President Yoweri Museveni in Dar-el-slam and he kept reminding Patrick Mwondha that he lived with President Museveni in Dar-es-salaam. So when he made this statement, we all understood what he meant. He was referring to Museveni, whom he lived with in Tanzania, against the others that he had just met in the CA like us agitating for a multiparty system. In effect, the late Jabwor had crossed to the Movement but physically he continued associating with us.

The late Jabwor would not forgive me on behalf of his friends and colleagues if I do not bring out three events that happened in his life. The first one was the fact that we used to sit in the CA according to alphabetical order, so the late Jabwor was always seated next to Obua Otoa. So the day he made the fundamental statement that the devil you know is better than the angel you do not know, his friend Obua, who was seated next to him, stepped on him and pressed his toe very hard and nobody could see.    (Laughter) He shouted and said, “Mr Chairman, please save me from my neighbour.” The chairman said, “How can I save you when I do not know what is going on?” So, that is something, which we always laughed about when we met Jabwor; and he would lift his toe and say, “Please, do not step on it”. This is because he knew we kept accusing him for having crossed and left us behind.

Mr Speaker, that is not all, the other story was when Jabwor told us and his friends that he built a very beautiful house in the village and he used his innovation. He used the local community to collect local stones from Karamoja and he built a house made of nothing but stones. The house looked so nice that when the NGOs, the foreign workers, saw the house they persuaded him to sell the house and indeed, he sold the house.

His friends, Patrick Mwondha and Obua Otoa, used to laugh at him say, “Obonyo Jabwor, you are naked even up to the house; you the Karimojong cannot even have a house.” So, that was one of the jokes. I must say that hon. Obonyo has never been naked because he probably built his house before even the hon. Patrick Mwondha did but those are the jokes, which we enjoyed with the late Jabwor.

The last story I would want to share is when our late father and leader, Paul Muwanga, died. This was the former Vice-President of UPC. When he died, we set up several committees and he decided to play the role of handling the coffin, the church and other activities together with Yona Kanyomozi and others. The late Jabwor chose one role and he did not want to change his mind. He said he wanted to be a pole-bearer. 

It was very difficult for Patrick Mwondha, who was leading the team, to persuade Jabwor to stop so that they give him another role. He said, “If you want me to play my roles, I want to be a pole bearer.” So, Mwondha had to work so hard to get someone with matching height that would tower like Clement Jabwor. Mwondha was lucky to find a young man from Teso called Rogers who used to work in the UPC Secretariat and of course, his friend Ambassador Obua Otoa was also quite tall and one other fellow.

That is some of the strange behaviour of Clement that I remember. We used to say to him, “Clement, please, be realistic; if we put you there, it means the casket will go tilted.” He told us, “I do not care but I am going to be a pole bearer.” I must thank Patrick Mwondha and others who were able to work around this strong position.

Mr Speaker, there is a lot that we can say about Jabwor, but there is one other thing I want to thank him for. When Patrick Mwondha ended up with tall gigantic men to carry the casket of Paul Muwanga, there was a story that went around that there is something strange about UPC, that they have decided to bring Scotland Yard from England to carry the casket of their vice president, but the strange thing is that those Scotland Yard men are black. This is because they were strange towering characters that people had not seen carrying the casket of our vice president. From that day, people started changing their minds about UPC and that gave us wonderful advertisement. However, when he was insisting being a pole bearer, we could not understand that he was actually a blessing in disguise.

Mr Speaker, much as we appreciate the tradition of giving honour to all those who have offered services to this country as Members of Parliament, it is also important to advise Government that there must be a mechanism in place to take care of former Members of Parliament in totality while they are still alive. (Applause) This, once designed, may go a long way to help former Members of Parliament live quality lives and probably, even live longer and with fewer burdens.

I also want to beg that if there are any hospital bills associated with the medication of the late Clement Jabwor, I plead with the Government to pick up the bills so that we do not let the family go with the burden of settling bills at a time when their father and husband has departed. May the Almighty God comfort you, Lydia and the children. I love you all and I know with God on your side, nothing will be against you. The Lord God said He is the father of the orphans and the husband of the widows. From today, that house will begin to experience divine help from heaven. May God bless you.

3.12
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion that tribute be paid to the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor. Like you noted when we were laying the wreaths, usually we lay wreaths in accordance with sheds of opinions and groupings in this House but you also realise that the wreath that I laid today, which was supposed to be on behalf of Independent Members of Parliament, was pronounced as if it was from me. So, that mismatch in laying of wreaths did not only happen with the UPC switching with the DP people and probably, that is also something that we have to take due note of. 

Suffice it to say that the Karamoja region is a region that every Ugandan of goodwill has a soft spot in his or her heart for and also gives all the support that it deserves. We cannot express this solidarity with the Karamoja region without recognising and saluting great men and women who form part and parcel of the Karamoja renaissance. The hon. Obonyo, who is lying before us here, forms an integral part of that human resource and tells us about the Karamoja renaissance and the story that comes with Karamoja from way back. 

An attribute of bringing people of different ethnicity together is something that up to now, we are still struggling with. Even yesterday in this House, Mr Speaker, there was a report from a committee about how we can help to bring our people together - people from Bugisu. It was about a certain ethnic group which is different from the Bamasaaba. That is something that still eludes us up to today.

Somebody who has the art and the character trait that brings people together is really somebody worth celebrating. I strongly associate with anybody with such a character trait because as most of you are aware, my constituency is the most cosmopolitan constituency in the whole of this country. My brother, the hon. Lokeris, is one of my constituents except that he just does not vote from there. It is something that is very unique and very special if we can have unity in diversity.

This character of unity in diversity was also expressed by him when he went beyond the borders of this country, not only to get married but also to work there. While today we are thinking of how we are going to integrate the East African Community, to integrate the African people, he had gone way ahead of us both in his actions of marriage and work.

Mr Speaker, those days of student exchange, which unfortunately, is not very common now, I believe were very great days that produced very great people of this world. This is the story of the Obama Senior who went to the USA around about the same time in the 60s under an exchange programme. This would not just happen to anybody; it would be a case of picking brilliant African people. The fact that he was picked among those who were taken around that time on an exchange programme simply speaks volumes about his brilliance.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who ably seconded the motion, is a qualified accountant, who did her Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Nairobi together with the late. Looking at the profile of the late and his illustrious career, he chaired committees that were investigative in nature; investigating companies that had been mismanaged at that time in the 1980’s is something that we have to applaud him for. 

Around that time, there was mismanagement in the coffee sector and investigating that particular sector was a daunting task. This is because there was a very powerful military man, who was behind that organisation, and investigating him was not very easy. He was part of those who went to the core and said, “let us be accountable”. We have to salute him for that, if we refer to his very rich profile.

I would like to point out two things in closing - being a CA delegate and laying a foundation, which gave the hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the rest more work to do. When he signed for a single party system, he gave the hon. Cecilia Ogwals more work to keep on fighting for multiparty democracy.  I have to thank him for that. At least we can see that the fight went on and we have reached where we have reached today, and we can pay tribute to him when there are two sides of the House. I want to salute him for being part of those who broke the ice. 

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable members, many comrades, many senior citizens, have been brought to this House and we have paid tribute to them. Often times, we have taken note of institutions that they have gone through, especially the academic institutions like primary schools or even secondary schools, which by the time of their demise are really in tatters. 

I want to salute Government at this point because I was in Kiru Primary School a few months ago and it is being built afresh. It is a completely new structure that is being built in Abim District. I think Government deserves credit, and it is the office of the Prime Minister doing that. The late will be happy that the primary school, which formed the launching pad for his education career, is not something that has not gone to waste; even if he is lying before us, it something that we can look at write about.

On behalf of my colleagues, the independents, on behalf of my constituency, the people of Kibanda County who share unity in diversity, and on my own behalf may I express condolences to the family and to all Ugandans Who have been bereaved by this very unfortunate demise of an illustrious son of Uganda.  May you collectively pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. I second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are really tight on time; we have only 35 minutes, so we are going to contribute in two minutes. 

3.21
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join the rest to support this motion. It is so sad that the people of Abim have lost their son and it is so sad that the people of Uganda have lost such a brilliant man. Listening to what colleagues have already mentioned, he was a very social man and a uniting figure. This is a very good lesson to all of us despite our background. Despite our political background, what matters is service to our people. 

We are proud that this man loved his identity and culture as a man from Karamoja. He served in various positions with diligence; this is what we should remember today as people of Karamoja, that it is very important that we work hard. It is very important that we give our people good education. It is very important that we raise our children to identify with our culture and work hard.

I would like to extend condolences to the family of the deceased, to the people of Abim and the people of Karamoja. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.23
MS JULIANA AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Clement Obonyo Jabwor. I support the motion because as we have heard from the previous speakers, this is one of the citizens who contributed to the development of this country. He participated in the formulation of the Constitution, which we cherish and protect today. Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity, on behalf of the people of Abim District, to thank you for according this respect to the late former Member of Parliament, hon. Clement Obonyo Jabwor. 

I would like to mention one thing that I cherish, and which the people of Karamoja and Uganda today can emulate from the late. The late had a very special character; he had a heart for everybody. During the time of his leadership, there was no law in place; it was a time of hostility. It is true that he led the two ethnic groups that were not compatible, that is, the Jie and the Ethur by then. At that time, the hostility was not only about cattle rustling; we had militia from both the Acholi sub region and Lango sub region. We had a man called Ojuku who was terrorising people. It took somebody of his character to bring peace to the region. (Member timed out)

3.25
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to second the motion that tribute be given to hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor.

Mr Speaker, Obonyo Jabwor served the people of Abim, Karamoja, Uganda and other countries like Tanzania with love and dedication. The legacy he left in Tanzania, I believe, is the one helping other Ugandans get jobs in Tanzania. This is because of the way he served in Tanzania with good ethical conduct. He fought corruption in Tanzania and Uganda, as we heard from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

Two months ago, I met him - he was my friend and my mentor – and he told me that he wanted to share a lot with me. He told me that the biggest problem of Uganda is politics. If people could put politics aside and concentrate on developing this country, we would be very far. He was referring to countries like China that have developed. He said our problem is politics; there are a lot of things that are being compromised because of politics.

Mr Speaker, he also told me that he was very happy with my work. Every leader needs support - this is what he told me - not criticism all the time. Leaders need support; there is no bad leader, there is no good leader. Leaders need support. So, he said that he was very happy with my work and he was going to continue supporting me. I was really very grateful for that. He was a social man. If you moved around town here in Kampala, you will not fail to get people whom he related with very well. 

I thank the President for the support he has given to the family and for allowing to accord him a state burial. I thank the President very much because it was up to his discretion to decide whether to bring him here for this special sitting or not. I also want to thank Parliament for - (Member timed out_)

3.28
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank Government once again for doing the right thing. 

Honourable members, as you are aware, the late Clement Obonyo Jabwor stood on a UPC ticket and won elections. As you have heard from the Government Chief Whip and also ably heard from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Opposition Chief Whip, Obonyo Jabwor moved beyond the party divide. Much as he was UPC and he had defeated his opponents in DP, he still went back and lifted his opponents whom he had put down. That is the spirit that we need in today’s politics. That is the spirit that is lacking today in Uganda. 

If you are a president and you have defeated your opponent, do not finish him off; lift him up. Know that whereas we are different, whereas our parties are different, our future is shared. That is the spirit that drove Obonyo Jabwor and that is the spirit that we, all politicians in Uganda today, need to emulate.

The second virtue is the ability to move on. You know very well that much as the UPC Government was overthrown, he still kept on working with the governments in power. That is a very good spirit. It may look, like hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, that he changed his party, but his conviction was that he put his people first. How best could he serve his people if he did not have the power to serve his people? So, sometimes, I feel that whatever he did in his politics, he all the same served his people.

Finally, I would like to thank the late hon. Obonyo Jabwor very much for educating his children. I was with one of his sons who did law in Makerere University. I knew that he felt education was paramount for his own children and for his own people. So, as leaders today, the legacy he left us is to see that education is what we should cherish and profoundly put forward for this country to move forward.

I thank you, Mr Speaker, because even with your busy schedule you accorded us time to pay tribute to the late Obonyo Jabwor. I thank Government once again for the official burial that it has accorded the late. He deserved it and may his soul, on behalf of the people of Kole and on behalf of UPC, which I am now –(Member timed out)

3.31
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and extend my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family.

My first close contact with the late hon. Clement Obonyo was in 1982 when I was just a young officer from the university; I was working for the Ministry of Rehabilitation. In 1981 and 1982, Karamoja region experienced the bitterest famine ever, to the extent that it led to an exodus of the Karimojong who were marauding in many corners of Mbale where I was posted. We were tasked by the then minister, hon. Masete Kuya, to resettle the Karimojong and hon. Clement Jabwor was on the working committee. 

We assembled the Karimojong in Sironko Town Council and brought a number of lorries, which had been donated by the Italian Government, to transport these Karimojong men, women and children to Namalu. Immediately we arrived in Namalu, I saw the humour in hon. Clement Jabwor. Immediately we arrived in Namalu, he quickly assembled the Karimojong and said, “Welcome home and show that you are home by staging a traditional dance”, and you know how the Karimojong dance – they jump up with the women, lifting the breasts. (Laughter) You could not imagine that this was a Member of Parliament. That was the humour you would see in Clement. 
As young officers, we said, “eh, so, when you are among your equals, you can also afford to crack jokes.” That was what Clement was - a very humorous person, a person who believed very strongly in his culture.

Mr Speaker, in 1996, under Government of Uganda UNICEF country programme, when we were talking of introducing education to the Karimojong, we were mistaken. The Karimojong had already been introduced to education - (Member timed out)

3.34
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chief Whip as well as the previous honourable members who have talked very well about a fallen brother. I also support the motion by saying that from the time I served in public office, I have learnt to respect the previous leaders because public service is not easy at all. 

This was a gentleman who came from a humble family, who struggled and became what he was and served this country in various capacities and in very important offices. We really need to pay tribute to him for what he did during his life in this country.

The only very bad part is the age at which he has left us. I lost my grandfather, who was 110 years old, but when they announced his age, people who had come to bury my grandfather said, “ooh”, meaning that he had really lived for so long. However, to me it was very painful because I would have loved him to stay on. This, our brother and elder, has died at the age of 70, which is – (Member timed out)

3.36
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay tribute and honour to the late hon. Obonyo. I came to know hon. Obonyo through my father, who was his close friend and chief campaign manager during the 1980 elections. He indeed canvassed votes for him and handed him victory as Member of Parliament for Kotido South Constituency.

During the tenure of hon. Obonyo, he promoted peace and unity between the Jie and the Ethur, people of two different ethnic backgrounds. This good relationship encouraged meaningful intermarriages and indeed that has assimilated these cultures and language. Today, the people of Kotido and the Jie have the Ethur language as their second language. Similarly, the Ethur have the Jie dialect as their second language.

The late hon. Obonyo had a large heart, which was accommodative of different people, characters and environments. He even broke down the cultural barrier when he crossed to our sister country, Tanzania, and got us a wife, a mother, a clan member in the names of Mama Lydia Obonyo. 

The late hon. Obonyo was nationalistic and a Pan Africanist. This could be seen in his debates both in Parliament and in the Constituent Assembly. His attributes of humility, generosity and dedication in serving his people and the country is a rich legacy that he has left behind for us as Ugandans and other generations to emulate. 

The late hon. Obonyo will be missed by his family, friends, relatives and the nation. Therefore, may the Almighty God comfort the bereaved and may his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to at least say something about the late hon. Obonyo.

As stated by the woman Member of Parliament, hon. Obonyo was a Pan Africanist who managed to cross boundaries. I think that was great for Uganda. He was a Pan Africanist and he showed this by marrying someone from Tanzania. 

The late hon. Obonyo fought corruption. Even at the time of the UPC Government, you can see that he was already fighting corruption. His death has helped us reflect on the times behind us. Many people would want to say that corruption has only emerged in the NRM regime. It was there even at the time of UPC because the late fought corruption at that time between 1981 and 1985. He was a courageous and determined man, emerging from Karamoja and studying up to all those levels he went to. He would never give up.

Finally, to the family, relatives, friends and Ugandans, we should reflect on the Bible, Ecclesiastes 3:2. It tells us that there is a time for everything; there is a time to be born and a time for death. He has served the country and he has died; may his soul rest in peace.

3.40
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago and on my own behalf, I want to send condolences to the people of Abim. They are our closest neighbours.

The first time I heard about the late was when I was still a young boy, when the honourable Dr J.J. Otim came to visit my father. That was the time they were doing their primary elections. He contested against a DP man who came from Adilang and he was trying to share how his friend from Abim, Kotido, was gaining ground. I was still a young boy but today we are in the same family in Parliament as we honour him and see him off.

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about his character; of course, the greatest thing on earth that somebody can build and leave behind is a legacy - how do you develop human beings; what service do you normally render to the people? If you have that spirit of love in you, then for us who are still remaining on earth would have to hope that at least the love, which is founded on God, definitely will give us hope to say that may somebody’s spirit rest in eternal peace. 

Of all the character attributes that people have been talking about, our late father, who has died a young man at the age of 70 –(Interjections)- In Uganda, you can still stand to be the President even after the age of 75 -(Interjections) – Okay, it is the age of 70, unless it is amended. 

Mr Speaker, this is God’s making; God has called him. However, when we hear about what is happening around the world, for example in Khartoum where a woman is being sentenced to death for marrying a Christian - (Member timed out)

3.43
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Mr Speaker, I want to join colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Obonyo. On behalf of the people of Jie County and on my own behalf, I would like to offer my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Obonyo. 

Mr Speaker, the late Obonyo leaves us, the current leaders of Kotido and Abim, a big challenge. Despite the fact that many things have been done, the good things that have been said about hon. Obonyo are the things that remain a challenge today. Why were the people of Kotido South, Jie County inclusive, able to vote for Obonyo? What happened is that when the new districts were created, - Kotido and Abim - there are more conflicts today than they were in 1980. I think this is a point of reflection for the current leaders. We need to work towards harmony, towards unity and oneness because the example is lying before us. He has already set a precedent, so what are we doing? 

Secondly, hon. Ogwal was the right person to talk about the late Obonyo because she has relayed the question of education. In 1980, the Government developed programmes under UNDP and there were schools constructed in every village, which gave a chance for the people of Jie to go to school. I want to confirm that the activities that were carried out by hon. Obonyo were a reality and were well intended for the good of the people. I think many people who went to school in Jie at that time are the leaders of today. 

I happen to have been a very strong supporter of Obonyo, although not a registered voter in 1980. Because my family members believed in him and canvassed support for him, as a child I also followed him and kept on concentrating on wherever the campaigns were taking place. I have no doubt, therefore, that I must have picked the spirit of leadership from that point.

Mr Speaker, it is important that hon. Obonyo goes on record as a Ugandan who has made a contribution towards the development of Karamoja. I thank you.

3.46
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. As a Member of Parliament coming from Karamoja, I should express my appreciation to the Government of Uganda and specifically to our Government Chief Whip for this honour that has been given to our late brother. We are really very appreciative of this. It is important to also thank our colleague MPs who have been there for giving us, Members from Karamoja, this kind of comfort. We thank you very much. 

The point I would want to emphasise is the one raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. As we do talk about the good done by our late brother, it is important for us to think of those he has left behind – his wife and children. This is to reiterate the point that Government should be able to come in to look after those he has left behind. The Government should come in to give further assistance. We should be able to support those he has left behind. I wish him eternal life. Thank you.

3.48
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Obonyo. I want to start by conveying condolences to the family of the late Obonyo; indeed, you have lost a father, a husband and a great man that served this country.

Cognisant of the contribution made by the late Obonyo, I want to say that we are better off because of the service that was rendered to this country by the late Obonyo in the various capacities that he served. As a legislator, who participated in the Constituent Assembly, it can be said that the late Obonyo was a very strong person and once he took a decision, you could not bring him down. 

I want to say this because during the Constituent Assembly, for one to stand and oppose hon. Cecilia Ogwal on matters of multiparty democracy he must have been a very strong person. This is exactly what the late Obonyo did as hon. Cecelia Ogwal was able to testify here. He gave legitimacy to the 1995 Constitution because he signed it. Thereafter, the Opposition decided to wait and see how to fight it, but Obonyo had played his role in giving this country a Constitution that we are using up to now with amendments coming in. These are some of the great contributions that the late Obonyo made to this country and they must be recognised.

The late Obonyo participated in the process of widening and deepening the integration of East Africa by that time. Born in Uganda, he completed his university education in Nairobi, married a wife from Tanzania, worked in Tanzania and served his country. This is a true East African that walked the talk.

I also want to say that he was appointed and nominated to various commissions to do inquiries into mismanagement because he was a strong person. Many people would only be appointed once and we would say they received bribes here and there, but Obonyo was appointed five times and he participated. In the Land Commission, he never awarded himself - (Member timed out)

3.51
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I begin by sending my condolences to the family on behalf of the people of Kaberamaido. Definitely, life will never be the same again but we pray that the Good Lord comforts the soul of the late Henry Obonyo Jabwor.

Some of us who come from that part of the country keep on talking about the good old days despite our ages. The education in Uganda then took care of every part of this country, regardless of which family you were born into. Every Ugandan had a chance of going to whichever school they wanted to then, which is now dwindling. Any Ugandan would compete and go to King’s College Budo, Namilyango, Namagunga, Gayaza and the rest. Those were the good old days that we talk about. That chance has been reduced almost to a bare minimum now.

As leaders of this House, these are qualities that we should keep on remembering in these gallant sons and daughters of Uganda. These are things that we should keep fighting for. In time to come, some parts of Uganda will completely not be able to send children to such schools and that would mean widening of the gap in this country.

The other thing is the question of equal opportunities. I still look at the late Henry Obonyo and his career development and the capacities in which he served. This is what we call patriotism. If you see someone who can serve this country in these positions, we would express concern and say that the Good Lord rests such people’s souls in peace. People like us who are following should fight to follow such legacies so that we pick up and the trend continues. That is how we will continue talking about one country.

I looked at the profile of the late Henry Obonyo –(Member timed out)

3.53
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Kadam, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Clement Obonyo, my friend.

The late was among the first Karimojong to pursue education up to university level. By their time, you could just count a handful of them; the first being the late Joshua Akol, the Omwonys, himself and group. These were the people who inspired us to study. 

In my case, I saw a school in December 1959. I asked my father what they do there and he said, “If you want to drive those vehicles that you see, then you must go to that place; if you want to become a chief or somebody in life, then you must go to that place; if you want to drink tea with sugar, that is the place you should go to.” I said, “That is all very good” and I decided then to go to school before he even told me to go to school. 

People did not adore school children at that time. When I was in school, one day I decided to go and see my aunt in a nearby village. When I reached near the village, I saw some children playing – my contemporaries; they rushed and started beating me because I was putting on clothes. I wailed until my aunt heard me and came and took me home, rebuked those children and said, “This is my child.” The reason they were beating me is because I was adding to the number of alien men, those people who came to rule us. You can imagine; this time was really terrible!

In the 1980s I came into real contact with the late Obonyo, when I was made the administrative secretary of Moroto by the then UPC Government. You know, most of us were in different parties. We are the people who started the Movement itself. This person would have died long time ago not now. There was a time we were headed to a certain place in Bwera where the militias attacked us, killed three of our colleagues including one commissioner. We were all beaten and we had bruises. This person would have died at that time. That was the time when people were talking about tribalism. That is why I condemn tribalism.

Later on, we went to talk to the Karimojong to cool down so that we live in peace with our neighbours, and that was his contribution, amongst others. May his soul rest in eternal peace. He has been my friend and my mentor, together with Patrick Mwondha seated there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, your debating time has been short. I apologise for those who have not been able to speak but we know you have spoken from your hearts. Those of you who will be able to travel for the burial, I am sure communication will be made available to you. The motion is that this Parliament resolves as follows:
1. That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the demise of the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor.

2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Clement Henry Jabwor to Uganda and other countries.

3. That it collectively prays that his soul rests in eternal peace. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted

East African Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Clement Henry Obonyo Jabwor)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I communicated at the beginning, this matter was so important that we had to defer the prorogation of the House to this time. That means that the late hon. Obonyo Jabwor did not want any other business transacted after his motion. So this House shall rise immediately after this; no business will be transacted. That is a great honour. In my experience, this has been a first in the history of this Parliament - that we have a special session when a body is in the House and then in that session the House is prorogued for the session. It is a great honour to the people of Kotido, Abim, his family and Ugandans at large that immediately the motion is approved, the House is prorogued. If that is not divine then it should be something else. 

I have also got rumours, which I have not confirmed, that the hon. Betty Amongi of Oyam South has been re-elected to serve UWOPA as chairperson. In the event that the information that I have got is true, I congratulate her; in the event that it is not true, -(Laughter)– treat this like the space the congratulation message took is empty.

Honourable members, the time is now for me to communicate formally the prorogation of the House. It would have been appropriate for leaders of both sides to speak at this moment as we move to the next recess that will lead us into the last session of this Parliament. However, I have a standing engagement with the Rwanda community; they have a service which started at 2.00 O’clock and I am supposed to be a guest of honour there. I went to church and they were not yet ready so I decided to hold this first and then go there at 4.00 O’clock. So I should be going there because they are waiting. Otherwise, each side should have communicated to the House about their gratitude to the Speaker for being a very good person –(Laughter)- but let us save that for another occasion.

Honourable Members, this is a proclamation by the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda:

“WHEREAS clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has be carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 16th day of May 2014.

The pending business in the House or its committees is saved. 

Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House, Kampala this 16th day of May 2014.

Jacob L Oulanyah (MP), Deputy Speaker of Parliament.” 

Thank you, honourable members.

(The House rose at 4.08 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
