

Thursday, 10 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to appeal to you that we work expeditiously today. In relation to the reports on the ministerial policy statements, I would like you to allow me to give a chance to only five Members to comment on different issues so that we can try to beat our deadline because we are ahead of schedule.

Secondly, I have received information a number of times that some committees are taking decisions that bind the House without my knowledge and also without the consent of this House. There are also others, which continue to receive funding from outside yet the Parliamentary Commission facilitates the committees. Even worse, there are those committees communicating positions without reference to either this House or to myself. I want that to end, but I will be arranging a meeting of the chairpersons so that we can explore how to work and also ensure that while you do your constitutional duties, you do not go outside them. 

The other issue is an appeal to Members who want to come to the Speaker to do so before 1.00 p.m. When you come to our office at 2.00 p.m. and insist on staying, I do not know how to make a choice to either walk out and leave you there or stay. When I listen to you, you take 20 minutes, making me late for the House. Therefore, if you want to see me, come before 1 o’clock. I am appealing to honourable members to do that. 

Now let me just give three Members an opportunity to raise issues of national concern. You each have two minutes strictly.

2.53
MS BRENDA ASINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rise on a matter of national importance regarding Iganga Municipality Central Market. 

Due to the rains, the vendors’ health is not really good. Even the customers who come to buy from that market do not get where to pass. There is a lot of mud and water logging all over. Therefore, I request the concerned ministry, as they consider this budget, to please consider my market in Iganga Municipality. I will be grateful. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister has heard and when the report comes we should discuss it. 

2.54
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, let me appreciate your office and the honourable colleagues who supported me when I lost my dear mother. 

Madam Speaker, in the very week that I lost my mother, I was put at gun point - chini ya ulinzi - by unknown Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officers. I had initially shared this matter with the Minister of Defence, my senior colleague and Old Boy (OB), hon. Adolf Mwesige, and also his deputy minister, hon. Macodwogo Okello. I thought this matter would be resolved at that stage because the Butiaba Barracks did not know of this deployment, the oil and gas police did not know about it and neither did the Regional Police Commander (RPC) of Hoima. 

I went down behind Butiaba Barracks on the way to Kibiro Hot Springs and between the dam, which is being constructed, and the oil well of Taitai, I found over eight UPDF officers grazing over six herds of long-horned animals. I initially identified myself when they stopped me but I was surprised that on return, another roadblock was mounted. I was ordered, with three guns facing the car, to get out. However, the people in the car restrained me from getting out.

I had expected feedback because I had also talked to Col Nyarwa to find out what was happening. I had expected the solution would be to remove them since I had just mourned my mother at that time. However, what has surprised me further is the revelation I got yesterday that if I had got out of the car, the intention was to kill me. They called me a saboteur. 

I know the area of conflict is the access of the pipeline from Buliisa to Hoima, and it is also the Taitai oil field. Also, the Minister of Lands last year went and revoked all fraudulent titles. I am now being blamed for that yet it is the Government which did its work. As a leader, I am naturally supposed to be doing that. 

Yesterday, I got anonymous callers telling me to stop going to the constituency and that I should stop movements because I survived death that day. My request is – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please complete.

MR MUKITALE: My prayers are: One, can the Minister of Defence immediately withdraw those army officers who are looking after the long-horned cows? Two, can the Inspector General of Police also withdraw the Kapapi police whose work is to protect those herdsmen? Three, can the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs go down there and look at the involvement of the army and the police?

Hon. Norah Bigirwa reported here the other day that when the herdsmen and their cows were chased from the north, they ended up coming to Buliisa and when the community and police stopped them, they got orders from above to release them. We want immediate intervention. We think that this problem is taking too much. I cannot accept our people to be forced to accept what they have not- There are no movement permits and yet this area is supposed to be vacated and people compensated to give way for oil and gas work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, he has made his request, but this is just for the Government: oil exploration causes tension between the community and the interests of the state. However, Members have a right to speak for their people and they should not be unduly harassed for raising the concerns of their population.

I hope that we do not have a situation like what happened in Ogoni land when one of the biggest voices was hanged for speaking for the interests of their people in the oil industry in Nigeria. Therefore, please Government let us have harmony in this area. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the guidance that you have given. However, Madam Speaker, it is also clear that the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Security are here. These matters are within their ministries and therefore, they would be the right people to comment on what hon. Mukitale has brought to this House.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the three ministers to give us a picture and give assurance to hon. Mukitale whether he is going to survive for the next few hours or whether these people are still following him? I am seeking your indulgence on that issue, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Defence is here; would you like to comment about the strange soldiers who are near Lake Albert?

3.01
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS: (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues raised by hon. Mukitale are serious. I therefore cannot give definite answers to them now because we have to do some preliminary investigations about them. 

However, what I can assure him is that he is very free, like any Member, to visit his constituency. There is nobody in this country, whether he is a member of the UPDF or not, who can stop a Member of Parliament from visiting his constituency. 

I will investigate and establish the facts and give an answer to my colleague, hon. Mukitale. I will cause a meeting on this and give an answer to my colleague.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister. When hon. Mukitale spoke, he said he had reported this matter to him. Therefore, we need to know from the minister what action he has taken from the time he received the information up to now. What information has he got? Has he gone to the ground to find out whether those people exist? Rather than what he is telling us now, that he is going to investigate, can we know from him what he has done as a minister from the time he received the information?

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the issue brought up by my colleague is a very serious matter. We cannot wait until his body is lying here and then we come and speak good things about him afterwards - God forbid.

I would like to ask for clarification from the Minister of Defence. You were informed earlier that soldiers of the UPDF who were grazing herds of cattle threatened a Member of Parliament. First of all, is it the role of the UPDF to graze cattle? Whose cattle are those?

Madam Speaker, I brought for you cases like this from my own constituency. This issue of cattle keepers moving around the country and being guarded by soldiers of the UPDF and threatening lives of Members of Parliament, I went through it. Can you assure us that my brother, hon. Mukitale, is going to be alive? What are you going to do to ensure that UPDF gets out of the issue of keeping cows? Is that their job?

MS BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to give information to you and the entire House. When my colleague raises those issues, it is not the first time he has been threatened, and he is being threatened because of ably representing his people and for a justifiable cause.

Colleagues, we represent Ugandans in this House and if we are doing that honestly, why are we being threatened? Madam Speaker, the people that we are talking about, you will find them dressed smartly in suits and sometimes even holding guns while grazing. It defeats my understanding. What kind of people are these?

Colleagues, I think it is high time that we rose and sorted out this issue. It may not only involve Buliisa but I think this country is undergoing a serious invasion and we need to act.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs, I want you to assure this House that hon. Mukitale and hon. Nyendwoha will be able to go to their villages in Buliisa and do their work without being threatened. We want an assurance.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: I have already said, Madam Speaker, that there is nobody, including members of the UPDF, who can stop a Member of Parliament from accessing his constituency. 

However, I have taken note of the seriousness of the issues hon. Mukitale has raised. I have never conferred with him on this issue; he could have talked to my colleague but certainly –(Interjection)- It does not help because I have taken note of those issues; I have said I will investigate them and come back to this House. (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I was in the Committee on Budget when the honourable minister, Adolf Mwesige, and the Permanent Secretary and their team came to present. I said, “Chair, I have matters that I cannot put in the committee openly and that I will talk to the minister about outside.” Indeed, he gave me audience here on the second floor outside the committee room. 

However, he said that I should not mention them on air. I have been on air but I have never mentioned this issue. Is it in order for my colleague, a Mitchell “rat” like me, to sacrifice my life and say I have never communicated to him about this? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I was not around the budget committee so I do not know. However, on a very serious note, honourable minister, I think our colleague is worried about his life. You need to do something about these soldiers.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of anonymous callers calling, threatening and killing Ugandans is becoming a very sensitive issue. When my honourable colleague mentioned that he was called by anonymous callers, he reminded me of a girl who was killed just at the beginning of this week. Many other Ugandans have been killed in a similar way by people calling, threatening to kill them and eventually killing them. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday you guided very well that this matter is going to be substantively debated in this House. I wonder whether it is not procedurally proper that this particular matter is referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to investigate and have a comprehensive report about this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: To investigate whether the soldiers are there?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I was very clear, and even a colleague from Buliisa also confirmed this. Hon. Mukitale said that Members of Parliament from the region, particularly those from Buliisa, are threatened and warned by people who have guns, with “orders from above”, not to access their constituencies. Parliament cannot just look on because this may escalate. I have a similar situation; I am getting worried about people who are invading my constituency and opening up churches but with guns. I am sure if this was investigated, it could help to solve the other -

THE SPEAKER: Okay. After we have finished with the budget, we shall have a comprehensive debate on security where all these issues can be raised. However, the question of our colleague’s safety is very important and he should be able to move and do his work. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have leaders from Kitgum. They come from Chua West County and are represented by hon. Okin Ojara and hon. Margaret Lamwaka. You are welcome. (Applause) There is also another group; we have Mr Cyprus Baluku, the LC III chairperson of Lake Katwe. I do not know where he is seated. He is not yet here. Okay, when he comes, we shall let you know. 

3.11
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance on Uganda’s noncompliance with international treaty obligations under rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides thus:
“(1) The President or a person authorised by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter.

(2). Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this Article.”

As a result of the above constitutional requirement, Parliament of Uganda passed a Ratification of Treaties Act in 1998, which provides procedures of ratification of treaties. Section (4) of the Ratification of Treaties Act requires Cabinet to lay before Parliament all treaties that it has ratified as soon as possible. 

Rule 40(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda state thus:
“(1) The Minister responsible for Treaties, Protocols and International Agreements shall lay before Parliament any treaty, protocol or international agreement entered into by the Government of Uganda within six months after it has been concluded or signed.” 

Sub rule (3) of the same rule provides thus: “The Minister shall, at least twice a year, report to Parliament on the implementation of any international treaty, protocol and agreement entered into by Government.”

Madam Speaker, many times as Members of Parliament, we have been embarrassed. This week, you indicated here the same embarrassment you have gone through many times when we are noncompliant with treaties and other countries have complied. We have been embarrassed and we are asking about – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NSAMBA: We are asking if Uganda has complied with international obligations because Uganda ratifies international instruments and does not apply them.

My prayer is for this House to prevail over the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Attorney-General to come before this House and inform us which treaties have been ratified. We need to know the treaties which are being implemented. 

Madam Speaker, if you could allow Members to air out views where they have suffered embarrassment on matters of noncompliance with the international treaties, I so beg. Thank you.             

THE SPEAKER: We cannot have a debate on this issue now. I think the biggest embarrassment is suffered by the Speaker. I told you that when we go to the Pan-African Parliament, the longest list of noncompliance is from Uganda. When I am there, they bring it and show me because everywhere it is indicated “Nil”. In East Africa, it is the same thing. 

Why do you sign treaties and conventions and leave them in your offices? We are the ones who are called upon to explain what we are doing in the country. Attorney-General, after we have finished with the budget, please come and bring all the conventions you have made and lay them here. Those which require domestication, you tell us what you are going to do to domesticate them. Those that do not require, you will still tell us so that we can also report. This is really embarrassing. 

3.16
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I brought up an issue here about illegal and inhuman evictions that were happening to my people of Butemba Constituency in a village called Sunga in Kyankwanzi Town Council. They are being carried out by members of Uganda People’s Defence Forces from the National Leadership Institute. 

Madam Speaker, this issue is well known to the President. We discussed it immediately after the retreat of ministers and permanent secretaries. He explained that since there was a project coming that would make use of that land, he would help to resettle those people. When we had a function in Kiboga in March, the President promised that he would give me audience and he told me to liaise with the Government Chief Whip and the Principal Private Secretary (PPS). 

I wrote letters and called but the PPS denied me an opportunity. Since last week, people are being evicted. I do not sleep and at my home, I have to cook for people; I am becoming a “government” and it is overwhelming me. Last week, when I brought up the issue here, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Betty Amongi, stood up and said she would help. However, when we went out and discussed, she said that those issues were above her and that I needed to get another way. I realised, I would not get help from her. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that the Minister for the Presidency is here. Help me and request the minister to remind the President to fulfil his promise so that my people can have peace. The area I am talking about has a well-constructed Government primary school and a polling station of 321 people - where His Excellency got 100 per cent in votes - plus other facilities. It has been a village. We do not want to stop the project but we beg the President to settle our people somewhere. I so beg, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister for the Presidency, I do not know what you can say about this matter. This is part of your docket. This is in the neighbourhood of the National Leadership Institute. 

3.18
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this as a very important issue that has been raised by the honourable colleague. I will come back here and give detailed information. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the budget involves a number of statutory Bills which must be handled quickly. I seek your indulgence so that I can bring forward the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we can free them to go and deal with the Bills and then we come back to our other arrangements. Could the chair of the committee come and present the report? Please, summarise because we all have the report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

3.20
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019. In the interest of time, I will go straight to the votes. We have nine votes including:
 
    1. Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;  
    2. Vote 108 - National Planning Authority (NPA);
    3. Vote 129 - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle the Member.

MS KATALI: Vote 129 – Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA); 
    4. Vote 130 – Treasury Operations; 
    5. Vote 131 – Office of the Auditor-General; 
    6. Vote 141 – Uganda Revenue Authority (URA); 
    7. Vote 143 – Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS); 
    8. Vote 153 – Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA); 
    9. Vote 310 – Uganda Investment Authority (UIA).

Madam Speaker, I will go straight to page 5.

Compliance to the National Development Plan II (NDP II)

According to the NDP Certificate of Compliance issued by the National Planning Authority and presented to Parliament in April 2O18, the accountability sector's 2017/2018 budget was 55.7 per cent compliant with the NDP II. The key emerging issues arising out of the assessment were as follows:

1. 	Realignment of the Uganda Free Zones Authority and Uganda Investment Authority to the trade and industry sector as their roles are more inclined to the trade and industry sector compared to the accountability sector. The NDP II states that the accountability sector is concerned with mobilisation, management, and accounting for the use of public resources to facilitate the delivery of quality services. 

These two institutions' roles have little to do with the role of the sector as indicated above. Therefore, in the spirit of rejuvenating the functionality of sectors and their respective working groups as stipulated in the NDP II, Uganda Free Zones Authority and Uganda Investment Authority would synergise better under the trade and industry sector other than the accountability sector.

2. 	The sub venting or non-vote institutions are left out on Programme Based Budgeting (PBB) as their programmes and respective intermediate results can hardly be traced in the budgeting instruments, making their assessment towards achieving results difficult. These institutions should report their performance in relation to their institutional programmes if Government is to clearly track their results in the budgeting instruments as envisaged in the NDP II.

3. 	There are inconsistencies in the indicators and targets that were used in the various planning and budgeting instruments. There is need for consistency of the indicators and targets in the planning and budgeting instruments.

Certificate of Compliance to Gender and Equity Requirements

Based on the assessment findings in respect to compliance of the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2018/2019 with gender and equity requirements, 85 votes achieved the required pass mark (50 per cent and above) for a gender and equity certificate of compliance; 21 votes performed below the pass mark; and 32 votes had not submitted their ministerial policy statements and were not assessed.

Table 2 indicates the assessment performance of the various votes under the jurisdiction of the committee as follows:

    1. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – 71 per cent;
    2. National Planning Authority – 64 per cent;
    3. Office of the Auditor-General – 61 per cent;
    4. Uganda Bureau of Statistics – 58 per cent;
    5. Uganda Revenue Authority – 56 per cent;
    6. Financial Intelligence Authority – 40 per cent;
(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: This is not just to interrupt my colleague; it is not in bad faith. Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule are you raising that procedural point?

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, a matter of urgent national importance was raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Iganga about rains destroying a market. Would it not be procedurally right for the –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, take your seat. She is providing the money for that.

MR FUNGAROO: We need an assurance from you first – 

MS KATALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

    7. PPDA – 32 per cent;
    8. Uganda Investment Authority – 27 per cent

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will go straight to page 19 and look at the committee observations and recommendations. I will be reading the sub-topic and the recommendation.

Vote 008 - Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

1. 	Economic Growth 

We all know what is happening to our economic growth. The committee recommends that the country should remain focused on the middle-income agenda by pragmatically and prudently implementing the prioritised interventions in Vision 2040 and its attendant plans.

2. 	Domestic Revenue

The committee recommends that Government expedites the development strategy for domestic revenue mobilisation which can enhance revenue performance over the medium term. In addition, Government should establish new measures aimed at collecting taxes from the large informal sector. 

The committee further recommends that the following measures are undertaken to address the ever diminishing tax base:

    a) Enhance tax education programmes, widening tax education coverage and targeting specific sectors and categories of persons.
    b) Follow up on presumptive regime enforcement and strengthen research in sectors such as transport and logistics.

3. 	Dividends by State Enterprises

Madam Speaker, whereas the number of state enterprises is about 22, only 10 are profitable. According to the law, these enterprises are supposed to declare their dividends but only one - the New Vision - does so. Therefore, the committee recommends that all state enterprises which are profitable should declare their dividends to Government and deposit the money in the Consolidated Fund. If there is need to recapitalise them, the money should be appropriated by Parliament during the budget process. This will ensure transparency and accountability to the people of Uganda.

The committee further recommends that all the companies which have high debt to equity ratios submit their status reports to Parliament within six months and provide strategic plans on how they can be made profitable. Government should also recapitalise the companies in order to make them profitable as these would increase revenue generation for the Government.

4. 	Vote Status for Subventions

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance has a number of subventions. We recommend that these institutions should report their performance in relation to their institutional programmes if Government is to clearly track their results in the budgeting instruments as envisaged in the NDP II, and those subventions should be granted vote status to ensure proper budgeting and oversight.

5. 	Development of the Public Free Zone in Entebbe 

Madam Speaker, in the current financial year, money was advanced to Uganda Free Zones Authority to buy land in Entebbe but we did not allocate money to help them develop the land. We recommend that in the next financial year, Shs 8.5 billion be reallocated from Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation to enable them conduct the necessary studies and establish the necessary infrastructure to attract investment and increase exports.

6. 	Staff Costs for the National Population Council 

This is another subvention under the National Population Council. They are understaffed and we recommend that Shs 754,321,465 be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable the council recruit the necessary staff.

7. 	Revision and Popularisation of the Population Policy

We recommend that Shs 502,345,000 be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable them revise and popularise the population policy.

8. 	National Population Information Management System (Population Databank)

We recommend that Shs 820,355,650 be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable the council establish the population databank.

9. 	Central Monitoring System

We recommend that Shs 3,000,000,000 be reallocated from some of the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation to enable the board procure a central monitoring system. Madam Speaker, this central monitoring system is for gaming and lotteries, which is a subvention under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They need to be linked to all the machines in the country. The total cost is Shs 10.5 billion but we are recommending Shs 3 billion for next financial year.

10. 	Transport for the Gaming Board

They need to buy two vehicles to help them in monitoring. We recommend that Shs 350 million be reallocated from some of the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation, to enable the board purchase these vehicles.

11. 	Enforcement Exercises

They need to move around and enforce, to make sure that the right people are gamming. We recommend that Shs 2.04 billion be reallocated from the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation to enable the National Gaming Board conduct enforcement exercises.

12. 	Compliance and Sensitisation

We recommend that Shs 2.61 billion be reallocated from some of the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation to enable the board ensure compliance and also conduct sensitisation campaigns to stop illegal gaming.

13. 	Microfinance Support Centre

Right now they have challenges and they need to recapitalise. We recommend that Shs 15 billion be reallocated from some of the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation for recapitalisation and also that Shs 3 billion be reallocated from the same fund to support business development services for SACCOs and microfinance institutions countrywide.

14. 	Funding for Enterprise Uganda

Madam Speaker, we recommend that Shs 4,000,000,000 be reallocated from some of the Treasury Operation's proposed budget allocation (Shs 2.5 billion) and the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation (Shs 1.5 billon) to enable them reach out to all regions in the country.

Vote 130 - Treasury Operations

1. 	Public Debt
The committee recommends that Government explores a strategy in scaling down on acquiring more public debt mainly due to the fact that the concessional window of loan acquisition is narrowing. The need to strengthen domestic debt management is extremely critical and the need to expedite the development of a national revenue mobilisation strategy to raise funds from alternative sources and reduce dependency on borrowing is also critical.

2. 	Low Absorption of External Financing

The committee recommends that Government avails project preparation funds to ensure feasibility studies, environmental impact assessments, project-affected persons’ compensations, and the project management units are established early enough. All Government departments should prioritise counterpart funding within the MTEF by linking work plans and budgets to sufficient cash flow requirements.

3. 	Arrears/Court Awards

Madam Speaker, in the National Budget Framework Paper, we had Shs 80 billion but in the ministerial policy statement the ministry brought Shs 120 billion. Therefore, we recommended that Shs 40 billion be reallocated to other sectors that urgently need these funds.

4. 	Contingencies Fund

According to the law, we are supposed to set aside 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual budget of the Government of the previous financial year for the contingencies fund. However, only Shs 77 billon was set aside for the next financial year. Therefore, we recommend that 0.5 per cent of the national budget of the financial year 2017/2018, which is Shs 145 billion, be remitted to the Contingencies Fund for the financial year 2018/2019.

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA)

1. 	PPDA/Uganda Road Fund Home Block Project

Madam Speaker, PPDA and the Uganda Road Fund, with approval of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, have been putting up their own home. Therefore, Shs 4 billion was given to them but they need an extra Shs 4.6 billion. Therefore, we recommend that Shs 4.6 billion be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable them acquire a permanent home so that the current funds being spent on rent (Shs 500 million per annum) can be spent on improved service delivery in the future.

2. 	PPDA Mbale Regional Office

The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority needs to bring services closer to people. Therefore, they are trying to open up a new system in Mbale regional office. The committee recommends that Shs 195 million be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable PPDA bring services closer to the people and improve efficiency.

3. 	Monitoring Local Content Development

We have been talking about local content but most of the local people cannot fit well. Therefore, they need Shs 260 million, which we recommend to be reallocated from the Contingency Fund's proposed budget allocation to enable PPDA develop the local content strategy and build the capacity of local providers so that they can participate competitively in the procurement process and reduce on the capital flight by foreign companies – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Try to summarise.

MS KATALI: Thank you. Let me go to the last page.

In conclusion, subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget estimates for the following votes as follows:

Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
Recurrent –  Shs 318,004,469,000 
Development – Shs 202,585,739,000 

Vote 108: National Planning Authority 
Recurrent  – Shs 24,008,762,000 
Development - Shs 1,044,168,000 

Vote l29: Financial Intelligence Authority 

Recurrent – Shs 10,034,574,000 
Development – Shs 465,000,000 

Vote 130: Treasury Operations 
Recurrent –Shs 8,855,223,126,000 

Vote 131: Auditor-General 
Recurrent  –  Shs 55,397,949,000 
Development – 	Shs 3,975,510,000 

Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority
Recurrent - Shs 297,288,942,000
Development - Shs 34,639,696,000

Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statics 
Recurrent - Shs 34,010,141,000
Development - Shs 15,409,486,000

Vote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority 
Recurrent - Shs 13,922,778,000
Development - Shs 11,189,000,000
 
Vote 310: Uganda Investment Authority
Recurrent - Shs 6,743,740,000
Development - Shs 4,240,000,000

I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and the committee. The Clerk is directed to reflect all the reports in their entirety in the Hansard.

Honourable members, the report has the necessary minimum signatures. Are there any comments? 

3.39	
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, chairperson of the committee, for that presentation.

On 30th of January this year, I raised an issue about allowances in town councils of hard-to-reach areas, specifically Buvuma Islands. We got a response from the Minister of Public Service and an undertaking from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Bahati. I would like to quote the Hansard of 30 January, and this is what the minister said: “Madam Speaker, we are just going to be debating the Budget Framework Paper in a few minutes from now. I think before we submit the final budget in April, we will be able to look at the issues of hard-to-reach areas and then report to the House.”

I have interacted with the minister a number of times and he assured me not to worry and that we are going to be considering the budget very soon. The districts that are supposed to benefit from this allowance include Bulambuli, Buvuma, Ssembabule, Mitooma, Bukedea, Bududa and Rukungiri. The Minister of Public Service submitted a list of these districts on this Floor of Parliament.

The promise by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that I should not worry still stands. However, I am worried until I get commitment from the minister and I think this is the right time. Honourable minister, are my civil servants in Buvuma Town Council going to benefit from hard-to-reach allowances like they used to?

3.42
MR TERENCE NACO ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for this report. 

I have heard the chairperson of the committee saying there is low absorption of funds borrowed from outside. I am perturbed and I do not know how this happens. I thought funds that are borrowed are meant for particular projects; how can it happen that most times you do not absorb all the funds? Why are we borrowing if we do not have any programmes to borrow for? I would like to seek clarification about that. Thank you.

3.43
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that when the planners consider hard-to-reach places, they do not consider Mukono and yet Mukono has Koome Islands. They always consider Koome as part of Buvuma   yet it is a separate subcounty in Mukono District. That is my concern and I think it should be considered. Thank you.

3.43
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson for the great report. I would like to encourage us next time that when our sisters take the Floor, we should give them the necessary audience because we ought to treat them with the dignity they deserve.

Madam Speaker, the committee’s report mentioned money set aside to fund a research study. I would like to implore your committee that you do not need to look for money to facilitate research because universities are already doing that. First of all, they get their funding from Government to undertake research and come up with scholarly and academic recommendations that are supposed to guide Government interventions. I would like to rather suggest that we re-allocate that money to something else and tap into the opportunities that come from research undertaken at universities.

Madam Chairperson, the fundamental problem that this country is grappling with is corruption. Literally, what we generate ends up in the hands of those that have decided to hijack our economy or revenues. Therefore, I would rather that your report sounds firm as far as trying to strengthen and facilitate accountability institutions like the Inspectorate of Government (IGG). Why can’t we explore the possibility of having the IGG’s office or Auditor-General’s office at district level?

On the issue of the Contingencies Fund, if you went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and your constituency had an emergency, you will find the template – the minister is here. A regrets for non-availability of funds will be served to you within minutes. That would not be the case if we had this contingency. Therefore, I would like to ask this honourable House that this particular budget should not be passed until we have a firm commitment that 0.5 per cent of the national budget would be available for the fund.  
	
Ugandans are crying. Last year, you recall that on this particular Floor, I pleaded that farmers in Kamuli and Kasese be exempted from SACCO taxes. Cabinet has prepared a paper to again reinstate them. I would like to encourage your committee to explore helping Ugandans by ensuring that SACCOs should not be taxed.

The issue of safe and clean drinking water pains me. We have animals in Isingiro with enough water but we have human begins in Kasese without drinking water. How can Uganda be called a country? This particular budget is supposed to address that for once so that we have our communities in Uganda served with clean and safe drinking water. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite the minister, I hope you can address us on why state enterprises which are profitable do not declare dividends to the Government. It is in the report. I hope you can give us a way forward on that issue. I think the queries are finished. You can now respond - the minister first and then the chairperson.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the issues of the acting Leader of the Opposition. He has raised issues to do with water and safety. I am sure that the Minister of Health will be able to respond to some of those issues when the debate on health and water comes up.

The other issue is on corruption, which I think is a key issue which all of us must handle. We would like to thank the Members of Parliament, especially the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and other accountability committees, for the work that you are doing in following up the reports from the Auditor-General.

We are also trying to do some amendments to the procurement process, which has been the centre of corruption. We want to now move into e-procurement. We are amending the law to reduce on the delays and centres of corruption. This law will be coming here in June.

The other point which was raised was what the committee has suggested. I hope that we shall have the time, probably with the Committee on Budget, to revisit the recommendation of the committee. In the argument, they are saying we provided Shs 70 billion in the Contingencies Fund. Because the money that we have provided is little, in their wisdom they are reallocating it to other areas instead of adding into the Contingencies Fund. We have been crying here time and again that we need money in the Contingencies Fund. If we get it out of the Contingencies Fund, however little it is, I think we would be distorting the purpose for which the Contingencies Fund was created. Therefore, I hope that we shall have further discussions with the committee before the budget is finally passed.

On the hard-to-reach areas, hon. Migadde, the 30 per cent is already incorporated in our estimates and the Minister of Public Service confirmed this to all of us yesterday. Therefore, you do not have to worry that Buvuma is not included.

On the issue of low absorption, we have identified about four factors that have been contributing to low absorption. We have worked out a formula to improve on this with the Committee on National Economy. One of the factors has been lack of preparedness before the projects are submitted for funding. This idea of shooting first and then you target after, we have now said no to it; you are not going to be financed if you are not prepared.

The second factor has been the counterpart funding. There is no loan that goes to the Committee on National Economy - They have made it a point that we cannot go to the committee without confirming that counterpart funding is there to finance the project. (Applause) 

There are also issues to do with processes of approval of the loans. We are improving on this and working with the Committee on National Economy. There is no loan that has overstayed in the committee. So we would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because this process is ongoing.

Finally, I would like to comment on efficiency. We are proposing - and regulations will be made to the Public Finance Management Act – that this becomes part of the marks that we should use to see whether an accounting officer is fit to hold an office if they are not implementing, if they are not applying the resources which Parliament has appropriated through loans. Therefore – (Mr Nzoghu rose_) – Stand up and speak. (Laughter) 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I would request that you rule hon. Bahati out of order – (Laughter) – because it is me who is paying him as a taxpayer. Thank you.

I simply wanted the minister to clarify on the issue of contingencies very well. According to the Public Finance Management Act, we are supposed to have a Contingencies Fund. We are aware that actually the ministerial policy statement had indicated on page 11 a total of Shs 77 billion for the Contingencies Fund. Unfortunately, this was less than what is actually provided for in the Act. Secondly, even if it is less, they have still reallocated this money. 

Therefore, I wanted the minister to tell us - One, why they have decided to reallocate this money to different votes, particularly the Shs 8.5 billion that has been reallocated to the free zones? Two, actually the Shs 68 billion instead should have been recommended to be allocated to the Contingencies Fund to comply with the Public Finance Management Act and help the fund for disaster purposes. 

As you are aware, Madam Speaker, quite a number of our colleagues here have been coming here and telling us that there are problems of floods, landslides and food crises. It is based on this that this Parliament, through your chair, passed that law so that Parliament and Government can be able to get money from that vote. Therefore, hon. Bahati, what is your problem? (Laughter) Why do you run away from the provisions of that Act? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the minister was actually taking issue with the recommendation of the committee to reallocate. I think he was saying we need the Contingencies Fund to remain where it is. 

Honourable members, in the Ninth Parliament we reallocated that fund but we had trouble dealing with the disasters. Therefore, I also would like to add my voice to say that let the Contingencies Fund be there. You are now seeing issues in Bukomansimbi, Iganga and other places. I would like to appeal that the Contingencies Fund is left intact and actually beefed up to the limit because we need it. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for supporting us on that matter. I think those are the few questions. 

On the issue of dividends, I beg that I return to the House with an informed position on those enterprises which are declaring dividends and those which are not and the reason why, so that the House is informed. 

However, I wanted to end with good news to Members of Parliament and leaders in the country. Two days ago, Harvard University carried out a research, which has now confirmed that Uganda will be the second fastest growing economy in the world, next to India, by 7.4 per cent. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: You wanted to clear something?

MS KATALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has ably answered all the questions. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings that we had with the different stakeholders and the original report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we are dealing with the Committee of Supply, we shall deal with the issue of the Contingencies Fund properly.

I now invite the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Summarise as much as possible.
         
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

3.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I beg to lay on the Table the report and the sets of minutes of our meetings. 

Madam Speaker, as you have advised, this committee oversees about 11 votes. In accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for 11 votes under its mandate-

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister goes, can you in your next report give us an update on SDGs - all the ministries - and human rights- 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee considered the policy statements of the following votes:

    1. Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    2. Vote 133 – Directorate of Public Prosecution (DPP)
    3. Vote 102 – Electoral Commission
    4. Vote 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission
    5. Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission
    6. Vote 101 – The Judiciary
    7. Vote 148 – Judicial Service Commission
    8. Vote 109 – Law Development Centre (LDC)
    9. Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)
    10. Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government 
    11. Vote 119 – Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) 

In considering the ministerial policy statements, the committee invited and held meetings -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, they can read that.

MR OBOTH: Unrelatedly, Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on the sectors’ compliance to the gender and equity framework. 

Madam Speaker, as we are aware, it is a requirement of law that ministerial policy statements are accompanied by a certificate of gender and equity compliance. The committee noted that some votes under its purview have continuously posted very poor scores in this regard. The Law Development Centre, for instance, over the years scored 41 per cent in the financial year 2016/2017, 64 per cent in FY 2017/2018 and a low percentage of 26 in the financial year 2018/2019.

Sustainable Development Goal No. 5 calls for gender equality with an understanding that gender equality is not only a fundamental human right, but a necessary foundation for a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world. Such scores do not reflect the commitment needed to achieve this very important global undertaking to sustainable development. 

Because of time constraint, Madam Speaker, allow me go straight to the committee’s observations and recommendations. We have a detailed version and I am going to refer to an abridged version. 

The Judiciary 

During the financial year 2017/2018, the Judiciary had a total approved budget of Shs 132.21 billion, of which Shs 70.31 billion was released and Shs 62.06 billion was spent by end of December.

Madam Speaker, maybe you can guide me further on if I should only go to the recommendations or the narrative too.

THE SPEAKER: Just read the subjects and the recommendations thereunder.
	
MR OBOTH: Under this, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends an additional Shs 6 billion to reduce case backlog through automation of court. We saw that last financial year, Parliament approved Shs 2.5 billion and it has helped the Judiciary a lot in the automation of court systems. It yielded results because courts registered an increase in disposal rate. The recent case proceedings in Mbale could attest to this. Now our judges are able to follow submissions from counsels and interact especially since they are not writing by hand.

Madam Speaker, our committee is of the view that an additional Shs 6 billion be availed. 

They also have a gap in staffing and we would like to appreciate this Parliament and the Government for allowing the recruitment of more judges. 

Budget Performance: They have domestic arrears. Madam Speaker, the Judiciary has a problem of not sticking to commitments in the control system. We recommend that any outstanding arrears should be deducted from the vote’s budget and should be charged at source. 

Madam Speaker, we have a recommendation on renovation under the development budget. Government should ensure adequate release of funds to spending agencies to enable them deliver on the activities in the work plans of the financial year. It can be realised that most courts were supposed to be renovated but they remained untouched during this financial year. 

Increase in Case Backlog in the Magistrates Court: There was an increase in case backlog by 1,868 cases during the half financial year ending. This was due to the strikes by the attorneys from the office of the DPP, affecting criminal cases.

The committee recommends that the case backlog reduction strategy established by the Judiciary should be supported by committing to it additional funds. Madam Speaker, I believe that Government also will be able to support the reasons for the strikes of both the prosecutors and the Judiciary. 

Staffing Gaps: A total of 2,864 posts remain vacant, implying a staff gap of 62 per cent. This has affected the performance of the entity and contributed to case backlog.

To address this, Government should expedite the Judiciary Administration Bill to allow the appointment of specific cadres of staff under the Judiciary such as research assistants and court administrators.

While we were interacting with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we were informed, and this is detailed in our report, that the Judiciary Administration Bill is already gazetted. We believe that that will come soon.

Inadequate Human Resource: Staff levels of the Judiciary stand at 55 per cent and they have a lot of workload and caseload for both non-judicial and judicial staff. To address this, again Government should expedite the Judiciary Administration Bill to allow the appointment of specific cadre of staff as mentioned. 

Limited use of Courtroom Technology: This still refers to the automation. We are making a case that an additional Shs 6 billion be availed for this purpose. Our judges and judicial officers should stop taking notes as they listen while proceedings are being transcribed; that will also help a lot in reduction of case backlog.

Inadequate Court Infrastructure: The committee recommends that Government should kick-start the process of constructing its own court infrastructure across the country in a phased manner over the medium term, in order to reduce on rent expenses that are on the rise. 

It came to our knowledge that most court buildings are housed in hired premises including the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal/Constitutional Court. We wonder what happens when the landlords are in trouble or on the wrong side of the law. That is the very reason we would urge this Parliament to agree with the committee’s recommendation that more funds should be given to expedite the process of construction of court buildings.

Operationalization of New Magisterial Areas: There is non-operationalization of new magisterial areas and High Court circuits as there are no funds to run them, leading to increased caseload and lead times. The committee recommends that the Judiciary prioritizes the operationalization of new magisterial areas and High Court circuits over the medium-term starting financial year 2019/2020.

Madam Speaker and Members, you need to know that there are new magisterial areas in the counties or constituencies that were created. However, there are judicial officers to work there and there is no money even to take the required state attorneys.

Inadequate Development Budget: The Judiciary continues to rent premises even for the Supreme Court as stated above. Therefore, we recommend that they should develop a project in financial year 2018/2019 to kick-start the construction of the above courts beginning with the Court Of Appeal and the Supreme Court. Government should provide additional funds of Shs 0.2 billion to develop the project designs.

Law Development Centre (LDC)
While we were interacting with the Law Development Centre, it should be noted here that this Parliament was concerned in the previous financial years about the autonomy and concentration of LDC. In the next financial year, LDC has prioritised de-concentration and is opening its first regional centre in Mbarara. Therefore, we shall have Kampala and Mbarara and we expect that more lawyers will be trained and will access the bar course training.

Madam Speaker, I am trying to summarize as I read-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, at this rate we are going to take long. You highlight the areas where you want the support of this House and then go to the provisions of the budget. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this is a very hard job especially since we have 11 agencies. I envy the Committee on Finance and others who have only to talk about a few.

The committee recommends a provision of Shs 2.52 billion to LDC in the next financial year 2078/2019 as development budget to complete the first phase of construction of a multi-storeyed academic block. We have been complaining about the number of those who go to LDC but they do not have space.

Due to an increase in the number of universities teaching law, Parliament recommended that LDC decentralizes and this is what I have talked about; they complied with the recommendation. They require Shs 1 billion to decentralize in one region of the country starting in the next financial year. We need this Parliament to support this cause so that we have one LDC centre in Mbarara. They went to different regions; they had criteria and Mbarara scored highest. The next will either be in the east or north.

The committee recommends that LDC be allowed to retain an additional Shs 1 billon to fully decentralize its services across the country over the medium-term. 

On the budget performance for financial year 2017/2018, the committee would like to recommend that Government improves LDC's development budget over the medium-term to accommodate the growing number of students.

Budget Strategy: The committee recommends that LDC develops a strategy of increasing the enrolment of students at the centre in the medium-term. 

Government should abolish the pre-entry exams policy at LDC to increase access to legal practice services in the country. This is a matter that we have debated and found that the exams are neither serving the purpose nor helping the already graduate lawyers who want to access the bar course. It is not a guarantee of quality assurance.

Gender Compliance: We recommend that LDC addresses critical gender and equity concerns. However, we should also note that of all the agencies, Ministry of Justice I think was rated overall No.3 with 80 per cent. We want to thank them.

Uganda Law Reform Commission (ULRC)

Madam Speaker, under the implementation of the approved National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) for financial year 2018/2019 and the medium-term, the committee recommends that Shs 3 billion be provided in the financial year 2018/2019 and the balance be provided over the medium-term.

Honourable colleagues, this is the entity mandated to revise our laws and even translate them into local languages. Under their budget strategy, the committee recommends that Uganda Law Reform Commission be provided with an additional Shs 3 billion in the financial year 2018/2019 and the balance over the medium-term to facilitate printing of the revised principal laws.

Law Revision Bill

The committee observed that the Bill is still outstanding and constraining the publication of a revised edition of Laws of Uganda. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government expedites the presentation of the Law Revision Bill to Parliament for enactment. 

The Electoral Commission

The Electoral Commission were grateful for the resolution of this Parliament and Government for the enhancement of salaries. We believe that the resolutions made in that regard will be followed through by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they will not default. They had suffered for 18 years and are now a lot happier. I bring greetings and salutations from them.

Electoral Commission Regional and District Office Space

This Parliament recommended that an additional Shs 2 billion be provided to the Electoral Commission to start constructing its own regional offices in financial year 2018/2019. The commission continues to incur costs of renting office and storage facilities in all the regions and districts countrywide. However, this has not been provided for in the next budget.

The committee recommends that the development budget of the commission be increased by Shs 0.5 billion in the financial year 2018/2019 to kick-start the process of designing plans for the construction of regional offices.

Relocation of the Electoral Commission Headquarters

We all know that this Parliament recommended Shs 10 billion to be provided to relocate the Electoral Commission headquarters to a new premise during the financial year 2018/2019 as part of compensation costs of the Standard Gauge Railway, Jinja Express Highway and Kampala Flyover Project. However, the development budget has remained unchanged. This implies that the construction and purchase of the new premises for the new headquarters was not prioritised in financial year 2018/2019 and yet this is a Government sector. The committee recommends that those funds be provided

The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission expedites the election of lower local councils as provided for in their work plan. They indicated here that they failed to carry out elections for administrative unit councils and women councils/committees. This led to the Shs 20.74 billion meant for these activities to remain unused. According to the Secretary to the Electoral Commission, they will now be ready to conduct the elections for the lower local councils because they are expecting it within two weeks from now but that is not provided for in this budget. 

Creation of New Districts and Administrative Units

The Government continues to create new districts, with six districts to come into effect in the next financial year, 2018/2019. The commission requires Shs 0.706 billion to operationalise one district, which translates to Shs 4.236 billion for the six districts. This has not been provided for in the budget for financial year 2018/2019, rather there has been a reduction on programme 51 on management of elections. 

We created these districts here together therefore the money should be provided. The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 4.236 billion to operationalise and execute its duties in the new districts created to start in financial year 2018/2019. This means that by 1st July these districts are coming into effect and elections must follow suit. 

The commission needs additional Shs 0.403 billion, about Shs 400 million, to clear arrears for the data entrants for services rendered in 2010, which arose from the aborted administrative units’ elections. Our own brothers and sisters were recruited in this process and up to now, they have not been paid their Shs 10,000; they are still waiting for all these years.

The committee recommends that the commission be availed with Shs 0.403 billion to clear arrears as remuneration for data entrants for their services in 2010.

Voter Education: The Electoral Commission requires an additional Shs 3.019 billion to carry out voter education and training in preparation for the 2021 - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the chairperson to present the report.

MR OBOTH: They need to carry out voter education and training in preparation for the next general elections. The committee recommends that Shs 3.019 billion be provided over the medium-term starting with the financial year 2019/2020 for voter education and training to ensure free and fair elections.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! You are very excited about the chairperson’s report. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you for that observation. The details of this report were uploaded on the intranet yesterday; I am reading the abridged version. You see me struggling because I have to summarise; I am reading on my feet. There will be an election, whether in 2021 or not, and I know that you all want to go for it.

Parliamentary Commission 

The Parliamentary Commission has experienced declining budget cuts given the revision of travel allowances for staff and MPs. The budget for this programme is declining from Shs 22.801 billion in the financial year 2017/2018 to Shs 17.801 billion in 2018/2019. This has created a funding shortfall of Shs 12.451 billion.

The non-wage recurrent budget estimates for the Parliamentary Commission under programme 22 should be adjusted by Shs 12.41 billion to cater for recurrent costs and oversight activities of committees of Parliament during the financial year 2018/2019. 

Madam Speaker, it is evident that this is affecting the performance of most of the committees, which cannot do oversight work as we are supposed to do. It also affects the way we do our budgeting even here. You cannot prove for sure whether a certain project was undertaken by an entity you are supervising. 

Therefore, on the approved Budget Framework Paper, we recommended provision of Shs 3.7 billion to support the technical departments of legal, research, clerks, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and Budget Office in the execution of their mandate to provide adequate support to the institution of Parliament. Instead, the Departments of Legal and Legislative Services received less by Shs 0.5 billion for the next financial year and all other three departments maintained the budgets levels of financial year 20l7/2018. This has increased the shortfall to Shs 4.2 billion in financial year 2018/2019. 

This shortfall will impact negatively on the provision of technical support to Parliament in its role of adequate oversight and legislative roles. The committee therefore recommends that Government should provide an additional Shs 4.2 billion for the above technical departments to enable them execute their mandates to fulfil Parliament's strategic objectives.

Madam Speaker, it has been observed over time that Parliament continues to partly create audit backlogs due to delayed scrutiny and debates of the Auditor-General’s reports. In addition, other mandatory reports like the Inspectorate of Government and human rights reports are not handled by Parliament expeditiously. This also implies that capacity gaps exist in Parliament to scrutinise statutory reports. Madam Speaker, as I was presenting, I saw the line minister pushing me against the table and I believe he will have answers here at one point.

Audit committees should be supported in the disposal of all audit reports in a timely manner. Parliament should prioritise debate of audit committee reports and other statutory reports as provided for in various laws and in the Rules of Procedure.

Technical departments should be provided with adequate resources to improve their respective capacities in scrutinising statutory reports. This will enable them provide adequate support to committees to handle all the reports.

The committee recommends that absorption of funds should be improved by adhering and aligning work plans with procurement plans and respective budgets. This is on compliance in financial year 2017/2018 where Parliament only spent 86 per cent of the released funds by the third quarter.
 
During the financial year 2018/2019 and the medium-term, Parliament should institute a system of linkages between local governments, constituencies and the national Parliament.

Government should ensure that during the financial year 2018/2019, laws to strengthen the credibility of the electoral processes and review of appropriate legislation are brought to Parliament for enactment.

Madam Speaker, during the first three quarters of the financial year 20l7/2018, four Bills were passed out of 20 targeted Bills. This indicates a poor performance of Bills enacted. This was due to delays experienced by committees to dispose of proposed legislation due to inadequate funds to process Bills and delays by the Executive to introduce proposed legislation.

The committee recommends provision of an additional Shs 12.541 billion to committees to enable them clear legislative and oversight backlogs before them. The Executive should expeditiously introduce the Bills highlighted in the President's State of the Nation Address since 2016, including a comprehensive constitutional amendment. As I was reading this, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs came in; I felt him. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the Tenth Parliament currently has 553 Members of Parliament -(Interjections)– 453, I beg your pardon. I seek your indulgence. The Tenth Parliament currently has 453 Members of Parliament. Subsequently, this number is expected to increase, with effect from July 2018 with the coming into effect of the six new districts. This has created a funding wage shortfall of Shs 3.492 billion for financial year 2Ol8/2019.

The committee recommends that the budget estimates for Parliament be adjusted by an additional Shs 3.492 billion to incorporate the incoming new Members of Parliament for the additional six districts.

Parliament is scheduled to host the Commonwealth Parliamentary International Conference in October 2019. Procurements leading to the hosting of the above conference will be undertaken in this financial year. However, the non-wage recurrent budget has declined from Shs 371.89 billion in the financial year 20l7/2018 to Shs 305.67 billion in financial year 2018/2019. This has created a shortfall in the non-wage recurrent budget of Shs 1.768 billion, which is needed to kick-start the procurement required for the Commonwealth Parliamentary International Conference this financial year. We need this money this financial year and we have that shortfall, Madam Speaker.

The committee recommends that the budget estimates for non-wage recurrent should be adjusted by Shs 1.768 billion to enable Parliament procure various goods and services in preparation for hosting the Commonwealth Parliamentary International Conference in October 2019. This is a conference that will showcase Uganda in various ways. We do not have enough time to elaborate.

A department for the Office of the Leader of Government Business has been created to start in financial year 2018/2019, with a provision of Shs 1.383 billion. However, the committee noted that while this department is meant to support the Prime Minister in handling business at Parliament, the same Prime Minister is fully catered for under vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister. This is in spite of non- provision of direct support to key offices in Parliament like that of the chief whips of both Government and the Opposition.

The committee recommends that Parliament creates specific departments for the Parliament Chief Whip and Chief Opposition Whip to enable the offices undertake their respective mandates more effectively starting in the financial year 2019/2020 and over the medium-term.

Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) 

Uganda Registration Services Bureau need increment in their nonwage recurrent to enable them open at least one regional branch during the financial year 2018/2019. They need Shs 1.754 billion. For the record, I should say that this is one of the best performing agencies that we have; little money is put in their hands but they make good use of it.

The committee recommends that a reallocation within URSB be undertaken to transfer Shs 7.5 billion from the Department of Finance and Administration to develop the chattels/movable collateral registry under the Business Registrations Services in financial year 2018/2019. The details of that are just above. We recommend for reallocation.

Budget Performance

The committee recommends that the outstanding policy, regulatory and legal reforms should be expedited during the financial year 2018/2019 to pave way for the bureau to improve service delivery.

Allocation to URSB has increased from Shs 2.537 billion in financial year 2010/2011 to Shs 14.7 billion in financial year 2017/2018. This resulted from an additional Shs 10 billion in appropriation in aid to enhance Non Tax Revenue (NTR) collections. Collections of NTR stood at Shs 30.2 billion during the first three quarters of the financial year 2017/2018 out of an annual target of Shs 38.6 billion, representing 78 per cent of NTR collected.

However, allowing the bureau spend Shs 10 billion at source to collect only Shs 38 billion is low. The target of Shs 45.5 billion of NTR collection set in financial year 2016/17 and above should be restored in financial year 2018/2019.

The committee recommends that the bureau should start budgeting for the building maintenance costs over the medium-term. This is because the bureau has already kick-started the construction of the Uganda Business Facilitation Centre to house URSB, Uganda Investment Authority, Capital Markets Authority and others, expected to be completed within 18 months.
 
Debt Collection: The Auditor-General raised concerns over non-collection of debt and advised on the use of court bailiffs. This has created a dent on the entity's balance sheet of Shs 6.253 billion uncollected.

The committee recommends that URSB expedites the collection of the above debt in financial year 2018/19 to improve its income receipts.

Budget Strategy

The balance should be obtained from the Department of Finance and Administration and appropriation in aid allocation of Shs 6.220 billion for financial year 2018/2019.

Wage Bill: The committee recommends that in order to ensure project sustainability, project staff should be given six months to transfer any skills required for the proper functionality of the bureau since the wage bill cannot accommodate additional staff in financial year 2018/2019.

Development Budget

The development budget for financial year 20l8/2019 will be Shs 0.203 billion, a decline from Shs 1.140 billion provided in financial year 2017/2018. The development budget is critical in ensuring acquisition of requisite infrastructure and logistics for effective delivery of services.

The committee recommends that URSB be allowed to retain an additional Shs 0.93 billion in form of appropriation in aid to enable it finance its investment costs during the financial year 2018/2019.

Inspectorate of Government (IG)

The committee recommends an additional Shs 0.88 billion be provided to the Inspectorate of Government’s recurrent budget for financial year 2018/2019 to facilitate it to enforce the Leadership Code Act. This Parliament passed the new law, which has not been put to effect.

Staff Training

Parliament recommended Shs 0.646 billion for training staff to promptly respond to the changing trends in corruption cases. However, this has not been provided for in financial year 2018/2019 budget estimates.

The committee recommends that Shs 0.646 billion be provided to the IG non-wage recurrent budget to improve their capacity to fight corruption. Madam Speaker, we found out that corruption is emerging and changing dynamics. They need to retool the officers to cope with cyberspace crime, online crime and different white-collar crimes. They need to build capacity.

Budget Performance: Sophisticated corruption involves organisations and syndicates. The IG has limited capacity to tackle such cases adequately. This calls for training to equip the staff with specialised skills to tackle the emerging trends of corruption.

The committee recommends an additional Shs 0.646 billion to enable IG staff acquire specialised skills to tackle corruption effectively.

Enforcement of the Leadership Code of Conduct

The committee recommends that IG be provided with adequate resources to expedite the verification of declarations of all leaders in the country during the financial year 2018/2019. This will require an additional Shs 2.66 billion to enable it meet its mandatory obligations and operations. That is drawn from the narrative that out of 65, only 10 leaders’ declarations were verified because of the continued re-education in their nonwage budget.

Rent and Utilities

The committee recommends that IG engages the landlords and renegotiates the payment mode to avoid rental arrears. Like we all know, they pay in dollars and when the dollar fluctuates, they have some shortfalls.   

National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Contributions and Gratuity

The IG requires an additional Shs 1.088 billion to enable it meet its NSSF and gratuity obligations. The committee recommends an additional Shs 0.370 billion for NSSF contributions and Shs 0.718 billion for gratuity be provided to IG in financial year 2018/2019 to meet statutory obligations.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (MoJCA)

During the financial year 2018/2019, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs annual budget estimate is proposed to be Shs 133.48 billion, an increase of Shs 52.49 billion under the development component, directed towards support to the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS).

Parliament approved an additional Shs 1.4 billion to support the Administrator-General in the administration of estates and property of the deceased.

The committee recommends that additional Shs 1.38 billion be provided in the budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019 for MoJCA recurrent budget.

Whereas one of the strategic objectives for MoJCA is to ensure disciplinary control over errant lawyers, the disciplinary committee of the Law Council concluded 60 cases against errant lawyers in 18 sittings. The Law Council also inspected 49 law firms out of which, 48 were approved and one was not. 

The committee recommends that the ministry follows programme based budgeting guidelines while reporting performance, indicating the baselines, targets and likely outcomes.

The ministry continues to face challenges of outstanding court awards, which have increased from Shs 249 billion in financial year 2012/2013 to Shs 676.8 billion as at June 2016, while only 1.38 per cent of the outstanding liability was cleared. The committee recommends that the ministry develops a clear strategy on how it intends to clear the outstanding liability.

In spite of the growing outstanding court awards, only Shs 9.35 billion has been allocated for financial year 2018/2019, leaving a deficit of Shs 667.45 billion. The committee noted that this liability is subject to interest, which will lead to the exponential growth of the liability. People who have won cases against Government are denied access to the remedies. 

The committee recommends that court awards should be decentralised so that the concerned Government department/agency that creates the liability is responsible for the payment of the respective court award.

Gratuity

The ministry requires an additional Shs 1.062 billion to cater for gratuity expenses for the 18 staff who already retired and an additional four staff due to retire in financial year 20l8/2019. The committee recommends that Shs 1.062 billion be provided from reallocations from within the MoJCA budget to cater for the staff due to retire and those already retired. 

The committee recommends that only Shs 0.65 billion be provided for travel abroad under the programme, while the balance is used to settle gratuity expenses discussed above. We noted an increase of Shs 2.324 billion under general administration, policy and planning of which a Shs 1.6 billion increment (from Shs 0.117 billion in financial year 2017/2018 to Shs 1.717 billion in financial year 20l8/2019) is directed towards travel abroad for the office of the Attorney-General. This provision was not justified. However, we also know that they need to travel and defend court cases. In the wisdom of the committee, we recommended that this money be reallocated.

Effective Representation of Government in Courts and Tribunals: The committee recommends that the non-wage recurrent budget for case handling be adjusted to an average of Shs 350,000. This will require an additional Shs 0.458 billion to be provided in the non-wage recurrent provision for financial year 2018/2019. Currently, it is about Shs 273,667 per case per year. The committee looked at this and recommended Shs 350,000 per case per year

De-concentration of the Attorney-General’s Services

The ministry has opened regional offices in Mbarara, Mbale, Gulu, Arua and Moroto. During the financial year 2017/2018, another office was set up in Fort Portal, bringing the total number to six. Each regional office covers more than 10 districts and serves more than six courts. These offices need office equipment, legal reference materials, utilities, procurement of vehicles and motorcycles. During the financial year 2018/2019, Shs 0.617 billion has been provided out of the required Shs 3.447 billion.

The committee recommends an additional Shs 2.830 billion to be made to the non-wage recurrent and development budget of the ministry to fully operationalise the Attorney-General’s regional offices.

Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)

The committee recommends an additional requirement of Shs 1.5 billion to be provided to the UHRC for civic education and human rights awareness.

This Parliament recommended Shs 0.2 billion to undertake feasibility studies for the construction of UHRC headquarters. The committee recommends provision of an additional Shs 0.2 billion to undertake feasibility studies for the construction of UHRC headquarters in the next financial year.

Budget Performance for Financial Year 2017/2018: The committee recommends that statistics on human rights outputs and outcomes be provided in all budget submissions to Parliament to assess the performance of the commission.

The committee recommends that all security agencies should respect and observe the rights of all persons and promote freedom of expression.

The Uganda Police Force should, as a matter of urgency, strengthen its capacity to address the increasing lawlessness by stepping up community policing/neighbourhood watch programmes and increase its investigative effectiveness.

The Uganda Police should expedite the investigations into the reported crimes to their logical conclusion so that perpetrators can be brought to book.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs continues to handle the compensation awards by the Commission. However, beneficiaries continue to face challenges in accessing compensation from the ministry.

The committee recommends that 15 per cent of the allocation for court awards and compensation allocations to the Ministry of Justice be ring-fenced for compensation of victims of human rights abuses.

In addition, the policy of having relevant MDAs whose officers are involved in human rights violations to shoulder the burden of compensating the victims should be expeditiously implemented starting in Financial Year 2018/2019.

Wage shortfalls during the Financial Year 20l7/18

The arrears created as a result of under budgeting should be paid in full for the months that were not paid at the new rate.

High Case Backlog at Tribunal

The committee recommends that the commission be strengthened by increasing the number of commissioners at the tribunal and staff to expedite the investigations to enable victims’ access justice.

Budget Strategy for Financial Year 20l8/2019

    i) Inadequate Wage Provision
Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that an increment of staff and commissioners' salaries (for all categories of staff, except the secretary to the commission) by 40 per cent in Financial Year 2018/2019 and increases it by an additional 30 per cent over the medium-term. Therefore, an additional Shs 2.67 billion should be provided for salary enhancement of staff of all categories, including commissioners while Shs 0.767 billion be provided to meet the salary shortfall for the secretary to the commission in Financial Year 2018/19.

    ii) Graduate Volunteers 

In a bid to extend services to Ugandans on a wider spectrum, the commission opened field officers run by graduate volunteers who are eligible for appointment and absorption into the commission structure. 

The budget estimates for the wage Bill should be further adjusted to make a provision of an additional Shs 1.537 billion to cater for the recruitment of the graduate volunteers in the commission structure

    iii) Inadequate Non-Wage Provision

The committee recommends an additional Shs 1.08 billion be provided to the non-wage recurrent budget to meet statutory obligations for Financial Year 2018/2019.

    iv) Development Budget

The committee recommends an additional Shs 1.5 billion additional to the development budget to enable the commission procure additional vehicles to deliver its mandate in the next financial year. They have very old vehicles and the maintenance costs are prohibitive. 

Judicial Service Commission (JSC)

This Parliament approved Shs 0.5 billion to JSC to enable it establish a project under the development budget to kick-start the process of setting up regional offices. This was to facilitate JSC to carry out a feasibility study on establishing regional offices.

The committee recommends that Shs 0.5 billion be provided for feasibility studies and designs for the construction of regional offices during the Financial Year 2018/19. Honourable colleagues you need to know that these are offices where members of the public can access JSC to raise complaints against judicial officers and they do not have to travel up to Kampala.

Budget Performance for Financial Year 2017/18		

The committee recommends that the JSC should expedite the recruitment of the remaining judicial personnel to enable Judiciary reduce the case backlog.

In spite of the commission disposing of 225 disciplinary cases, the commission still faces a backlog of over 400 disciplinary cases against judicial officers.

The commission should dispose of the outstanding disciplinary cases with the aim of reducing the case backlog and ensure corruption free judicial services in the country.

The committee recommends that JSC reallocates from within its budget to provide any additional costs associated with recruitment during the Financial Year 2018/19

Gender Compliance

The JSC scored 50 per cent as the minimum requirement to meet the gender compliance requirement. However, Judicial Service Commission needs to do more by indicating how it is to consider the gender and equity issues in future to address vulnerabilities in the sector.

Office of the Director of Public Prosecution 

Implementation of the Approved NBFP for Financial Year 2018/2019 and the medium-term

Parliament approved an additional Shs 2.0 billion to ODPP to facilitate witnesses in providing evidence with a view of reducing loss of cases in the courts of law. Although Shs 0.08 billion has been provided to support victims in terms of counselling and other social support and witness protection this is short of the recommended amount. This Parliament recommended two billion shillings and only Shs 800 million was provided.

The budget estimates for Financial Year 2018/2019 should be adjusted to provide additional Shs 1.92 billion under the non-wage recurrent budget to support and protect victims and witnesses.

To facilitate successful prosecution of corruption, land and sexual offences cases, Parliament approved Shs 4.6 billion additional for the above purposes in Financial Year 2018/19. However, only Shs 2.02 billion has been provided.

The details of the cases include: conducting pre-trial witness interviews has an allocation of Shs 0.38 billion instead of Shs 0.7 billion; prosecution of criminal offences has a provision of Shs 0.848 billion instead of Shs 2.5 billion; and prosecution of sexual offences and gender based violence and child cases has a provision of Shs 0.8 billion instead of Shs 1.62 billion. We all agree that these are areas which are sensitive and we are losing a lot in this.

The budget estimates for criminal prosecutions under the non-wage budget for Financial Year 2018/2019 be adjusted by Shs 2.84 billion to handle the above expenditure items.

The contribution of reduction of case backlog by 2O per cent - the budget estimates should be adjusted to include an additional Shs 1.5 billion towards the clearance of case backlog to increase access to justice in the country.

Madam Speaker, we provide for case backlog for judicial officers but we never provide for the Office of the DPP (ODPP) where other senior lawyers could come and dispose of cases, which the resident state attorneys are taking long to dispose of - they do not have that provision to give the per diem or facilitation.

Budget Performance

While efforts are being put in place to expedite the reduction of case backlog, Government continues to lose many cases in court, resulting from poor investigation institutions of Government. In this regard, institutions involved in investigations should develop mechanisms of improving their investigative capacity to improve on the prosecution results. Networking and automation of the offices of DPP should be expedited to enhance its efficiency and effectiveness.

Staff Structure

Over the medium term, Government should facilitate DPP’s office to increase its coverage to the whole country to dispense justice through the recruitment of more staff to fill the staff gap. Actually, where they are not there now, we have the police prosecutors doing their work.

The committee recommends that Government should facilitate the DPP’s office with additional resources of Shs 0.51 billion for the provision of security to its officers and implement Parliament’s recommendations in the approved National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) for the financial year 2018/2019 and in the medium term as indicated in Section 5.11.1 of this report.

Legal Reforms Outstanding

During financial year 2018/2019, Government should amend the above laws – Trial on Indictment Act, Magistrates Courts Act, the Evidence Act, Amnesty Act and Penal Code Act – to improve on DPP’s office and introduce the Witness Protection Bills to improve access to justice and ensure efficient and effective prosecution services in the country.

Madam Speaker, the DPP’s office needs additional Shs 2.84 billion over the medium term to improve case management by prosecutors – they want to roll out the prosecution case management information system. The committee recommends that an additional Shs 0.1 billon be provided to the DPP’s office to fully operationalise the land department during the financial year 2018/2019.

Security Needs for DPP Officers

Madam Speaker, it is obvious that we are aware of this and what befell them. The committee recommends that Government should provide an additional Shs 0.51 billon as security expenses to protect the officers in DPP’s office in the execution of their mandate.

Six Regional Offices

They are planning to have regional offices in the districts of: Luweero, Hoima, Iganga, Tororo, Rukungiri and Moroto. However, this activity is not funded and requires Shs 6.66 billion during the financial year 2018/2019 and all these regional offices are going to have High Court circuits.

The committee recommends a provision of Shs 3.3 billion be made in the budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019 to establish at least three regional offices and the remaining three offices be established over the medium term.

In totality, Madam Speaker, it is the prayer of the committee that the House adopts this report and approves the budget estimates that is incorporated in the recommendations for the respective votes for financial year 2018/201 as follows:

Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 47,336,635,000
Development expenditure – Shs 85,382,400,000
Total – Shs132,719,035,000

Vote 101: Judiciary
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 124,025,832,000
Development expenditure – Shs  11,769,500,000
Total 	– Shs 135,795,332,000

Vote 102: Electoral Commission
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 76,981,319,000
Development expenditure – Shs    700,000,000
Total – Shs 77,681,319,000

Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 44,487,783,000
Development expenditure – Shs 13,593,213,000
Total – Shs 58,080,996,000

Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 414,604,886,000
Development expenditure – Shs  66,997,481,000
Total – Shs 481,602,367,000

Vote 105: Law Reform Commission 
Recurrent - Shs 13,172,355,000
Development - Shs   200,020,000
Total - Shs 13,372,376,000 

Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission 
Recurrent - Shs  23,867,160,000
Development - Shs  1,911,797,000 
Total - Shs 25,778,958,000

Vote 109: Law Development Centre
Recurrent - Shs 13,824,085,000
Development - Shs    4,643,304,000
Total - Shs 18,467,389,000

Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau
Recurrent - Shs 23,414,146,000
Development - Shs  1,132,670,000
Total - Shs 24,546,816,000	

Vote 113: Directorate of Public Prosecutions
Recurrent - Shs 33,688,062,000
Development - Shs  9,755,351,000
Total - Shs 43,443,413,000

Vote 148: Judicial Service Commission
Recurrent - Shs 8,480,355,000
Development – Shs 992,797,000
Total - Shs 9,473,152,000

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you made an adjustment of Shs 1.5 billion. I do not know where it is.

MR OBOTH: That is all incorporated in our report.

THE SPEAKER: Is it already incorporated in the report?

MR OBOTH: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Members of the committee. As I had indicated earlier, we will just have a few comments. I will start with hon. Angura and I will take only five members.

5.22
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee, for the wonderful report presented –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have Mr Baluku is the Chairperson LC III of Lake Katwe in Busongora, Kasese District, in the gallery. He is here to witness the proceedings. (Applause)

MR ANGURA: I would like to thank the committee for the report and the observations they have made.

In relation to the Judiciary, how I wish some Members of Parliament from Pader, Omoro and Kitgum were here. When we travelled to Northern Uganda on a fact finding mission about a disease that was not well known there but believed to be epilepsy or nodding syndrome, we found very many cases of children who had either been sexually abused, expecting and pregnant but with no judicial remedy.

The reason the parents gave was that even if those cases were reported to the police, the judicial circuits were not near for them to follow up the cases. Many of them were leaving their children at home suffering with no justice realised.

The report has proposals to expand circuits and increase the number of judicial officers. How I wish it would start with this area such that those suffering children in the north can get justice for those who have been carelessly lowering their zips, defiling and impregnating children in Northern Uganda.

For the last financial year, the budget for sexual and gender related offenses was Shs 1.2 billion. However, they only released Shs 0.8 billion. This time they have budgeted for Shs 2.4 billion. How I wish all that money could be given to this sector to alleviate those challenges. I beg to submit.

5.24
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson of the committee and strongly support the recommendations.

On court awards, it is not easy for anyone to take Government to court. Therefore, for people to go through the process and win cases and then Government fails to pay, means that the Government will continue to intimidate Ugandans and discourage them from getting justice. Everything should be done to ensure these court awards are paid.

I welcome the recommendation that whatever money is put aside for compensation, 15 per cent should be ring-fenced for human rights abuses. These human rights abuses take the form of torture and people are robbed of their means of livelihood. Some of them even died before receiving their compensation. It is, therefore, very important that people are compensated for human rights abuses meted out against them.

For many years, development partners have been in charge of sponsoring civic education in Uganda up to close to 90 per cent. It is important that Ugandans take charge of what we want to teach our people, especially the moral and ethical values. They should know their rights because development partners have been funding but still when someone talks about human rights, people think that person is importing values from outside. We forget that the whole of Chapter Four of our Constitution guarantees rights to Ugandans. 

Therefore, we should raise awareness so that people can demand them and know their duties and responsibilities; that is very important.

Madam Speaker, it is important that those Government institutions that have land like Uganda Human Rights Commission and others are facilitated to build their own homes. I am sure Government is relived that Uganda Police has its headquarters at Naguru; we should encourage this.

Uganda Human Rights Commission has land and other departments of Government but year in, year out, they lose money in rent –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the Chairperson of the Committee of Human Rights to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I think we should have started building yesterday.  

Regarding the increased allowances and salaries for the commissioners of Uganda Human Rights Commission, it is long overdue and there has been a presidential directive. It is proper that their allowances are reviewed and increased to be commensurate with the work they do.

It is also important to facilitate them to have a presence in the whole country because we know that they run tribunals and people whose rights are abused run to the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Therefore, we should facilitate them to run these regional centres and be able to carry out their work among the populace. 

The chairperson said that gender issues will be addressed in future. I thought that gender issues are with us today. We should do everything possible to ensure that these gender issues are handled from today and in the future. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to concur with the committee on the proposal to decentralise Law Development Centre to cater for students who are very far away from Kampala in the regions that we know. With the increasing number of universities that are teaching law, it is imperative that this decentralisation programme of LDC is approved and funds definitely allocated.

However, I take issue with the selection criteria of the pioneer beneficiary of this decentralisation programme of LDC. It has been mentioned as Mbarara. I have no issues with Mbarara but I have an issue with the selection criteria. It happens to be in a region where the holders of the docket, which is the line ministry, hail from because when you talk about the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General, the Deputy Attorney-General - will, therefore, one be justified to say that maybe they had an edge of influential superiority and undue influence on the selection of this particular beneficiary, Mbarara –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Nambeshe and thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been perusing through the report and as far as I can recollect, majority of the best brains and the people who actually took lead in doing law come from the east and north. It is an issue that you cannot run away from.

The choice of Mbarara is not clear with me because in any case, Mbarara is even nearer to the centre in Kampala than the north. The chairperson must clearly explain to us the parameters that they used to decide that Mbarara is the one to take that centre.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for the information that you have accorded me. That is an issue that we should not take lightly. 
I also concur with the committee on the recommendation that pre-entry exams at LDC be abolished because these are prohibitive. They are limiting on the numbers of those that would access legal practice services in the country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Just to supplement what hon. Nambeshe said, honourable members, since we started listening to these debates, I have noticed that the regional centres are in particular places and in the same places. (Applause) 

I have not seen any centre in Namayingo yet it is part of Uganda. I have not seen something in Yumbe or Buyende yet they are part of Uganda. No, no, no! You are acting in breach of the Constitution, you ministers, because I have been listening to the same towns and they are all on the highway. This is not fair. (Applause)

5.33
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and his committee for the report. I would like to comment to the issue of the Electoral Commission.

I sincerely appreciate what the Electoral Commission is doing but in this particular case on the voter education, you will realise that Parliament puts in so much money towards voter education to the Electoral Commission. Honourable members will also attest to this that in most cases, the Electoral Commission does not do what it is supposed to do. Voters simply guess. 

When it comes to filling forms, they do not even know because they are not educated. They do not take time to go to radio stations to talk to them, especially in the election of LC 1 chairpersons and women councils, if we were to conduct them. The population did not know what was supposed to be done yet the Electoral Commission had been given money for voter education. 

In a situation where they are requesting for money and the committee is saying that we give them additional Shs 3 billion, we can do that but we should ask the Electoral Commission to do due diligence to the community in this country. Let the electorate be educated. Let them know their rights and what is supposed to be done. That is my take on that.

On the Inspectorate of Government, I would like the Chairperson of the committee to clarify this to the Members. It looks a little vague - a situation where you said that the non-wage declined from Shs 19 billion in 2016/2017 to only Shs 18 billion in 2017/2018 and it made them perform - you have also said that out of the targeted 65 leaders, only ten leaders’ declarations have been verified. I have an issue with that because, Madam Speaker, Parliament alone has got 454 leaders that have to be verified. So, a situation where he says 10 out of 65, are those institutions? What is this? It is a little vague. Let him clarify on that so that we know who these are and is that target enough with the billions of shillings that they want?

I am also not happy with the Law Development Centre. According to the report, the Law Development Centre is saying that they are not so much gender compliant. They are not stable and their scores are from 41 per cent in 2016/2017 to 64 per cent in 2017/2018 and for the next financial year 2018/2019, it will be only 26 per cent. That is not acceptable at all and we are saying if they are not committed in a situation that we are seeing, most likely, this House should not give them money. They should prove to this House that they are compliant in terms of gender before they get the money that they need –(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need some clarification from the chairperson. You talked about employing graduate volunteers. I need to be guided under what law? Madam Speaker, you remember I presented here a Private Member’s Bill on how to handle graduates but the finance ministry has been playing hide and seek up to now. The Ministry of Education and Sports, in its budget framework paper, talks about training graduates. I am wondering which law is going to guide them? Equally to the justice ministry, which law is going to guide them? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we finish the Budget, we shall bring that Bill, with or without the certificate because our Rules of Procedure allow us after 60 days to do that and I know that it is more than 60 days. So, we shall move without the ministry. (Applause)

5.38
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report presented. However, in the preamble, the committee acknowledges that this sector is one of those that are not compliant with NDP II. When you look at the budget estimates for all the 11 votes, they are requesting for more money yet they are also not compliant with the mechanisms, which have been put by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for example, the programme-based budgeting tool, which is meant to ensure we have value for money. We do not want taxpayers’ money to be wasted for nothing. How sure are we that all this money they are requesting for will eventually be used for the rightful purpose so that we have value for money for taxpayers? I thank you.

5.39
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with the committee about the elections of LC I and LCII chairpersons. Madam Speaker, we are on a time bomb because of these elections not taking place. Those LCs play a very big role in the communities. First and foremost, they enhance on keeping law and order; they help in monitoring Government projects and help to mobilise the communities on any development project.

I think the reason we are seeing now a lot of domestic violence, child marriages, land disputes and theft is because these leaders aren’t yet elected. I think the ministry in charge should pronounce and tell the country when these elections will take place -(Interruption) 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Koluo has raised a very critical matter. The information I would like to give him is that the Electoral Commission has come up with a roadmap to hold elections for municipalities and other new sub-counties but they have not talked about election of LCs. 

Madam Speaker, LCs election is a matter that has come to this Floor several times. They indicated they did not have money; we pushed the finance ministry to release the money. They indicated to us that they released the Shs 15 billion but no election took place. At the same time, every time it is announced there would be elections, they waste their money to mobilise. Thank you, hon. Koluo. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR KOLUO: Thank you very much, my brother. Madam Speaker, what is happening in the whole country is that they are saying it is Parliament not supporting the elections of LCs. Thank you.

5.42
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the committee’s recommendations on page 18 where they say that there should be an increase in the intake of students at the Law Development Centre (LDC). However, I do not agree with the committee’s recommendation that the pre-entry exams be scrapped. (Applause) I propose that instead of scrapping the pre-entry exams, let us lower the entry pass mark. If it is 60, let us bring it down to 50 because the pre-entry exams were put in place to check on the quality of lawyers we are to produce.

On page 22 of the report, the committee reported about the relocation of Electoral Commission Headquarters. Parliament had recommended that we award Shs 10 billion to relocate this facility. I pray that this is quickened because it is a hindrance to infrastructural development like the Standard Gauge Railway and Jinja Express Highway. We needed these infrastructures yesterday. So, let this money be availed so that we can have the infrastructural development take off.

Finally, about the elections of the local councils still on page 22 - the committee has said there is Shs 20 billion on the account of Electoral Commission, which is supposed to be used to hold these elections. We also note that EC has a work plan. Madam Speaker, I am wondering why the Electoral Commission has not carried out the elections yet we have the Shs 20 billion on their account and the work plan in place? Maybe, you need to throw more light on this. If it is a question of maybe looking for more resources, then we see what to do as Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.44
MS ANNITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support my sister, hon. Khainza on the same point of scrapping the pre-entry exams at LDC because this will compromise the quality of the advocates that will come out of LDC. It is not about having so many advocates coming out of LDC. We have over 11,000 lawyers qualifying every year but we have 700 advocates qualifying from LDC. So, if we have 11,000 advocates qualifying, management of these advocates would be very difficult. 

What we would need to do is to invest more in the law council that helps in disciplining of the advocates. 

5.46
MR GERESHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to oppose the idea of scrapping the pre-entry exams. In fact, I suggest that for all professional courses, pre-entry exams would be necessary to safeguard quality of our professionals. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You have finished? 

5.47
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I only would like to submit on the committee’s recommendation that pre-entry exams at Law Development Centre should be abolished. I have been a member of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for 11 years and my chairperson then was hon. Adolf Mwesige, from 2001 to 2010. 

We got very many international lobbyists with real money; they wanted the Law Development Centre to be liberalised so that we can have Americans and Britons setting up law firms in Uganda. With the capital they have, they can rent the entire Workers House and employ all the lawyers and create those curtails but our committee objected to that idea for ten consecutive years. 

So, the argument that LDC should be opened to the outside world has not received the blessings of this House. Now, I am very surprised that the committee is recommending, Madam Speaker, that the pre-entry exams be abolished. 

Now if I am to address my mind on this, there are very many universities that have started offering law degree courses such as Gulu University, IUIU, Uganda Christian University, Cavendish University, some of those universities are without libraries —(Interjections) – yes, and they are not chartered. 

Some of them - because they duped Ugandans that they offer law degrees, many people enrolled. When they finished the law degree, including one of my brothers, LDC could not admit them because the university had not got the standard requirement to start teaching law.

The difficulty with the legal profession, if a lawyer makes mistake in court, the cost is paid by you the client. It is not paid by the lawyer who made that mistake. Therefore, it is very sensitive to the extent that to set same standards, all those who completed law degrees – and I appeal to Members - should undergo the pre-entry exams at Law Development Centre and that is for reason, if - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, for a fact this House is led by very competent lawyers; you and the Deputy Speaker to mention. You are very excellent lawyers, more excellent than even those who have gone through the pre-entry exams.

Madam Speaker, we also know that there are lawyers who got pass degrees but when it comes to practice, they are very excellent lawyers. I will not mention them here but one of them is now at international criminal court. He was a Member of Parliament here; he didn’t get first class but he is very effective. 

Therefore, is it in order for hon. Odonga Otto to presuppose that when you don’t sit for pre entry exams which you also didn’t do you are not a very good or excellent lawyer? Is hon. Odonga-Otto in order to also allude that whoever has not done a law degree from particular universities - I am assuming, he is talking of UCU where he and I studied from, Makerere University that such people cannot be good lawyers if they studied from Uganda Islamic University in Uganda or KIU yet we are on the process of development?

Therefore, with the population increasing, we have only one centre called LDC, is hon. Odonga-Otto in order to discourage a legal development in this country? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I didn’t go through any pre-entry exams but we have to discuss it properly to get the pros and cons. I don’t know whether it is necessary because I did not do it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the point I was raising before I took information is that the moment we have like 10 universities offering law degrees, they will start - because in those universities, the students do not sit for national law exams; each university sets their own exams.

Therefore, we are going to have a scenario where one university will make all their students pass with high marks so that they join law development centre. They will start rigging even exams for their own university. Therefore, we need a safety net as a country that well you have come with a law degree from your institution, you come and undergo another exam to see if your degree is real or Kiwaani - (Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happened to be an external examiner at the Law Development Centre sometime back before joining Parliament. The reasons that were advanced to have pre-entry exams were very clear and precise.

We had students from universities that I will not mention here but who got first class degrees. We also had students who got second class upper degrees. When we subjected them to simple oral exams - and I will give you one of the questions that we put to some of these students and the question was: “What are the essentials for the formation of a contract?” (Interjection) - I am giving information -

THE SPEAKER: He is giving information. No. he is giving information.

MR MUGOYA: I am only giving information and I did not even participate in the proceedings of the committee because I was in - so I am giving information, which is very helpful to you people. These students could not even -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a cautious issue. We want to understand it before we take a decision because there are recommendations made by the committee. We need to understand whether we are moving properly.

MR MUGOYA: Yes, Madam Speaker. We also simplified for them the questions and said “What is volute?” We really simplified for them these question but they failed to answer these questions. 

When it came to commercial transactions, it was even horrible that they could not even define what a company is all about, how do you form a company? So we felt it necessary that we should have pre-entry exams to avert the seemingly low quality of students that were being admitted at the Law Development Centre.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, honourable chairman, I don’t know whether you are very strong on your proposals, can we remove this and maybe have a study about it?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, if I may give an explanation, pre-entry exams were never and can never be as a result of feedback from the Law Development Centre. It was a policy matter from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, through the Law Council and it was more largely because of the space. LDC was not having enough space. 

We have interfaced with them -(Applause)- the issue of quality - you cannot regulate quality at the pre-entry exam level. Quality of lawyers is regulated at the law school. Hon. Mugoya said he was an external examiner, I was an internal examiner for years; I taught law. Where do you determine that this is a good lawyer? By when you ask them simple questions of definition, what is volenti non fit injuria, which is purely Latin to say voluntary assumption of risks?

Madam Speaker, we on this matter of pre-entry exams, we exhausted with the Law Development Centre and they don’t have a problem with it. They say that now that they are able, their capacity is able, the exams, training - in fact this committee of Parliament we were going to benchmark in Ghana over the same where they are also doing pre-entry exams. However, before we could go with the LDC, Ghana outlawed pre-entry exams. According to them, that was an additional examination, not relevant and out of the curriculum. Nobody is taught how to do pre-entry exams but some lawyers and some practicing lawyers who call themselves lecturers, are making money from this. (Applause) It is ugly and should be stopped.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I still want to insist on two points. Unless we are going to have a national exam for all lawyers like it is done for the nurses - because there is no way, if I am a lecturer at Gulu University, I will mark my students to get first class degrees in order to secure admissions at the Law Development Centre as a way of advertising my university. 

Secondly and most importantly - I know very many -(Interruption)

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect hon. Odonga-Otto has indicated that some lecturers can just award marks for first class, which is very unethical of a teacher. I would not want him to assume –(Interjection)– according to the teaching profession this should not be a sweeping statement. If it has happened in any other university, it should not be presented as a blanket statement that lecturers just award marks for - 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want him to substantiate.

MS NAKAYENZE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate or withdraw.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a young brother who did law from Gulu University. He is now pursuing a Masters in Law because he failed to get to the law Development Centre due to the pre-entry exams. He got a very high first class degree; he was the second best at Gulu University but the pre-entry exams did not work out. 

I know that there are very many members here who have had problems with pre-entry exams at the Law Development Centre. I do not want to mention names. They should declare their interests. (Laughter)

MR MAKMOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What are you doing?

MR MAKMOT: I am a member of this Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I was not around as you see I am not a signatory when this particular resolution was made -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you were not around and you had a different view you should have filed a minority report.

MR MAKMOT: I was not around to sign the minority report. I would like to give information. I did not know about this position until now.

THE SPEAKER: No! You cannot speak against the report. If you did not want to sign, you should have had your own minority report.

6.01
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my view, we are contravening the Education Act. We have the National Council for Higher Education that is charged with the responsibility of ensuring quality control, to make sure that these programmes are certified and universities are licensed or chartered. 

By the time you allow a Ugandan to pay nearly Shs 4 million for four years in a university that the National Council has allowed to operate and at the end of the day you want to trap the innocent students at the Law Development Centre gate -(Interruption) -

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, even before these law schools are opened at various universities the Law Council must visit and certify that there are minimum requirements for this particular university to start a law school.

I am surprised that someone who did law can stand here to talk like that about these universities. The process to start a law school starts at the Law Council.

MR AMORU: Thank you so much, for that information. I think that the pre-entry exam is being misunderstood in Uganda. UNEB is now being rendered useless because after passing senior six and ensuring a student is qualified or not to advance in the next stage but you are denied.

Some of the content of the pre-entry exams is not known - they are asking funny stuff that is not related to issues that people are going to study. I would like to entirely agree with the committee that if we have issues of quality control, we should get a better solution to treat it from the origin other than penalising an innocent student who has studied and paid money for four years. 

In my view the Law Development Centre should open its gates and the students who have qualified - if the issue is on capacity to take in the number of students that is needed, the Ministry of Education and Parliament can handle that. Otherwise, giving pre-entry exams at this stage over and above the exams that the student has already done is discriminatory. Thank you.

6.05
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As some colleagues have mentioned there were sufficient checks and balances in the system even before pre-entry exams were introduced. To enable the legal system produce a quality lawyer, the student must pass senior six. You cannot join any university or law school if you have not passed A ‘level and the standard of passing to join any law school is not set by that university but by the Law Council. The Law Council is a statutory body composed of highly qualified and distinguished lawyers in this country; including Judges of the Supreme Court. So, that is check point number one.

Check point two is that law school itself. Once one has passed their degree and have the minimum qualification to join the Law Development Centre, their curriculum is structured in such a way that a student cannot pass by accident; there is no way because there is constant assessments at the Law Development Centre for those of us who have been there. As the student sits in class, the lecturer is examining them by way they present themselves; the way a student answers questions.

There are also oral exams in the third or fourth month where a student appears before a panel of distinguished lawyers both from within and outside LDC to answer different legal concepts. If the student doesn’t pass that they cannot proceed.

Further, there are written exams, which the student must sit and pass; there are sufficient checks and balances in the legal system -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, my learned colleague for giving way. I just have two questions to ask you to clarify to the House. 

First, which criteria would then be used to admit students at the Law development Centre (LDC) in the absence of a pre-entry examination? Do we take all the first class and leave the pass degrees? 

Secondly, are you aware that currently all advocates undergo training every year? We are already qualified advocates but if you do not have 20 Continuing Legal Education (CLE) points, they do not give you a practicing certificate in spite of already qualifying through LDC. Are you aware of that? I am a qualified advocate but if I do not have 20 CLE points, I am not given a license for that year.

MR MWESIGE: That we have the 20 CLE points is the more reason that you do not need pre-entry exams – (Applause) – yes, because once you go to the law school and even after you leave, you are actually constantly trained to make sure you are a sharp lawyer.

Therefore, we seem to be punishing our children so much subjecting our children to unnecessary rigors for them to go to law school. Once you have passed A’ Level, you have that rigorous course at LDC, which you cannot pass without doing all these courses and once you have passed, you still go through continuous training. Therefore, in my view, these pre-entry examinations do not make sense at all.

6.10
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All of us here will have to agree that the Uganda Human Rights Commission has lost its relevance given the levels of human rights abuses and violation taking place, literary on a daily basis in Uganda. I do not know whether this Parliament is not mandated to ask the Uganda Human Rights Commission to update the country in terms of our human rights position in as far as the past, the present and the future are concerned. 

I do not think it is urgent for us to think in terms of having a home, given our limited and constrained resource envelope, for the Uganda Human Rights Commission. It cannot be a priority right now because we have other pressing needs especially confronting the ministers of health, education and agriculture. Therefore, I think that the headquarters for this institution can wait on. 

About the Uganda Law Reform Commission, we have just undergone some constitutional incubation in process; the age -limit. The country was almost going up into flames; we did not get even a single voice to get the constitutional legal direction and guidance from the Uganda Law Reform Commission. I think, it is high time that we called upon these Government institutions to stand up to the occasion and provide leadership especially when we get contentious constitutional questions or situations. 

I do not know how the new Parliament will look like. I was interested in hearing from the chairperson, in his report, the status and the future of the shadow Government. Today we are in the shadow, certainly 2023 or 2021 we shall be right there. However, this works for everyone because you are in the shadow Government today but you can be in the real Government tomorrow.

Madam Speaker, we subscribe to the Commonwealth principles and practices; a shadow minister in the Commonwealth will have an office, a research team and many times they will have to hire the services of a PhD student and the same happens in America. Someone serving in the opposition of minority Government will have those services. It is not too late for this particular Parliament to have that focus; our new Parliament should provide offices for a shadow minister. 

I am a shadow Minister Regional and Foreign Affairs but I go through hell. I do a lot of research and that eats into my time that I would have otherwise deployed into the normal parliamentary proceedings. 

On the Directorate of Public Prosecutions; we know that the peace and aspects of law are very clear. The Office of the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) is supposed to facilitate the prevalence of criminal proceedings, basically; identification, investigation, prosecution and adjudication and to see how these reconcile into one another.  I do not think that is the case today.

Finally, on the Electoral Commission - this is 2018 and next year will be 2019, just about a year to election. They are sleeping at Jinja Road and in about a year they will now begin saying we can use a diary from National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA); they have to begin early. Ugandans in the next election want a credible election such that by the time the announcement is made, no doubt will be storming or signalled both here at home and elsewhere. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to reassure that there is Parliamentary Commission and is foresighted. Our plans will enable everybody to get where to sit. It is not that we are not a life-link; we are much focused.

6.16
MR MOSES KIZIGE (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the position of the committee on the issue of pre-entry examinations. I would like to give my experience from my own position as an accountant. 

In 1996, I was admitted to the University of Notre Dame in the United States of America and for all graduate programmes in the States, you either do the Graduate Management Admissions Test (GMAT) or the Graduate Record Examinations (GRE). For us from Africa we were even required to do an examination in proficiency of English Language. 

When I got to Notre Dame, I pretended not to have heard about any of these requirements but I was given an opportunity to enrol into the MPA programme, subject to passing GMAT in January. What happened is that within the full semester, I was on top of the class in all the four modules that I studied. That coerced the University of Notre Dame and in January 1997 they took a decision to admit students from Commonwealth countries without doing GMAT or GRE on the strength of performance. 

I even excelled at the end of the programme and was retained as an Adjunct Professor at Notre Dame for another three years after completion of my programme. Therefore, I just proved that you do not need to have a pre-entry examination into a graduate programme. (Applause) 

Secondly, just like hon. Odonga Otto has said, as members of professional bodies, we are required to do continuous professional development and professional training for a number of hours each year to remain a member of that profession. Therefore, the committee is right on this matter, we do not need pre-entry examination at LDC.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Otafiire the Minister of Justice.

6.18
THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This question of pre-entry at LDC is a bit tricky. When I took over the department of justice about seven years ago, there was an alarming rate of failures at the LDC and my question to the then management of LDC was, what is the problem? How can you have a class of 1,000 students and 800 fail? Is it the students or the teachers or both?

We had a discussion and we concluded that the classes were a bit too big for the teachers. A class of 1,000 or 800 is not a class but a rally. It is no longer a class but a rally.

Therefore, a decision was made that there should be limiting of the entry by some mode of selection- pre-entry. However, in my mind, that pre-entry exam was unfair. It was a stop gap position for us to be able to look for other ways of ensuring that every parent who has paid for their daughter or son to do law, that child gets opportunity to prove their excellence or incapacity because people who have failed pre-entry here have qualified at other institutions in Rwanda and Nairobi. They have done very well.

Therefore, that is why we came up with the idea of decongesting the LDC like we intend to decongest, money willing, the Court of Appeal. That is how the programme of having five teaching centres- Kampala, Central Region, Southern Region, Northern Region, and Eastern Region came about.

I have heard honourable members complaining that Mbarara took the first opportunity. In fact, as Otafiire, my primary concern was for people from Northern Region. Students from Arua, Moyo coming to Kampala- why can’t we help them and they stay there in Gulu, Lira or Arua?

What I am told is that Mbarara was more ready than the others but I can promise you and I want to promise this House that the programme of decongesting the LDC is continuous. 

In addition, we are going to ensure that every region gets a teaching centre and that the students of Uganda go to a region of their choice. If I choose to go to Gulu, that is up to me. However, we should make sure that every child who has studied law and got a degree accredited by the National Council for Higher Education gets opportunity to get legal training.

Now, like hon. Mwesige said, the process of training within the LDC is the filter. You are filtered from day one to the time you graduate. If pre-entry was a panacea, how come people who pass pre-entry fail? Why do they get retakes? The process of assessment during the course will ensure the quality of the product we get at the end.

Therefore, honourable members - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister. I am glad you are the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Section 3 of the LDC Act spells out the function of the centre; which is to organise, set standard for the exams to ensure the country produces advocates. 

As a Minister of Justice, the information I am seeking from you, don’t you think this resolution is inadvertently amending Section 3 of the LDC Act?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: This is a policy matter and you see hon. Odonga-Otto you have been here for a long time. The laws we make in Parliament are not cast in stone. If necessary, we shall amend in case there is a clash.

THE SPEAKER: But is pre-entry embedded in the law?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: No. it is not. Madam Speaker, having said that, we are now going to ensure that we decongest the LDC, create more space in the five teaching centres. The LDC will be responsible for setting standards, setting exams, employing teachers, marking the exams, and ensuring that all the teaching centres are at par in as far as education is concerned.

Madam Speaker, there are Ugandan students who go abroad and do law course modules our universities do not teach like cybercrime- it is recent, oil and gas, terrorism and yet we require that expertise.

You know, these big countries have become great by deploying manpower they do not train. We train people here, after they have graduated and excelled, people give them green cards, poach them and take them free of cost.

What is wrong with us Africans also deploying people we have not paid for, why should we lock them out? Therefore, Madam Speaker, let us allow every trained lawyer with a degree to come here and participate. Let them go to LDC and they will be weeded out by the kakunguta (sieve). They will be weeded out by their capacity to pass or fail exams. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I expect you also to respond to the issues raised so that we can conclude the report- beyond the LDC issue.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The LC1 elections, right now, the Ministry of Local Government and the Electoral Commission are harmonising their capacity to hold elections and when they are ready, they will let us know. Thank you, Madam Speaker- (Interruption)   

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, when you hear the minister responding to that issue, the way he is responding to it is so casual and yet this is a very big problem. Madam Speaker, wherever we go those people think we are selfish. After our elections, they were promised that elections would be held now he is here talking about harmonisation.

The other day he was taking about- there is no money. What are we really talking about? Honourable minister, the matter of LC elections is bigger than you take it. Those people, have spent- I do not know how much money they have spent mobilising. You know how elections are held.

Therefore, when you come here and you casually say, “Local Government is harmonising” it is Electoral Commission that is supposed to organise not Local Government.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I thank the Member for his concern but it was a matter of court just one day to elections, court said no. As a law abiding citizen and Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I am duty-bound to obey court orders. In the process of organising those elections, money was spent which money must be replaced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, that money has been replaced. The Ministry of Local Government which is responsible for local councils is harmonising with the Electoral Commission and they will soon come out with the programme of electing these institutions.

Concerning judicial services in northern Uganda, I agree with the concerns of the honourable members. Due to the financial constraints, we are unable to extend judicial services to the areas we would like to extend. Recently, you will recall that this Parliament resolved to increase the number of judges to 82. As of now, we have only been able to appoint 10 judges. We hope that in the near future, we shall add another 10 judges until we reach our desired number of 82. Madam Speaker, even then 82 judges and 400 magistrates are not enough for the population of 40 million Ugandans. 

There is need for the increase of judicial offices to an adequate level where they can serve our people adequately. I am concerned about northern region and promise that, we are going to make an effort to ensure that we help more people with judicial services in northern Uganda.

Civic Education

As far as Human Rights is concerned, that is obvious. It speaks volumes for itself and if we had capacity, we would go out and offer information and awareness about Human Rights. I thank you, Madam Speaker.    

THE SPEAKER: Does the Chairperson wish to make some concluding remarks?   

6.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all the Members for their participation. I believe that all issues have been handled except only for hon. Waira Kyewalabye about the graduate volunteer and you guided on that matter. It is not that there is any law.

I said here, that the Electoral Commission was grateful for this House intervention. Madam Speaker, you got correspondences. When a court order was issued on the eve of the elections, at that point, they had already used the Shs 8 billion. For them, they started from the updates of voters and that day, they were ready to conduct elections. They have made several correspondences on the money already spent. We would therefore like to thank, Madam Speaker, in her capacity as the Speaker of Parliament. You caused the Minister in charge of finance, to commit to reimburse or to find money. When that proposal for supplementary came here, hon. David Bahati just a few days ago, withdrew the one aspect of the Shs 8 billion and made commitment that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was going to avail that money.

Honourable colleagues, that is why I said, we need this money but there was some indication of the commitment from the minister in charge of finance that they were going to make good. That is why it is not in our budget estimates. If anything happens, we shall inform you to make a decision to compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide that money.

About the Government – (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the Chairperson of the committee winds up, I would like to request him to make some comment about the development expenditure of the Electoral Commission of Shs 700 million in a financial year; where you know that they are almost relocating because they have been given notice to relocate from the place. I think the development expenditure of Shs 700 million is a drop in the ocean. I do not know whether you considered that because the figures are going to be passed. I think Shs 700 million for such an organisation is a drop in the ocean. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, for the observation. We indicated that, that was what was approved. We also read the recommendations and they need to reallocate the headquarters. They need money to do that but that was what was approved. I believe that time is not lost; we can get interventions from this House and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank everyone. On the regional centres, this committee raised the same concern to the Law Development Centre (LDC). They gave us Mbarara and we wondered why? As Chairman of the committee, I was aware they went to Tororo, Mbale, Soroti, and Lira up to Arua. However, they were considering the oversight and whether the politicians are willing to give them land and accommodation? In the short term, they needed hostels which could accommodate at least a minimum of 300 students.

The hostels and accommodation for teachers where they would not need – That is why they are only asking for Shs 1 billion. They knew if they put a big thing, they would not be able to take off. However, the satisfaction we have is that they are going to roll out every financial year to go to different regions. 

To answer which criteria they are going to use for admitting students, is like taking me back in 2001 when I joined LDC, to ask myself or in 1975 or 1976 when hon. Veronica Bichetero joined which criteria they used.

The number will always be there. I think not everyone will be able to afford. The criteria are not for the committee to handle that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

I now, put the question that the report of the committee be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

6.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try and highlight a few issues of interest. I present to you the report on the Committee on Natural Resources. The report is in two parts.

The first part is for the sectors under mineral and energy, which is Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Vote 123 – Rural Electrification Agency (REA), Vote 311 – Uganda National Oil Company.

Part two is water and environment and there we have Vote 019 – Ministry of Water and Environment, Vote 150 – National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), Vote 157 – National Forestry Authority, Vote 302 – Uganda National Meteorological Authority and Vote 501 – Local Government.

Madam Speaker, the priorities of energy and mineral development in this Government policy objective is to ensure that there is adequate and reliable supply of energy to support social and economic growth. This includes increasing affordable power, expansion of transmission and distribution infrastructure, increasing access to affordable modern energy services through rural electrification and renewable energy.

On petroleum; the main objective there has been promoting, monitoring petroleum exploration and development in order to achieve local production. The others are; developing petroleum refining pipeline transportation, bulk storage infrastructure, streamlining petroleum supply and distribution.

The total budget in relation to budget performance as appropriated for this sector was Shs 1.878 billion but of this, Shs 1.56 billion was external financing. However, with a supplementary budget of Shs 106.875 million which was for supporting the thermal plant, the budget came to Shs 1.985 billion. This is laid out in the table on page four. I think what is important to mention is that there was a low release and the performance was at 36 per cent. The low release was partly because of money withheld for Karuma and Isimba dam because of certain unfulfilled commitments. These have since been rectified and we understand everything has returned back to normal.

With preliminary output performance for the year; this is laid out on pages 5, 6,7,8,10,11 and 13. Some of the key things to highlight here are these:

    1. Karuma hydro power project, which is 600 megawatts, is due for completion – at least two out of the six units - by December 2018. At the moment, it is 74 per cent completed. The other four will be completed in January.

We have a detailed report on this which we submitted previously and it has been on the order paper under “Business to follow” for some time. 

With Isimba, which is 183 megawatts, this is expected to be completed by August 2018. It is now 79 per cent completed. 

Then we have a cluster of generation plants under what is called “get fit portfolio”. Out of 156 megawatts, 58.1 megawatts have already been completed so there is just a few to go.

There is very good progress on transmission lines and on most of them, completion is above 75 per cent with the exception of two. 

In the sector of petroleum; according to the ministerial policy statement, we have progressed from exploration to the production phase, now with attention on the required infrastructure such as processing facilities, pipelines and refinery.

On the refinery itself; according to the ministerial policy statement, Cabinet has agreed on a private investor and negotiations are now in advanced stages and there is a framework agreement.

On the refinery; land has been acquired and 98 per cent of the people affected by the project have been paid.

For the next financial year in this sector, that is laid out in the following pages after page 13. The key priorities here will be as follows:

    a) Increasing affordable Power Generation Capacity - Shs 756 billion.
    b) Expanding the Power Transmission infrastructure - Shs 882 billion.
    c) Increasing access to affordable modern Energy services through renewable energy development – Shs 2.8 billion.
    d) Petroleum Exploration, Development, Production, Value Addition and distribution of Petroleum Products – Shs 78.6 billion.
    e) Mineral Exploration, Development and Value Addition – Shs 24.9 billion.

The budget estimates for the next financial year are laid out on table 2 which is on page 14. 

On Rural Electrification Agency (REA); which is another key aspect to mention. As you know this has the responsibility of implementing our rural electrification strategy. Preliminary budget performance on this is laid out in table 4 on page 24. REA had an approved budget of Shs 492.4 billion for this current financial year. Out of this it is only Shs 81.9 billion that was from the Consolidated Fund and Shs 367 billion was from external finance.

There was also a problem of release of the money partly because of bureaucratic procurement. There is also money that should have come from appropriation in 8 which is from UETCL, which is five per cent levy. Unfortunately, that is not being remitted to REA. 

There is also a problem of counterpart funding. Out of the Shs 30 billion which they are supposed to be getting, only Shs 20 billion has been made available for unexpected claims.

In this report, we are recommending an additional Shs 10 billion to be made available. The preliminary budget performance of REA is also laid out on page 24. 

With Uganda National Oil Company; according to the articles of association, energy and mineral development is supposed to be having shares of 51 per cent whilst the ministry of finance is supposed to be having shares of 49 per cent. However, none of those supposed shareholders has paid. Therefore, we are strongly recommending that the shareholders pay up for their shares.

There is also an issue with the storage facility which is being run by Uganda National Oil Company. While other countries like Kenya which are not land-locked like Uganda, have fuel storage for 90 days, in Uganda our fuel storage according to the meetings we had with the ministry is for two days only. According to the report that we have, it is three million litres. We are strongly recommending here that this is increased to at least 10 million litres.

Madam Speaker, we have a total of 29 recommendations under this sector but most importantly, the committee noted that there is significant progress in power generation. At the moment, generation far supersedes supply. As an example (according to Electricity Regulatory Authority and Uganda Bureau of Statistics), in October 2017 was 895.5MW on average generation. However, at most peak times – on average – we were consuming 597MW. By mid-next year, we are expecting generation to double.

Some of the teething challenges here are:

High Power Tariffs

Unfortunately, negotiation for refinancing of the loan for Bujagali power project has not been completed. Although Parliament made some tax exemptions there I think the effect has not yet been felt that much. We are, therefore, strongly recommending that these negotiations and bringing down the power tariffs be expedited. Actually – looking at the energy mix – for Bujagali it is 10.53c whereas for other generators such as Kiira and Nalubale it is 1.6c but somehow we are restricted to purchasing more from Bujagali.

On the issue of completing the industrial parks, unfortunately, not much progress has been made on that and at the moment it is at just 20 per cent. Therefore, we are also recommending that, that is expedited.

The other issue is low access to electricity, mainly in rural areas and some urban areas. Access to electricity still falls far below what had been targeted in the national development plan. One of the problems is that REA, which is implementing our rural electrification strategy, has not been adequately financed. There is also a problem that the money, which is supposed to be coming from Umeme to Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) and finally to REA is not being remitted. It has accumulated – including arrears – to Shs 61 billion.

Madam Speaker, part of the problem here is that although money is appropriated to ministries, departments and agencies for their utility, they are not paying. Since they are not paying, under the power purchase agreement, Umeme is insisting that they cannot remit that money because the agencies have not paid. That is why UETCL is not remitting the money to REA. However, this is significantly impacting on the rural electrification programme and access to power around the country. Therefore, agencies need to pay up and UETCL needs to remit the money to REA.

The committee is also recommending that counterpart funding for REA projects be provided. At the moment the shortfall for rural electrification is Shs 10 billion.

Madam Speaker, there are also a number of laws and policies such as Electricity (Amendment) Bill, Energy Efficiency and Conservation Bill as well as the Mining (Amendment) Bill, which need to be expedited and brought to Parliament.

There is also an unfunded priority of Shs 2.5 billion for mineral certification.

Water and Environment Sector 

This sector covers:
    1. Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment
    2. Vote 150: National Environment Management Authority
    3. Vote 157: National Forestry Authority
    4. Vote 302: Uganda National Meteorological Authority
    5. Vote 501-850: Local Governments

As outlined in the National Development Plan (NDP II) objectives, the NRM Manifesto (2016-2O21) commitments, H.E the President Strategies and Guidelines for Middle-Income Status by 2020 as well as the Sustainable Development Goals, under this sector, the objectives are:

    a) Increasing access to safe water in rural and urban areas from the current 70 per cent in the rural areas and 71 per cent in the urban areas to 71 per cent in the rural areas and 79 per cent in the urban areas by ensuring that each village has a safe source of water. 

    i) Increasing sanitation and hygiene levels in rural and sewerage in urban areas to 95 per cent.
    ii) Increasing functionality of water supply systems and promoting catchment-based integrated water resources management. 

b) 	Increasing the provision of water for production and functionality of water for production facilities from the current available 27.8mcm to 38mcm by Financial Year 2019/2010.
c) 	To protect, restore and maintain the integrity of degraded fragile ecosystem by increasing the national forest cover from 10 per cent to 15 per cent through massive tree planting. The target is 100-200 million trees every year.

The preliminary budget performance of this sector is on page 29 of the report. Overall, the water and environment sector performed at 67.7 per cent in regard to releases from the Central Government. A total of Shs 352.82 billion was approved to Ministry of Water and Environment. Out of this, Shs 41.1 billion was released for National Water and Sewerage Corporation – there is a bit of a challenge here which I will return to shortly. Performance on key outputs is on pages 30, 31, 32 and 33.

Madam Speaker, across the whole sector, they performed well on gender and equity assessment.

Key observations and recommendations of the committee
These are what we feel are key areas which need your attention. This sector forms the backbone of our economy – agriculture, livestock, fisheries, aquaculture, forestry, tourism, energy as well as water and sanitation all depend on this sector.

As Uganda's economy is largely dependent on its environment and natural resources, this sector, therefore, is a critical component of the country's drive to achieve its strategic goals, including the middle-income status by 2020. Logically, therefore, you would expect a significant improvement:

    a) In increasing water efficiency.
    b) Increasing water storage.
    c) Increasing availability of water.
    d) Mitigating impact of climate change by increasing our preparedness, reducing losses and increasing our capability to respond to extreme weather events like droughts and floods.

Unfortunately, according to the National Planning Authority, in its assessment of the performance of this sector, it reported that the sector is performing in the reverse. They talked about reversal performance. This is the report of the National Planning Authority in assessing the compliance of the budget sector.

They reported that the main problem why they are performing in the reverse is because of poor budget allocation. It has not been seen as a priority. For example, last year, we suffered a severe drought which left animals and human beings dead. We responded then with an increase in the budget of Shs 80 billion as development. Unfortunately, this year, it has instead declined to Shs 75 billion. This way of business is abnormal.

We have listed some of the areas as underfunded priorities on page 32 of the report. There are issues concerning urban water supply, which still requires Shs 40 billion, water resource management, requires Shs 20 billion; and this should be growing to Shs 50 billion annually. Environment and natural resource management, which requires Shs 15 billion- this, includes what you were talking about the other day, tree planting. Not much money has been made available for that. There is the critical wet restoration and rural water supply that requires Shs 52 billion.

You can see that we still have an uphill task here. I think it is very important the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or whoever is responsible for this budget allocation especially, the development committee in the ministry should wake up to the reality. Unless that is realised and prioritised, we are up for a big calamity looming around the corner.

Our recommendation is that the Ministry of Water and Environment together with National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) should undertake an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to assess the effect caused by these refugee settlements, and find immediate solutions and produce the required addition Shs 1 billion.

We also recommend that an additional Shs 5 billion should be allocated to ensure provision of water sources that are adequate for the refugees and the hosting population.

With this, I would like to go down to the figures. 

Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

Recurrent - Shs 91,158,189,000
Development - Shs 1,684,447,448,000
Total - Shs 1,775,605,638,000

Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency
Recurrent - Shs 44,099,313,000
Development - Shs 638,064,332,000
Total - Shs 683,163,645,000

Vote 311: Uganda National Oil Company
Recurrent - Shs 15,200,000,000
Development -	
Total - Shs 15,200,000,000

Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment
Recurrent - Shs 16,184,051,000
Development - Shs 580,014,691,000
Total - Shs 596,198,744,000

Vote 150: National Environmental Management Authority
Recurrent - Shs 22,255,402,000
Development - Shs 2,080,353,000
Total - Shs 24,335,755,000

Vote 157: National Forestry Authority
Recurrent - Shs 19,626,128,000
Development - Shs 16,331,910,000
Total - Shs 35,958,038,000

Vote 302: Uganda National Meteorological Authority 
Recurrent - Shs 12,837,950,000
Development - Shs 15,178,827,000
Total - Shs 28,016,771,000

Vote 501-850: Local Governments 
Recurrent - Shs 7,790,000,000
Development - Shs 51,920,000,000
Total - Shs 59,710,000,000

Madam Speaker, there are additions which have been highlighted as unfunded priority. With that, I beg to report. It is with much pleasure that I lay on the Table the minutes of the meeting where these were considered, together with the report. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson and the committee. Just two areas; honourable Chairperson, the other day the ministry of finance was here talking enthusiastically about tree planting but I do not see the Tree Fund here. I think that it is our responsibility to appropriate money. We must find money for the Tree Fund and make a start. It is sixteen years since we made that law. I do not know where the finance minister is but it is important that we start with this Budget. Therefore, we will have to find money from somewhere. 

The second one has to do with Isimba where you say it is at 79 per cent completion. However, the access roads and the access bridge have not been done. A number of the Projected Affected People have not been paid. There is something missing there and we want a commitment. I hope that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will give us a commitment about the access bridge and road at Isimba. It is part of the contract and nothing has been done, yet you say they are leaving in August. We want our bridge and roads.

Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum. As we indicated, we have just a few Members; hon. Mugeni Milly, hon. Katushabe, hon. Bukenya, hon. Margret Lamwaka and then hon. Amoding. I will get two people from this side.

7.12
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for a well elaborated report. My concern is on the rural electrification project. There are some projects that are supposed to be funded by World Bank but they have stalled for so many years.

My district Butaleja is supposed to be funded by World Bank on rural electrification and urban water. However, whenever I go there, they say there is no funding. The programme has stalled and yet the others that are being funded by the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) have kicked off. What is wrong with World Bank? What is the problem between World Bank and Government? What have they not met that is stalling these projects? Thank you.

7.13
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My first concern is on rural water supply. Two of my sub-counties where you visited, that is Bigasa and Kitanda, are water stressed. However, when I see the recommendation of the districts which are water stressed, I do not see Bukomansimbi included.

These two sub-counties have been facing the same problem. We face the same problems with those ones of Ssembabule and others but when they are considering them, they do not consider Bigasa and Kitanda. All the parishes of Bukango, Rwooko and the rest have been facing the same problem. The President has been there and since 2006, it has been his pledge. Whenever he comes for campaigns, he pledges to give us water.

Another issue is on Rural Electrification Agency. I remember when I had just joined this Parliament, they told us that the Ninth Parliament passed a loan to supply electricity to different districts, including mine. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. The loan was supposed to come from Abu Dhabi. Did they go to sign for the loan? What is the status of that loan? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Water and Environment, I have been to two sub-counties in Bukomansimbi with absolutely no water. I reported on Tuesday that I have gone to many parts of the country but the issue of water for the rural areas is very grave. 

7.15
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first thank the committee chairperson for the comprehensive report. I am going to talk briefly on two issues.

One is the forest cover which you have talked about. I would like to give Members statistics so that they appreciate the problem. Twenty years ago, the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations (UN) estimated the forest cover in Uganda to be 3.6 million hectares. Ten years ago, it went to 2.98 million hectares. It is now estimated to be around 1.5 million hectares. We are losing 100,000 hectares per year.

It is surprising that in one of the meetings I attended, the Executive was represented by the Minister of Local Government who is here. That was on 17th October last year. She said the problem with our forest cover is poor governance and insufficient efforts to save the forests. This was from a Cabinet member yet the ministry is not making any efforts to work on this.

Recently, even the central forest reserves were leased out to private developers who - the practice is - are not going to be supervised. They plant eucalyptus. After six years, they change to farming and other things. I would like the minister to explain to us what plans they have, especially after being indicted by their colleague that it is poor governance and insufficient efforts.

Secondly, I would like to talk about artisanal miners. I would like to commend the Chairperson and the ministry for their efforts. The good news is that Government has given the artisanal miners 30 per cent of the land that is available to us in Bukuya, which is a good development. 

However, as they plan to register artisanal miners, these people do not have a policy on artisanal mining. For the last three years since I came to this Parliament, they have been promising us a policy and an amendment on the Mining Act which does not cater for the majority of Ugandans who are doing artisan mining not only in Bukuya but Buhweju, Namayingo and Karamoja. They have not come up with anything.

So, I would like to know from the minister what they are planning to do in this area because the majority of Ugandans are the local investors who are doing artisan mining with the big investors not showing many results. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Lamwaka comes, on the issue of mining, there is a lot of secrecy surrounding minerals. The local governments, at least in my part of the country, have complained they just see big trucks moving. The foreigners even do not contact the local governments; some of them even go with arms. Mining is surrounded with secrecy.

7.19
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question goes to the minister. In 2014, electrical poles were planted from Kitgum, Corner Padibe, towards Lamwo and I think there is electricity in Lamwo. It passes through one of the Sub-counties, Layamo, Pagen; but all the other sub-counties do not have power and yet the poles pass through them. They were not also compensated.

By the time of my campaign, people were asking me about that. Even when I went for my constituency review, they kept on asking me about that. The same thing happened from Kitgum to Namokora. The electricity poles which were planted there are even getting burnt by wild fire in December and January. They are rotting and getting burnt and yet this is taxpayers’ money or even a loan.

Today, I came across a paper that you are going to connect us again from Kitgum to Agago. However, in all these places the electricity poles passed, you leave institutions like primary schools, health centres and sub-county headquarters as if this Government is different. The school has to plan their own. 

I would like to applaud the Ministry of Works and Transport for the work they did when they went to tarmac the Kitgum - Musingo road, they opened all the roads towards the schools. 

What are you going to do? Are you going to have those poles as designs on the roads? When the President comes to our district, he keeps appreciating and saying electricity has reached us when it is not there. Thank you very much.

7.22
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are three under this sector.

First of all, the committee raises the issue of compensation of the affected families under the refinery programme. Just a few weeks ago, we had a number of families coming from that district. Those that opted to be compensated through land compensation are not comfortable with what they are being given because they were taken away from their families and made to settle in small settlements as though they are in Internally Displaced Camps.

The arrangement they are having is not what they expected the Government to give them. Madam Speaker, I remember in the last Parliament, you guided on the same matter and under UWOPA, some members went to examine the situation. A number of families are still affected and the compensation has not been done to the expectations of the families. So, the question before the minister is how to address those issues. These are Ugandans who were moved away from their land and meant to take what they did not want in the name of a refinery which is going to benefit all Ugandans. I think that issue needs to be addressed. The Auditor General also raised a concern around that.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am a mother that usually looks at my bills when they come and the issue of VAT payment in the service provision in water in the families of Uganda- Kumi has been a water stressed district and we have recently got a World Bank funded project to get water taken to the farthest parts of the district. Many other families are being encouraged up to the farthest parish to apply to join and be connected to the water supply. 

However, Madam Speaker, how are those families going to be able to pay these aggressive taxes on utilities like water? Our country has not been able to meet its water targets; we are still below the target which is required in terms of water coverage in the country.

So, it is a challenge that URA insists on taxing water utilities in Uganda. I remember when URA came to talk to Members of Parliament, we raised that concern of why water is still being taxed in this country.

I will go to the issue of tree planting in my district, Madam Speaker. Teso is one of the driest parts of this country. If you pass through the upper part of our country, you will find there are no trees anywhere. The issue of tree planting must be taken seriously by this Parliament. The districts that need priority interventions are those that have bare land cover, Kumi being one of them. I would like to request that through this committee, the trees have to be multiplied; give the people of Teso, for example, citrus trees seedlings because those would be attractive.

When you take the trees, some people do not have where to plant them. They have two gardens; they say, “Now if I plant the trees in my two gardens, where am I going to cultivate food for my family?” So, if we gave them those mangoes, citrus seedlings which can enhance income generation for the family, it would be very good. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.26
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for that very good report. However, I have reservations:

First, the issue of rural electrification is very important but I wanted to get information. What is the plan for the hard to reach areas like the islands? How is the Government planning for the hard to reach areas in order for them to also have rural electrification?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am happy that some funds have been added for environmental impact assessments but my concern is people who are mining especially in my area. As you have observed, we do not know where they come from. They only come and see; they leave very big holes and children go there unknowingly and die in these places.

So, how are we going to protect –(Interjections)- it is because they leave them very open - in future, what will happen to these places?

Lastly, the environment will degenerate when we do not plan properly for trees- Everywhere, trees are being cut in this country. If we do not do something, then automatically, Uganda is going to have a very big problem. So, money must be given so that the trees are planted especially in the government institutions. Thank you very much.

7.28
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to speak about two issues; one is rural electrification. I would like to get a response from the minister on the issue of connections.

During the last Parliament, around 2013, I went to the ministry and I got surveyors who surveyed my area for rural electrification to health centres and secondary schools. From that time to date, I have been following up and they have been telling me they are going to start the work.

I would like to get an answer from the honourable minister when we shall be connected in Kween. We talk about these percentages but in some of our districts, we do not have anything. We recently saw the main line but it is not connected to health centres or schools. 

Like the committee is saying, we are producing a lot of electricity but we are not connecting our people. I would like to call upon them - if it is money, as the committee has suggested, as Parliament we need to ensure that we budget and give them additional money.

On the issue of water, with our terrain in Sebei sub-region, people may think that we have water but we are also water stressed. When you look at the statistics here, we talk about increasing rural water from 70 to 71 but when I focus on my constituency in particular and my sub-county where I come from, we are completely water stressed. We have only one water source for the entire sub-county; in Kaptum sub-county where I actually come from.

Therefore, I call upon the ministry that even as they –(Member timed out.)

7.30
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and I would like to address myself on the following: one is about rural electrification. Like other hard-to-reach areas in the country, I represent a sub-county called Mahango sub-county, which is entirely in the mountains. 

We have had surveyors from REA and they said connecting this sub-county via the cable connection on poles is impossible. There is an option that was given that the World Bank will fund a satellite to provide power that will be generated within the sub-county to supply that community only. However, I have been following up and I am keen to know whether this financial year, this sub-county will be able to benefit from the allocation.

We have six sub-counties that are water stressed. I know that World Bank has accepted to fund a project to provide water in the sub-counties of Kyarumba, Kyondo, Nsinga, Mukunyu and Lake Katwe so that these people can have water. However, there has been a recent communication, which needed to be confirmed, that the local government is following up with the ministry, which ministry is planning to reallocate this project to another area. 

I would like to submit to you, honourable minister, that the people of these sub-counties are already waiting for the water because when the World Bank visited the area, as local leaders, we communicated to the people that Government is responding to their issue of water. We hope that this financial year, the people in these sub-counties will receive water.

Lastly –(Member timed out.)

7.33
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for protecting me. I rise to thank the chairperson and the minister for a job well done. I will proceed to raise a few issues that I regard as footnotes to what you presented here. 

In regard to energy consumption in northern Uganda and in particular Gulu Municipality, it is very shaming that as we proceed to make sure that Gulu becomes a city in future, we have very serious challenges in terms of energy supply - and I can see the minister smiling. Honourable minister, Gulu Municipality has one of the worst power supplies. We have only 20 per cent power supply in a week in terms of all the referral hospitals that are there. Indeed we have had a lot of challenges.

In addition, two health centres do not have power connection: Aywee Health Centre in Pece division and Layibi Health Centre in Layibi. This is very urgent as far as we are concerned. Actually the Umeme manager in Gulu has become a PRO; he only tells you that the poles have been thrown down by rain. During the dry season he says, fire has burnt down the poles.

Secondly, the issue of planting trees has been stated clearly. Madam Speaker, if we went with you and stood at Karuma bridge and saw the number of trucks that come from northern Uganda and yet we have police check points all over the place - Two weeks ago, we counted 120 trucks crossing Karuma bridge to Kampala. What we have learnt is that Uganda is now exporting charcoal and Ntinda and Busia are the export centres. We are competing with Al Shabaab of Somalia in terms of export of charcoal in East Africa –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we talk, there are three big long trucks in the compound of Gulu district council with very big logs. Those logs must have been cut from trees of over 100 years. Besides, they are species, which are very rare and there was a circular to districts that those kinds of trees should not be cut. 

We call it beeyo, I do not know what it is called in English but according to the Chairman, Gulu District Local Council, they received a circular saying that those trees, including Shea butter trees, are not supposed to be cut because they are very rare species and they are going to be extinct. 

They are in the compound of Gulu District Local Council and they have been impounded. I believe that National Forestry Authority should also support Police who patrol. They should not only do it once and then disappear; they should be there. Those people who are connected with it should be brought to book. I believe that the suspects are very big people because those logs are for export. Thank you.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, let me summarise. That is the situation in northern Uganda and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should intervene –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to add to what hon. Betty Aol has said, I went to Lamwo with hon. Lanyero but I was traumatised by the number of sacks I saw on the road. Worse still, while we were in Padibe, the Speaker of the Council informed us that rare trees are being cut and it is untouchable big people who are involved. 

7.39
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring this matter of power to your attention. Our country is currently producing 900 megawatts and our consumption is only 650 megawatts. This means that we have a surplus of 250 megawatts.

Unfortunately, these 250 megawatts have not been distributed to rural areas, which need power. Of particular interest is that the committee has recommended the allocation of Shs 100 billion to thermal plants; Hydromax and Jacobsen.

Last year, when we were appropriating for FY 2017/2018, this matter came up because the committee had allocated money to the thermal plants but Parliament rejected it. The same committee has again brought the same matter saying that we should appropriate Shs 100 billion for thermal plants.

Madam Speaker, I recommend that we get that Shs 100 billion and reallocate it for power distribution to the rural areas instead of giving it to thermal plants whose owners are unknown. People should be sincere to our country –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when we were interfacing with the Rural Electrification Agency officials and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we received a report that by the end of next year, our power generation would have gone to 1,800 megawatts. However, consumption is at 550 megawatts and we are already generating about 900 megawatts.

However, with the coming on board of the projects that are running: Isimba, Karuma and another two, we shall be at above 1,800 megawatts. However, consumption is still low to the extent that even in areas where lines are moving, people are not consuming. 

My honourable colleague was talking about money provided for thermal generators but the supplementary we passed last week had Shs 106 billion for thermal power generation, which was a contentious issue here. We are still thinking of how to generate but we are not evacuating what we are generating.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. I know you are my OB -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You were raising an important point on thermal - Use a half a minute.

 MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, this Parliament is not aware of who the owners of these thermal plants are. Why is it that Government is continuing to invest money and yet we have excess power that can go to the rural areas?

As we pass the budget for this sector, I would like to move that the Shs 100 billion be reallocated for power distribution to the rural areas. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya raised an important point that we are appropriating money for thermal plants but we also raised a supplementary budget for the same. Someone will have to explain to us. 

7.44
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the well elaborated report. I wish to address myself on two issues; the committee has pointed out that power generation supersedes supply but not demand. As a colleague has pointed out, we have generated what seems to be enough power but the demand in this country is still a lot more due to the challenge of evacuating this power. 

Over the previous years, whatever money has been appropriated to Rural Electrification Agency to put up transmission lines has not been released appropriately. This is very dangerous for this country that has procured very many loans to generate power. When we double this capacity without putting in place appropriate transmission lines, we are going to be in more trouble.

Madam Speaker, the report has pointed out that the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited owes Rural Electrification Agency Shs 60.1 billion. This money has been outstanding for some time and it is almost turning into a bad debt. We need to compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to remit directly because Rural Electrification Agency needs this money to put in place all the transmission lines that everybody is clamouring for here.

In addition, counterpart funding has been a bottleneck in Rural Electrification Agency’s work over the past one year. I would like to support the recommendation to use Shs 10 billion counterpart funding to extend power lines. 

Madam Speaker, we have always had lamentations about the environment but there is an environmental levy, which has not been utilised to reinstate the environment that we have encroached on seriously. I think Parliament needs to pronounce itself on the manner in which part of this levy should be utilised, probably to promote environmental protection. This is because whatever is collected goes to the Consolidated Fund and does not help the environment that is destroyed. Thank you. 

7.48
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. Last year, to be precise in August when Kenya was going for elections, there were concerns about our oil reserves in Uganda and our readiness to sustain fuel supply in case Kenya went into turmoil at that time. I remember the Minister of Energy came and assured the House that the country had enough reserves to run for at least two weeks and that they were working on alternative routes as well as working with private sector investors to stock our oil reservoirs. 

Today in our report we are told that our reserves can take us for only two days. I am wondering what has gone wrong because we had a reserve, which could take us for at least two weeks. Now, we have sunk to just two days. In case of turmoil, our oil reserves can only run for two days yet the minister assured the country that then the reserves would take us for two weeks.

Therefore, I would like to know from the Minister of Energy what has gone wrong so that our reserves are only for two days yet we thought that by now, they should have gone up.

On the issue of rural electrification, I would like to thank the ministry for prioritising our areas. In my place, we have got a loan from the Islamic Development Bank. However, the problem we have now is that the lines are there but some villages are being skipped. They connect one village, skip two and go to another one. It is causing us a lot of problems to explain to the people why the rural areas are being connected on a selective basis. 

The argument they are giving us on the ground is that the transformers that had been allocated to that place were shifted to some other places. What is the use of Rural Electricity Agency (REA) putting up poles in the villages when they cannot be connected?
 
Madam Speaker, I would also like to throw more light on the issue of thermal power. Whereas we passed a supplementary budget of Shs 106 billion, that money is only for running the generators. However, we need less than that amount of money, I think around Shs 54 billion, to buy off these people so that we do not have to spend money but own the generators. 

The question we have been putting to these people is, why don’t we get money and pay off these people instead of having to pay them over Shs 100 billion every year? That is the issue that this House needs to interrogate. If you ask them they say, it is a contractual obligation that they must pay whether we need power or not. That is the absurdity that we as a country are faced with in regard to thermal power. We could pay them off but we are not doing so because the contract says, we must continue buying power we do not need under the thermal arrangement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You will all get an opportunity to speak, do not worry. Honourable members, before hon. Twesigye comes on the floor, we have some good news about the United Nations (UN) Base. I am told Mr Antonio Guterres has said it should remain here. (Applause) I would like to thank the Members for the vigilance and to congratulate the President and the Government. It is okay now and our people can rest assured. 

7.52
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, as Parliament, we should make some concrete stand on some of these issues as they cross-cut. 

My honourable colleague was complaining about these lines passing through people’s land and they do not serve these centres. I have a sub-county called Rubaya with power lines but they do not serve a health centre, schools or trading centres yet these power lines have passed through people’s land. 

Therefore, I am of the view that we make a stand on some of these issues. When you try to inquire from REA, they say this is a different project, another project will come to give the service here. We need to agree that no power project should go through an area and miss out a health centre, a trading centre or a school because that is the reason why we need power. 

Secondly, I am on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and yesterday, we were interacting with REA. The Executive Director (ED) assured us that they now have all the money to compensate the project affected persons but the challenge they have is the mode of payment; that some people do not have accounts in the banks and some do not have mobile numbers to be paid through mobile money. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to assure us whether the ED of REA was correct that REA has the money, which should be enough to compensate our people so that we can tell them to put in their claims. Thank you.

7.55
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament has been discussing the issue of sand mining and when you look at the report, it has not been captured well. Recently, Government categorised sand as one of the minerals in the country. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on how they are going to handle that project.

Secondly, there is the issue about lightening. I have not seen the ministry very vigilant to help our people, mainly schools. Last year, we lost some children at school so we would like to know the programme of the ministry on how they are going to sensitise the people or the communities to know about that issue. 

Thirdly, the President recently said they should terminate the Umeme contract. We would like to seek clarification on what the ministries are doing in terms of preparing to take over from Umeme. 

I would also like the ministry to clarify why the cost of water is still high yet this is a free resource. They should give us water at a lower price. Thank you.

7.57
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start from the power plant of Ishasha in Kanungu, which was constructed and commissioned on 21 November 2011 to boost the power line from Jinja. However, after realising the problem that it would not ignite itself, the President said that they were going to put it into what is called, “Island mode” such that if the Jinja line is off, it can generate itself to supply power. 

In Kanungu, power outage is at 82 per cent, which means that reliability is only 18 per cent. I would like to get clarification on when they are putting this line on “Island mode”.

Regarding water catchment management, the Government constructed a project serving seven sub-counties. However, the whole hill -as you are saying about the planting of trees - is not secured. We have said this in the committee but it is not coming by. I would like clarification on what plans you have for sustainability for these projects, especially Kanyampanga in Kanungu.

Madam Speaker, about affected persons in Isimba, the committee has said that the project is at 90 per cent and they are about to finish but those people have not been compensated. What is your view as a committee?

Concerning thermal generators, I am on the Budget Committee and we are wondering why we should not dispose of this project when we are talking about the surplus of power at 250 megawatts. Why do we need these thermal generators to continue? This is haemorrhage to the country? Shs 106 billion was passed the other day as a supplementary to pay off these people. The other year we passed another supplementary.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament made a pronouncement when we were passing this budget that these thermal generators should not be given money but they channelled money through a supplementary budget and they made themselves into a Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the chairperson said that some agencies are not paying and this is why UETCL is not remitting money. Which are those agencies and what is the position of the committee on those agencies? Could this be the reason why UETCL is not complying? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

8.00
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment about Karuma hydropower project. As a district hosting a very big and important project, I would like to report that we have not received anything in form of social corporate responsibility and that the Community Development Action Plan has never been implemented.

At one point, the technical officials from the ministry visited the district and told us that they had allocated Shs 40 billion for the Community Development Action Plan but to date, nothing is going on and they have actually disappeared from the ground.

My other comment is on NFA. Madam Speaker, at a time when everybody is concerned with climate change and the environment, I really get surprised with the way NFA conducts itself. I pray that if possible, they should be investigated.

Recently in my constituency, they gave clearance to a sugarcane investor and as I talk, they have cleared two forest reserves in the names of Nyamakera and Kibeka. The people had conserved them for all this time but as I talk, sugarcane is being planted in those two forest reserves.

My other issue is a proposal for districts that host refugees. I would like to pray that if possible, there should be addition funding to the local governments hosting these refugees because we really compete for social services like water and education yet our budget continues to remain the same. Therefore, if possible, that should be observed.

Madam Speaker, the other issue - 

THE SPEAKER: What is it, hon. Ssekikubo? Which rule? Does it relate to power?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kahunde for raising this very critical matter. Forest reserves being cleared for sugarcane growing cannot wait for a general response. Now that we have the minister here and the Member has raised a very big matter that should not go unchallenged, can the minister rise to the challenge and confirm if indeed two forest reserves can be given away and cleared in the name of planting sugar cane? I thought this was rather unusual and should not be lumped up with the general responses that the minister intends to give.

Can the minister therefore, on this critical issue, rise to assure this House about the status of the statement by a Member of Parliament from Kiryandongo?

THE SPEAKER: That is actually criminal. Are we going to allow you to go? Please conclude but we will need an answer. Have they actually cut down two forests to plant sugarcane? No, the environment minister is here.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament for that district therefore I know what I am saying and it is the truth. In addition, that letter can be got and laid on the Table.

The last issue is on wetlands. Madam Speaker, I was very happy when I read that some titles in wetlands were cancelled. However, in my observation, I feel that the cancelling of these titles is being done in a segregative manner because along Kampala-Gulu highway, you will find that very big wetlands have been leased to investors and they are doing serious work in broad daylight. The Minister of Environment passes there and they are along the road side.

My prayer is that we should cancel such titles. Instead of going for the small fish, we should go for such investors, Madam Speaker.  I beg to submit.

8.05
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its very good report. In addition, I congratulate the chairperson of the committee for successfully struggling with the figures. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for its recommendation that funding be given to Rural Electrification Agency to extend power to sub-counties, especially the sub-county headquarters. This is a very welcome idea, Madam Speaker. However, much as we are now looking at sub-counties, I would like to point out that some district headquarters are still in darkness and Abim is one of them. Abim started in 2006 and up to now, the district headquarters are in darkness. A child born in 2006 is now in secondary school but the district is still in darkness.

Most times, if the CAO’s office and RDC’s office are to photocopy items, they depend on generators. Where is the problem and who is the problem? We really need this addressed for the district of Abim.

The other thing is the issue of water. I thank the committee for its recommendation for the Ministry of Water and Environment to concentrate on rehabilitating the broken boreholes. Actually the issue of broken boreholes has been left to politicians. Each time I go to my village, I have become the Ministry of Water and Environment in Abim. I thank the committee for this –(Member timed out.)

8.07
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime last year, a senior minister called me at night asking about Moroto Forest Reserve and what I was doing for myself. At that time, we were busy consulting our voters on the issue of age limit. I thought the minister was passing a message from the big man. However, I was surprised that he wanted to know more about the forest in Moroto. When he learnt that I was representing Moroto Municipality, he then asked for the telephone number of the Member of Parliament who represents that area where the forest is. Later, I was surprised to learn that he wanted to cut some trees from there.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem of tree cutting in Karamoja; a lot of charcoal burning is taking place. Therefore, for a minister to think of cutting the very few trees we have in Karamoja is disastrous.  

On the issue of water, I would like to thank the committee for –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for raising that particular matter of a minister trying to undermine the laws, which this country operates on. However, it would be very difficult for you to guide this House in the event that the honourable member is not mentioning or substantiating which minister made that call. Madam Speaker, it would be fair for us to know the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fred Angella, this is a very serious issue. This House deserves to know who that minister is.

MR ANGELLA: Madam Speaker, the reason I brought this issue is, I wanted to know whether Moroto Forest has been degazetted for tree cutting. The minister comes from northern Uganda. I am sorry but I will not mention his name –

THE SPEAKER: I will allow you to come and tell me the name of that minister in my office and you must.

MR ANGELLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of water, it is true that Kumi is a water stressed district. Whenever, I travel to Karamoja, I pass through Kumi District and I always see jerry cans lined up for water for almost a kilometre –(Member timed out.)

8.11
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We would like to appreciate the water construction units given to water stressed areas. 

However, I would like Government to note that the programme was meant to assist the poor by getting fuel and then they could be helped to dig up valley dams. That was the purpose because we come from a water stressed area. However, most of the time, this equipment has been utilised by big persons who can afford the equipment.

For the last two years, we could not access this equipment. They are in Kisozi and Mawogola for many months without allowing the poor of the poor to access this equipment yet these people can afford units on their own. The poor therefore remain water stressed.

Madam Speaker, I have been dismayed by the chairperson’s report concerning the 60,000 Ugandans who were evicted from their mines in Mubende District because they are being referred to as illegal miners. You have said that US$ 350,000 is being set aside for registration and streamlining. However, these are not illegal miners. The people of Kitombi were just thrown out but they are Ugandans. They were undertaking their activities and are small scale miners. When the report refers to them as illegal miners, it is very unfortunate. What needs to be done is to set in motion –(Member timed out.)

8.13
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sincerely thank the committee for the very good report. As we get excited about the report of the chairperson that next year there will be double production, what has not come out clearly from the report is, how strategic are we going to be for this excess, which is also coming up because it doubles as production doubles? If I may ask the minister, following the law of economics, when supply exceeds demand, the price is expected to fall. Is that what we should anticipate in the near future?

Secondly, have you set yourself to identify other would be consumers, externally or internally? It would be very good for us to prepare because we are doing very well in production but how ready are we to promote consumption? Thank you.

8.15
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I have three small interventions. One, increasing access to clear and safe water by 70 per cent to rural areas is commendable. However, these targets can easily be affected by the quality of water that we consume in rural areas. For example, if you look at the belt along Lake Kioga and Lake Kwania, the extent of salinity of ground water is very high. In some places, even cows cannot drink the ground water from these areas. Therefore, that affects the quality of water in such places. Kioga, that I represent, is one of those areas. 

Madam Speaker, the water quality in turn will affect operation and maintenance. Because of the high salinity, the pipes cannot last in the water; the galvanised pipes get rotten a little faster. I have always wondered why the Ministry of Water and Environment cannot get another technological option for such areas. The current Government policy is that water users are responsible for maintenance of such facilities. However, Madam Speaker, with such poor water quality, can we create an exception rather than a rule that probably Government comes in to help such communities? 

Secondly, I am glad that Ministry of Water and Environment –(Member timed out.)

8.17
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to draw the attention of the chairperson to page 18; the Oriyo Mini Hydro Power Project. Last year, in the Committee on National Economy, we had an issue about some districts that were going to receive power yet we thought that some of those districts already had power. 

In the same way, the same districts here benefit from a project that is supported by Netherlands but you find that some of these districts are the same districts that are struggling with these others that do not have any project running in the area. I see Bushenyi, Mitooma, Bunyangabo and these others on page 18. Those districts are clear - When you go there, you will see Bundibugyo and that line is obvious. 

Madam Speaker, in the same line as the Chairperson was speaking, he said they need Shs 46.02 billion for the year. When they went for recommendation, they requested for Shs 62.8 billion. Maybe the chairperson could reconcile for us what is required because they are requesting for Shs 62.8 billion. Maybe maths can help us here.

I also heard my colleague saying that in COSASE, they agreed that REA should cede money for compensation. In the Committee on National Economy, we discovered that there was discrimination as the compensation was different for different regions. Therefore, we agreed that we should remove compensation in REA because of discrimination, which was being experienced; some areas get bigger figures while other areas suffer because of the same people.

Lastly, my colleague talked about the forests. Madam Speaker, as you go to your home in Kamuli, Mabira Forest is under threat. There is an area of around 150 acres in Mabira Forest that has been given to one person. I think you have been seeing something at the end of Mabira Forest where somebody is developing eco-tourism. That person is the owner of the house across. That person was given 150 acres to promote eco-tourism but he is beginning that way free of charge - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Propose a strategy. What do you want us to do? 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to interest herself in this matter because for 150 acres to be given to someone free of charge, moreover in Mabira forest, a forest that everybody is proud of, a forest that made someone get a new name; she is fondly referred to as Maama Mabira - 

Slowly by slowly they are devising a way of making sure it goes. When you pass there, please interest yourself on your left as you are going towards the end - Today I passed there and they have begun cutting down that part. Very soon –(Member timed out.)

8.21
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson and the entire committee for the well elaborated report. I have four points to raise regarding this report. 

First of all, I would like the ministry to tell us how and when they are prepared to promote and encourage Ugandans to plant trees around their pieces of land; the bibanjas and all along national roads, district roads, schools, health centres and urban centres in order to fight climate change in this country.

You may recall that in the 1950s the late Kakungulu planted what they call in Busoga jamira gyeene. Those trees made a great impact in Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu and other areas. We still remember Kakungulu because of those trees. Therefore, tree planting should be encouraged in all our localities. 

I have initiated a programme in my constituency, which I call Bbaale Go Green and I am encouraging all my constituents to plant trees around their bibanjas and that programme is on course. I would therefore request the Ministry of Water and Environment to interest all Ugandans and develop programmes, which will roll out to every district and all our villages.

Thirdly, last year we elaborately debated on water for production but I have not heard a report on it. In all our districts, water for irrigation should have been promoted. I do not know whether they have a report to tell us which irrigation schemes have been revived to date. 

Lastly, a member talked about spoilt boreholes in our constituencies. MPs have become water suppliers in the districts. In all our constituencies, you find a line of people who have come to request for money to repair their boreholes.  What plans does the ministry have to repair these broken boreholes, which are becoming a problem to MPs? Thank you very much.

8.25	
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern still goes to Mabira Forest. As you will recall in the early 1990s, Mabira had forest coverage of 74,000 acres. As we speak, it is less than 35,000 acres. 

When you go to Mabira forest, you only see trees along the highway. I took a lot of interest to find out what is happening because I would often find lorries with logs in the morning and at night. I found out that some of these illegal loggers have licenses from National Forestry Authority. 

I also took an interest to find out why we have a lot of what appears to be eco-tourism in Mabira Forest. I found out that it is merely a conduit of acquiring land in Mabira Forest. The person who is licensing all these categories of the so called investors is none other than National Forestry Authority. 

Therefore, I would like to hear from the minister; why is it that your ministry is issuing illegal licenses to these so called investors? (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is, there is a problem. We have come to reduce a forest to trees but a forest is bigger than trees. A forest has a big component of flora and fauna. For as long as there is a tree, they want us to believe that there is a forest. That is why they continuously degazette these forests thinking that when you plant eucalyptus, you would have left a forest in that place. Tomorrow, they will cut the eucalyptus and the forest will be no more. Therefore, the strategy of the National Forestry Authority –

THE SPEAKER: You are now smuggling a contribution.

MR NSAMBA: I am not smuggling, Madam Speaker. I am giving information to him that the problem we have is that we are reducing forests. Natural forests should be guarded.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, I therefore suggest that the parliamentary committee responsible should investigate all the activities in Mabira Forest and come up –(Interjections)- in the interim, I urge this august House to halt all activities that are obtaining and taking place in Mabira Forest  as we await the decision and recommendation of the committee responsible.

8.29
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To begin with, I would like to inform the House that it is not only Mabira that is being deforested; we also have a case where people are acquiring land titles in gazetted forest reserves. An example is Barifa Forest Reserve in Arua town. It is interesting to note that there are buildings emerging in a forest reserve. Therefore, the minister should help us understand the circumstances under which titles are being issued.

Secondly, in the report, I have noted that there is an allocation of Shs4.2 billion for synchronisation of computerised driving permits. As far as I know, Government went into a Public-Private Partnership for management and issuance of driving permits. I would like to understand why we should allocate this money yet National Information Technology Authority (NITA) is at the moment synchronising all Government electronic systems so that they can create a centralised system.

Thirdly, I would like to get a clarification from the minister on why they have failed to resolve the collusion between the Uganda Road Fund Act and the URA Act. This is because they have observed that one of the reasons the Uganda Road Fund is not getting enough money is because URA does not remit –(Member timed out.)

8.31
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I would like to address the issue of compensation for Isimba Dam. Our people in Busoga have not been compensated and it has been a practice by Government that whenever we start processing a budget, there is always an assurance from Government that we have enough money to compensate people.

Madam Speaker, our people from the Busoga side have been walking from Kisozi to Kagga & Partners in Bugolobi, looking for their payment. I would like to get an assurance from the minister. It is not a matter of saying we now have money because they have been saying this for quite some time. People have not stayed in their homes for the last two years. They gave away their land and property for the construction of the dam and they have not been paid. I would like to get an assurance from the minister now that money for compensation, specifically for the Busoga side, is there.

Madam Speaker, the Kayunga side was fully paid. The Busoga side has not been fully paid and people are suffering. Can we get an assurance from the minister that immediately after passing the budget these people will be compensated?

8.33
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee. On page 32 of the report, they have highlighted key unfunded priorities and one of them is water for production to support irrigation. 

Madam Speaker, last year Members of this House were concerned about food insecurity. Motions and matters of national importance were presented here. If Government is not going to plan for irrigation, we shall see water just being wasted during the rainy seasons. By now Government should be asking us to pass money for irrigation if we have to solve this problem of food insecurity in the country. 

The committee has also mentioned Shs16 billion for tree planting and wetland restoration. Whereas I agree with the idea of planting trees countrywide, I am not convinced with wetland restoration. I would like to understand from the minister, for example, how are you going to restore wetlands with buildings? Won’t this be part of the money that will be accounted for when actually you are not going to remove those buildings in the wetlands? I would say that we should use that money for tree planting.

On water-stressed areas, I would like to agree with the committee that these areas - for example Isingiro - should be supported. I shared the problem of water scarcity in Isingiro through my niece in 2015 who was taken for –(Member timed out.)

8.35
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for producing the report.

Madam Speaker, the issues of rural electrification and water are very crucial in this country if we are to better the lives of our citizens. I come from Soroti and rural electrification is still a dream. 

Water that feeds Soroti, Kaberamaido, Katakwi comes from Awoja and passes through a subcounty which has a school of over 1,400 students. It also has a Health Centre IV with patients and it is about one-and-a-half kilometres away from the main water supply. The situation is very pathetic. Students have to spare over an hour to move a distance away to fetch water to be used at school. The patients at the health centre also do the same. I wonder what plans the ministry has in terms of water coverage.

I was informed that this House passed a loan – I think one or two years ago – to promote extension of safe water to rural areas but there is nothing going on. I would like the minister to tell us how far they have gone. According to the information I have, you are supposed to extend water from the centre – (Member timed out.)

8.38
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I also stand to support the report, specifically the allocation of Shs 580 billion meant for rural water, which is under development expenditure.

I am one of the members of Parliament who has some Ugandans who have never seen tap water in this country. They are in the sub-counties of Karusandara, Rukoki, Kilembe, Muhokya and Lake Katwe and their Chairperson is in the gallery here.

Madam Speaker, apart from Katwe-Kabatoro –(Interjections)- I am the area Member of Parliament. In 2011, Shs 400 million was allocated for Mbunga gravity flow water but it was never constructed. I have been following up this with the ministry and I am waiting for answers. Honourable minister, now that I have supported this budget, I do not think my support is going to be in vain. I also think the minister and the concerned persons –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. We want to go; we are not going to sleep here.
 
MR AOGON: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that much as Parliament gives attention to the issue of Certificate of Gender and Equity, there seems to be a big gap.

We attend to issues of gender but we forget equity. Equitable distribution of resources should be a must for this country. I think the criteria of being equitable should be emphasised so that as a country, we can move in the right way. That is why we are suffering. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MBAJU: Thank you, for the information. 

8.40
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have four questions that I would like the honourable minister to answer.

First, why is the environment officer in Lira District giving out wetlands? What power does he have? I struggled with the Resident District Commissioner of Lira to ensure that the wetlands are not abused as they have been abused by this officer.

Secondly, I have 20 damaged dams, which should provide water for production and I have been raising this issue. I am requesting the honourable minister or the committee to go and visit the place because it is a very good opportunity for irrigation and animal production.

Thirdly, in Lira Municipality, three divisions do not have power and yet the neighbouring sub counties of Ngetta, Lira, and Adekokwok in Erute South - when you look at the developments in these areas even within the town, they deserve to have electricity. When are they going to receive this? Can you go and inspect this for yourself?

Why is it that power blackouts are very frequent? In other countries, this statement is not known. Children grow without knowing power blackouts and if it happens even for only five minutes, it becomes a legal matter. In Uganda, it is frequent and every day we witness power blackouts about four to five times. What measures are being put in place to address this?

Lastly, I have Te-ilwa Forest Reserve. I have brought this to the attention of His Excellency the President. Lira Sub-county is the smallest sub-county in Lango subregion with only four divisions, where we have Lira University and we have proposed an airport in that same area. We have transferred the headquarters to Lira (Member timed out.)

8.43
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to give the aggregation of some of the issues.

Madam Speaker, if it pleases you and should it please everybody here, we should brand this budget, a “water and power for all” budget. I do not want to dwell much on it because water and power are literally two single sources of livelihood in every community and the entire country.

Secondly, sugar growing in Kiryandongo is consuming our two forest reserves. I ask that this Parliament fully pronounces itself to completely stop it. I would like to urge the minister to interest herself with the committee for a fact-finding mission trip to that community –(Interjections)- You have an answer; okay, the answer should include measures undertaken to stop and save our two forest reserves in Kiryandongo.

Lastly, I do not know whether it has ever occurred to you, Madam Speaker, that if rain was to show up for only two hours in Kampala, you would ask for a boat or a ferry to access your home. Some time back, it rained for 30 minutes and it claimed a life of a banker at Nakivubo. What does that mean? It means that as a country, we need to demand a complete stop -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I request the ministers to use five minutes each?

8.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a job well-done and Members for the issues they have raised.

On the issue of Isimba Dam, that dam has components to be finished. Whatever is laid in the agreement must be done before we hand over the dam. We have been discussing it and there is a bridge and other accessories.

Just yesterday, we met the Committee on National Economy. We were looking at the loan request raised by the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fulfil all the aspirations we have to connect and power this country. 

The loan is supposed to cover all these sub regions of Uganda and we have attached the list of all these areas. We are covering 287 sub-counties and about four new ones. All these will be covered by this loan, which will be before you, Madam Speaker, very soon.

Therefore, connections will be there. According to our plan, this loan - because of the power mix coming on board like the power from Isimba and Karuma dams must be evacuated using the power lines that we have already planned. Some of them are being constructed so that we can gauge to take power to the rural communities.

We are targeting about 1,700 persons and also areas of commercial activities. We are talking about compensation of the corridors - where there are high voltage lines, which are dangerous to those who live under them, we compensate. However, for those ones which are below 33KVs and are serving communities, REA does not compensate. 

Some people request for power; it may be a connection from one house to another but they still ask to be compensated. I think it is upon us, honourable members, to make sure this power reaches all the communities that need it. Therefore, the loan is there. It is going to fill the gaps because there is also a need for transformers. 

We have moved lines and we have left some areas. Those areas need installation of transformers. All that has been studied and since you will be on the ground with us, you will tell us here and what we will have left out. The list will accompany the loan request which will come here. You will study it because we are concerned and we want to power this country. 

We want the excess capacity that is available to go to the people to stimulate development. It arouses development and attracts development to the remote areas so that power is not only available in the cities. That is being handled very seriously and we are very happy about it.

On artisanal mining; these are the people scattered in the country and have discovered gold and other minerals. However, in areas like Mubende, it attracted all sorts of people from different walks of life. They became too many and you would not know who were Ugandans or non-Ugandans. We then decided, because of the environmental concerns and others, to organise these people. We are organising them into cooperatives so that we deploy them to go back and do the job in an orderly manner – (Interruption).

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect, I wouldn’t wish to put my good minister to order but I am forced to. Yesterday when the minister was facing the committee, he heard me state that the south-eastern region, where Busoga is inclusive, was not catered for in the loan that is going to cater for the sub-counties that do not have power.

I would like to find out whether it is in order for the minister to come here on the Floor and say that all the sub-county headquarters and centres that do not have power will receive power as far as that loan is concerned; when I, who is seated behind him, was yesterday in the meeting where my region is not catered for as far as this loan is concerned. Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: My difficulty here is that I have not got the list of the 287 places that are going to get power. Honourable minister, are the Basoga there? I think that is what we would like to know. (Laughter)
 
MR LOKERIS: I think he was simply joking. I showed him that his area is well-catered for, except Bufumba, which we have catered for in our budget. By the end of May, we shall advertise for that area so our money will extend electricity to those islands. After all, ours is fully catered for so do not worry, Madam Speaker, about that because I know. (Laughter)

We are talking about the thermal power plants - we are paying for the Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant Company Ltd; so we must complete paying for it as a backup. On Eskom, this is a loan we agreed upon and we have honoured our commitment.

THE SPEAKER:  Anything else that is important?

MR PETER LOKERIS: We had a discussion last week over this matter with my minister and it was well explained to the august House and I am sure that is what was really happening at that time. Therefore, something must be there for backup in case there is a disruption. You should not say we are waiting; it must be there. Factories are working and must continue doing so.

THE SPEAKER: How much more time do you require? How many more minutes do you require?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Money?

THE SPEAKER: Minutes. Money; I do not have. (Laughter) How many minutes do you need?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, since most of the things have been exhausted, please give me two minutes. 

The honourable member from Abim said that electricity has not been extended to the district headquarters. We took power up to Abim where the headquarters were originally housed. However, the Abim people decided to shift the headquarters to Abuk. We are now planning to follow them there. (Laughter) They have abandoned power in Abim. Therefore, my sister, we are coming to follow you with this loan.

A lot has been spoken. I am very excited about all that has been said. We shall do more in our committee. Thank you very much.

8.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I thank the House for the constructive way you have given us points to enrich the report. As a ministry, we take it positively. I also thank my chairperson for having ably presented the report. 

Allow me to clarify on a few issues. Many colleagues have raised the issue of water stress in certain areas in the country and it is true. We have areas in Uganda which are water stressed and these are areas where we cannot get water on the surface and in the ground. In that case, if we cannot get water on the surface and in the ground, we look for other alternatives. 

That is where we are looking at extending bulk water supply to some of these areas like Bukomansimbi and Isingiro. We cannot go and sink a borehole quickly because there is no water in the ground yet it is natural. Maybe to enlighten the House, we have such areas in Uganda by nature of our rocks. There are poor aquifers and as a ministry, we cannot do much. However, we are doing our best to get water from somewhere else and move it. This requires a lot of resources which, sometimes, take some time.

There was a Member who raised fears about a project in Kasese to be funded by the World Bank. There is no plan in the ministry to shift that project. Therefore, as a ministry, we will continue to engage the World Bank to go ahead and implement that project. I think those are simply rumours from opponents but it is not there in my ministry.

There is a Member who asked whether we have any irrigation schemes. Yes, we have although we have not covered the whole country. We have Mubuku I in Kasese and it is operational; Doho I in Butaleja and Agoro in Lamwo District. These are given to the communities. There are some on which construction is ongoing like Olweny Irrigation Scheme in Lamwo District, Tochi in Oyam, Ngenge in Kween District, Doho 2 in Butaleja District, Mubuku 2 in Kasese District and Wadelai is about to begin soon.

These are big irrigation projects but there are also plans to have other smaller projects in the district.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lanyero wants clarification; please do that very quickly. Hon. Ouma, you have spoken. You know the Hansard people are getting tired and we need to stop.

MS LANYERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister has just stated about the irrigation scheme in Agoro, I just would like clarification because the Agoro Irrigation Scheme was not done well. In the last financial year, the Government allocated Shs 2 billion for the repair but as I speak, no work has been done. 

The people who went to do the preliminary work bypassed the district officials. They went directly to the local council people and whatever they did, we are not aware of it. Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify to the House on what happened to the money that was given for correcting the irrigation scheme. It is not functional though it is being mentioned now. Thank you.

MR ANGELLA: Sometime, last year, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries came here and told the House that they had money for eleven dams for Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. However, up to now, nothing is taking place. 

You are aware, Madam Speaker, that the issue of the Karimojong loitering the neighbouring districts in search of water has frequented this House. I would like to know from the minister where that money has gone. What is happening?

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I think some of the concerns she is raising fall under the unfunded priorities. As a ministry, until we get funds, we cannot come on the ground. Otherwise, we have many plans already but we are waiting for when funds will be available.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in respect to Agoro Irrigation Scheme, I think she was saying that it was substandard or it was not completed. I think that was her problem.

MS KITUTU: I am not aware of that report. I do not know where she is getting it from.

MS LANYERO: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that Shs 2 billion was given to correct the defects of the irrigation scheme because it has never been operational. So, I wonder what has happened to the Shs 2 billion that was appropriated for the correction of that mistake. 

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I think I will get more information on that so that I can inform the House properly.

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about tree planting but first, I thank you for also recognising the serious anomaly of low funding in tree planting. You will find that this item normally falls under the unfunded priorities and that is why although we have targets which are set in tree planting, we never meet them.

Also, allow me give a few insights on some of the issues which are being raised especially concerning loss in forest cover. Madam Speaker, in 1990, the country had around four million hectares covered by natural forests; 2.5 million hectares fell on private land which is owned by you and me; and then 1.5 million hectares was under National Forest Authority and Wildlife Authority.

Madam Speaker, when we carried out an assessment in 2015, the acreage under NFA had reduced by 400,000 hectares. However, what was left on the private land was only 800,000 hectares. Therefore, the forest which was on private land was what was lost most. Normally, we monitor everywhere that there is tree cover.

As I speak, as a ministry, we have started on the process of restoration of the 400,000 hectares and NFA has at least recovered around 200,000 hectares. Recently, you saw the advert of 40,000 hectares. We are seeking the private sector to assist us so that we can hit the 2020 target of having all these areas restored.

This sets a challenge because the law on forests on private land is not strong enough, much as we are obliged to promote tree planting. We have only restricted certain species from being cut. Otherwise, loss of total tree cover was a mishap in the law. It is a limitation and that is how we have lost most of the forests. Now, pressure is mounting on the forests, which belong to Government.

There is concern on the Mabira Central Forest Reserve. Madam Speaker, I also use that route when going home and I saw the area which you raised concern on. I actually took time to find out where the problem is. Now, when we opened the boundaries for Mabira Central Forest Reserve, it was found out that some part falls outside the forest reserve. This is what I –(Interjections)– allow me to finish.  

Madam Speaker, the Central Forest Reserves were gazetted in 1932 by an instrument and for us; we follow where the pillars are. And once we have identified where our areas are, that is now where people - of course these forests were there before we opened up the boundaries but the moment we opened boundaries, many people started cutting the trees next to the forest reserves. Recently, you saw other people raising concerns as if Mabira was being erased but -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude.

MS KITUTU: I followed that up with the Ministry of Lands and the person, after that opening - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, a Member gave statistics that Mabira area coverage of 72,000 hectares, has come to 35,000 hectares. The honourable minister is giving us statistics of ownership and referring to Mabira forest cover as a forest reserve. 

Is the honourable minister in order to proceed on information without specifics of the area right now that Mabira is covering in terms of the actual forest cover and then the specifics of the forest reserve without giving us those specifics? 

THE SPEAKER: Who are you putting to order? She is not there. I did not understand; what is your problem, hon. Anywarach?

MR ANYWARACH: We had specifics of the area of Mabira Forest as 72,000 hectares and they have been reduced to 35,000 hectares. That is the area coverage of Mabira. The honourable minister is proceeding to give us a survey that they opened boundaries and they realised that chunks of land were not falling within that area coverage and therefore, they belong to private individuals.

She is constantly referring to Mabira as a forest reserve; I don’t know whether she knows the difference between a forest and a forest reserve. Now -(Interjections)- yes, these are two different things and as a minister, she should know. My point is that is she in order to proceed without giving us specifics of the actual area covered by the forest cover of Mabira and the area covered by the forest reserve? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she was responding to an issue raised by hon. Mugoya who said that particular parts which she has identified have been taken away. That is what she was answering; that it should be there. That part is not part of the forest; that it could be private. That is what she was saying; isn’t it?

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, the central forest reserves are the ones that are under the National Forest Authority. However, forest cover can be on any land. Therefore NFA is mandated to take charge of forests that are under the central forest reserve. They are 506 in number.

Therefore, I was going ahead to say that on the point of the colleague saying that the forest has reduced by a certain number of hectares, I request that he brings proof of that loss. As far as we are concerned, we have not lost any area of Mabira. However, Mabira has enclaves –
 
THE SPEAKER: Members, we need to finish and go home; the Hansard team is tired. Let us consider the workers; they are tired.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I am the minister responsible for the forests. Until you prove that there are forests which have been lost - I was in Mabira and with the information in Ministry of Lands to confirm where our boundaries are. Therefore, until you prove that the forests have been lost - there are natural feelings where people see enclaves and you say that it is the central forest reserves. However, they are private lands being used for sugarcane growing. These are communities that have been there and were gazetted inside there. Members need to go and we ascertain the truth.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to give the information. If you think you have information to the contrary, then you can lead us through, that here, she is not accurate. However, let her tell us from her perspective as a minister in charge of those forests.

MR KITUTU: Madam Speaker, for Mabira, I was telling Members that we have enclaves and we were even trying as Government to persuade these people to surrender this land if we can compensate them; so that we have a closed forest. However, as we speak, that forest- we have people inside and it is not a forest under the central forest reserve that we have in the gazette.

Therefore, honourable members, if you want to ascertain the truth, go in the archives of the Ministry of Lands before you rise to - because we have proved that and as a minister, I stand here to say the truth.

Now, on the issue of Kiryandongo -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to finish. Can’t you meet the minister afterwards if there are areas which - you can meet her in the canteen? 

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, on the issue of Kiryandongo, the forest reserve being referred to is under the local government. We have around 116 forest reserves, which are managed by local governments. I will follow up this issue because within the law, the minister has powers to recall a forest under local government if we find that it is being mismanaged.

Otherwise, forests which are under local governments were given for purposes of communities benefiting and they are 116. These are not managed by NFA. The Member may have not found out properly but that is not under NFA; it is under the district. It was the district which leased it out. However, we shall follow it up and if we find that they are using it for sugarcane growing; it will be reverted back to the centre.

Madam Speaker, allow me also clarify on the activities which are permitted within the law under the collaborative forest management; where you can be allowed in the forest reserves under a concession and you are given a license and you coexist with the forest. 

This is commercial plantation development and it is within the law; Forest restoration, ecotourism, highway stop over centres, biking trails, forest parks, urban greening, biomass energy plantation, Bamboo plantation. It is on this strength that the 40,000 hectares which you recently saw in the papers were advertised for this purpose.

Out of the 40,000; 10,000 were left for communities. Therefore, 10,000 hectares - if you have any community which can apply - and for community, we allow them to promote bee keeping, like having tree seedlings within and they are able to co-exist with the central forest reserve and this is at the periphery of the forest reserves.

Recently when we raised an advert, there were 8,000 applicants but only 1,200 were successful and we are working on their licences. There will be dos and don’ts in those licenses which we shall be monitoring.

We shall give a timeline and if you do not implement within the timeline, we shall put a provision within the permit where we can recall the land. 

Someone talked about eucalyptus; Eucalyptus is widespread in the country. As a ministry, we are putting in place guidelines to regulate the planting of eucalyptus trees because it has been planted in fragile ecosystems like wetlands and without regulations in place, it becomes difficult to manage.

These were some of the itching issues but Members have to know that this is a very passionate sector; most of the forests lost were on private land. I have a very big challenge with the cutting of those logs because they are on private land, which all goes back to livelihoods. 

Communities who have these trees on their land are leasing them out. When someone who has never touched Shs 200,000 sees Shs 2,000,000 they lease their trees out. We are working with the district leadership to sensitise the communities to conserve these trees.

If we had a carbon fund in place, we would pay them to keep these trees. It is challenging to conserve trees on private land because they are not my mandate. I only persuade people to conserve them at no cost; it is hard to persuade a man who slept hungry. Thank you very much.

9.21
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the committee report, we noted that Electromax’s contract is ending in September this year and we have only included a budget for three months.

Unfortunately for Jacobsen, we have a contract which is running up to 2020 and the settlement fee is $49 million plus VAT which is Shs 59 billion; it is build, own and transfer after 20 years. We have to make a decision on whether we pay that settlement fee and then Government takes over. 

On the excessive power that is being generated, there is a plan of opening up industrial parks, increased connection in the rural areas and that is where funding to the Rural Electrification Agency comes in very handy and there is talk of exporting it as well.

Hon. Kibalya asked about the Olwiyo mini-hydro project; there are arrears of Shs 38 billion and in financial year 2018/2019, Shs 24 billion, which puts it at Shs 62.8 billion.

Ninety eight per cent of the districts are now connected by Rural Electrification Agency and the next target is the sub counties. The main problem we have is the additional money to enable them perform better. 

Who were the agencies receiving money and yet not paying for their utilities; under the power purchase agreement with Umeme; there, was an Escrow account that was setup in London. Umeme was supposed to withdraw money from that account if agencies do not pay but it got exhausted. Under the same power purchase agreement, it has resorted to withholding money which is a levy of 5 per cent which it should be paying to the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited. 

The leading culprits - and hopefully this will help to get them pay and we can give you a more detailed list together with the money that they owe - are Ministry of Defence, The Uganda Police Force, Prisons, Mulago and the Uganda Virus Research Institute. We are proposing that the money be deducted from the source that the Budget committee allocates this to Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited so that it can pay Umeme. The other area of priority is counterpart funding.

In conclusion, there has been a very positive response in the area of water. When we made a lot of noise about it last year, there was a little jump of Shs80 billion and probably there is no much noise this year; that is why there is no much increase.

Ordinarily, you would have expected that we would be building on the Shs80 billion development budget of last year. It is because of all these issues that the National Planning Authority is talking about reverse performance. The water sector is not given priority, deforestation, the forest cover is reducing from what it used to be, wetland degradation, sand mining and inability to protect our fragile ecosystem. 

All these pause a significant question of how we are planning for the future. Hopefully from the discussions we have had here, we will see some significant change. In the years to come, there is need for an actual revolution. The water we have been having has not been enough; what is coming on now might be 10 times more by 2030. 

We have mentioned a number of unfunded priorities which need to be given attention, including what hon. Ssekikubo mentioned earlier about the equipment to help in de-silting the valley tanks. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that one day this country will be in a situation where you cannot cut a tree until you have the authority from the Government. You cannot do it in America, Canada and Singapore.

Secondly, honourable minister, I am sorry I do not believe this business of 70 per cent coverage of this country. In my constituency, as hon. Akorimoe said, I am constantly supplying water. We need to support the rural people; there should be improved funding for the rural areas so that they can get water. 

However, I would like the Budget committee to create a Tree Fund before we go for the Committee of Supply. Let them create money from somewhere so that we establish a Tree Fund; we cannot continue like this. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the question now be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you so much for staying. I would like to thank the Hansard team and the Clerk and your team. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 9.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

