Friday, 13 May 2005

Parliament met at 11.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the night of Wednesday, 11 May 2005, a calamity struck this Parliament almost as it did one year ago when one of us, hon. Patrick Musisi, Member of Parliament for Busiro South suddenly died. As you are aware, it has not been the usual practice for Parliament to sit on Fridays, but today we are gathered here for this special sitting solely to pay tribute to our fallen colleague in a manner befitting a distinguished son of Uganda that the late Musisi has been. So, I welcome you to this difficult sitting.

I would like to extend the condolences of Mr Speaker and myself and the entire Parliament to Mrs Musisi and the children, the relatives and friends upon this irreplaceable loss. We pray for the Almighty God to guide us all through this difficult time and grant you his blessings in the days to come. We truly mourn with you. May the soul of the late hon. Patrick Musisi rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, in accordance with the Government Standing Orders, the hon. member has been accorded all that is expected for a Member of Parliament namely; this funeral is an official funeral and the arrangements which have been put in place include the payment for the casket, the provision of pallbearers, the digging and completion of the grave, the band, the wreath; and everything else that you are going to see here has been supplied by the Parliamentary Commission on behalf of the state. So, he has been accorded full honours due to a backbench Member of Parliament. 

And accordingly I know, and you have seen, that there have been statements on the radio; the government has been represented at both the Church Service and here. The body will be transported officially to the point of burial, the official pallbearers will be provided and the cultural or religious rights of the deceased will be accorded to him in full. Thank you very much.

(Entrance of the Late Hon. Patrick Musisi.)

The National Anthem (One Verse) 

Laying of Wreaths

CONDOLENCE MESSAGES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we continue to receive a number of condolence messages. We have a message from the chairperson, Uganda Women Parliamentary Association. 

“Mr Speaker, the widow and the family, people of Busiro and Uganda; 

Once again, the good God has decided to take back one of us at this time when we feel we need everybody’s contribution. 

Young as he was, we saw a politician who would help shape the destiny of this nation in many years to come. We shall miss his principled nature, mature debate, and his quality of addressing issues rather than personalities. 

Patrick demonstrated that one could have a strong allegiance to a political party and also be a friend to everybody.  

Patrick had a listening ear to all shades of opinion. He never shunned off issues related to advancement or special interest groups especially women.  UWOPA has lost an ally. 

UWOPA pays tribute to hon. Patrick Musisi as a family man, a God loving person, and anyone who interacted with him for only a short time could realize how much he treasured his family and humanity. 

Catherine Musisi, may the Almighty God, for whom both of you dedicated your 26 years of marriage life, console you and the family.  

Mary Amajo
Chairperson, UWOPA”

We have also received a message from our colleagues, hon. Reagan Okumu and Michael Ocula who are in Upper Prison, Luzira. 
“Madam Speaker, allow us to express our heartfelt condolence to the family of the Late Patrick Musisi, the Democratic Party and members of Busiro South Constituency.  

Hon. Musisi was our friend and it is impossible to believe we never saw your last da, and we shall not even see your body; perhaps we shall one day see your grave. Your death has made prison rooms uncomfortable for us, but we have decided to accept it. When we get out, we shall carry the touch of democracy from where you left. 

Sorry we could not see you again in this world, but we are sure we shall meet in another world where God has prepared for us. May your soul rest in eternal peace.”
Foundation for Human Rights Initiative:
“Hon. Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament. It is with great shock and deep regret that we have learnt of the sudden death of Hon. Patrick Musisi, Member of Parliament for Busiro South, Wakiso District.  

Hon. Musisi contributed immensely towards the struggle to promote respect and observance of human rights in Uganda. 

The Board of Directors, management and staff of the Foundation of Human Rights Initiative wish to express the deepest sympathy to the people of Busiro South, Wakiso District, the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda.  

We pray that the Almighty God comforts you and gives you the strength to go through this trying time.

Livingstone Sewanyana
Executive Director.”

This is from the honourable Commissioner, Zziwa Member for Kampala District. 

“Mr Speaker, it is with great sorrow that we mourn the demise of Busiro South Member of Parliament, hon. Patrick Musisi.  

Patrick Musisi has been a devoted Member of Parliament who has always respected and maintained objective positions on issues and he was candid in expressing his point of view. He cherished development and wanted so much to have his people of Busiro South develop. 

He has always been a hardworking person who always had something to do and had a very positive attitude. It is a pity to lose him at such a crucial time when the country is moving to a time of a new political dispensation.  

We honour God who has been able to sustain him and we pray that he gives grace to the grieved family.  May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

Margaret Nantongo Zziwa.”

Hon. Christine Amongin Aporu, Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness.  

“Hon. Deputy Speaker and the Parliament of Uganda, I have learnt with profound shock the sad news of the untimely death of hon. Patrick Musisi, Member of Parliament for Busiro South, Wakiso District.  

I wish, on behalf of the people of my constituency, my family and on my own behalf, to express my deepest condolences to you and through you to the Parliament and the grieved family.  

The death of hon. Patrick Musisi has robbed the country of one of the dedicated legislators. We shall miss him greatly as a colleague, friend, family head and indeed a father.  

I pray to the Almighty God gives the widow, children and the whole family the fortune and spirit to go through this trying time. May his soul rest in peace.

Christine Amongin Aporu.”

Toro Parliamentary Group:
“Mr Speaker, the members of Toro Parliamentary Group have learnt with profound shock of the demise of our colleague and friend, hon. Patrick Musisi.  

Hon. Musisi will be remembered for his outgoing, patient and nationalistic character. He had respect for colleagues even when you disagreed on principle. These qualities are important for us to emulate as we embark on the political transition. 

May the Lord rest his soul in peace.

Adolf Mwesige
Chairman, Toro Parliamentary Group.”

Uganda Women Parliamentary Journalists Association:
“All members of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Journalists Association, express their sorrow on the sudden death of Busiro Member of Parliament, honourable Patrick Musisi.  
He has been a straightforward person and friendly to all. We send condolences to the family and Parliament.
May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Anne Nseera Nandutu
Chairperson.”

Teso Parliamentary Group:
“On behalf of the Teso Parliamentary Group, the entire Teso community, whom we represent, I wish to express my most heartfelt sympathy and to convey my condolences to Mrs. Catherine Musisi, the immediate family, relatives and friends of the late Patrick Musisi and indeed the whole country.  

In his sudden death, we have lost a true patriot and a consensus builder. For us who have worked with the Late Patrick Musisi, we know that this country has suffered a great tragedy in his death.  

The entire community of Teso will miss him during this era of transition. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Alice Alaso
On behalf of the Chair, Teso Parliamentary Group.”

Uganda Parliamentary Press Association: 
“Mr Speaker, Members of the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association convey their heartfelt condolences to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Members of Parliament, the Democratic Party, the family and friends of the late hon. Patrick Musisi. 

As journalists, we have known hon. Musisi as a committed legislator, loyal to his political belief, and never indulging in combative politics. It is sad that Parliament has been robbed yet again of another articulate Member of Parliament. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Chairman.”

Honourable members, so far those are the messages.

MOTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PATRICK MUSISI

11.23
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, following the death of a son of Uganda, I beg to move that:

“BE IT RESOLVED THAT the Parliament of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 13th day of May 2005;

DO HEREBY COLLECTIVELY convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives… ” -(Interruption)

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, May I move that the mover of the motion goes to the front so that this motion is accorded the importance it deserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member of Kyadondo, please come to the dispatch box.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, “Be it resolved that Parliament of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 13th day of May 2005;

DO HEREBY COLLECTIVELY convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Busiro South and the entire nation upon the sudden demise of Hon. Patrick Musisi, Member of Parliament for Busiro South which occurred on the night of Wednesday, 11 May, 2005; and

DO FURTHER REGISTER its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that Hon. Patrick Musisi has, in course of his life, rendered to the people of this nation in his various capacities.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.”

MR NORBERT MAO: Seconded.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, it is not how many years you have seen someone that would tell how much you know about this person but rather three important things must have happened: One, you must have done business with that person; two, you must have stayed with that person; and three, you must have travelled with that person, in the sense that you would really know, how does that person behave in situations of scarcity. 

If you found yourself in a situation where he is the only one with Shs 1,000, could he hide and come back after he has had a cup of tea so that he pretends you are at the same level? If you have travelled with a person, you have done business with that person, you have stayed with that person; you can then claim to know that person. I am one of those people who can really claim to have known Patrick.  

One day, we were supposed to be at Heathrow Airport at 10.00 0’clock in the morning. But when we reached the airport, we were told, “Sorry, you cannot proceed because you are late”. We were requested to pay an extra US$ 150 each to be able to take the next flight, which would come 12 hours later. It so happened that I didn’t have the money but Patrick had some. As I was saying, “Now what shall we do?” He said, cool down, pulled out US$ 300, paid and we sat for the next 12 hours waiting for the flight. This was the time when we had to go and look after him in River Bridge Hospital in London when he was having an operation; he had some heart problem.  

Patrick cared for others, he was never selfish. Patrick was honest. Just on Tuesday, I was talking to one of our colleagues here. He went to the Accounts Department and told them, “Money which was supposed to be for Patrick Ocheng was wrongly put on my pay slip. I am bringing a cheque to pay this money.” He paid the cheque on Tuesday and on Wednesday he passed away! He was an honest man; he was a very straightforward man; he would never tell a lie. This is why I was shocked yesterday. I have heard very many people talk.

Sometime back, Patrick declared his intentions to take on the Democratic Party as a leader, and those who were champions of fighting him are now saying he had the potential; I do not know when they realized.  

Patrick was God fearing, I never saw him eat a thing before he prayed. He could never sleep before he prayed, he could never take on a journey before he prayed; I did not see him do that.
Madam Speaker, I was reading a certain paper somewhere. Three men were caught up in a very scandalous event. They went adventuring into a cave. While there, a big stone came and covered the entrance of the cave, and a voice said, “If each one of you said what good things you have done, that might be the key to remove the stone and you will go free.” These guys had nothing to tell, they had not done any good thing so that God could help them escape. One of them was shameless he said, God, one day I was about to step on a very tiny insect and I jumped it; I saved its life. Is that good enough to save us? And because of that, the stone was removed and these people were free. But Patrick has done so much that I think God can use that as a basis to rest his soul in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.33
MR NORBERT MAO (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, dear colleagues. I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the bereaved family, to all of us, to the constituency of Busiro South and to the entire nation, and to friends of the hon. Patrick Musisi worldwide. 

Usually when people of untimely death it is just a common phrase. Even people who have wrestled with ailments for months in hospital, they are said to have died in an untimely manner. Madam Speaker, this one is truly untimely. 

Hon Ruzindana had lunch with hon. Patrick Musisi. He was singing in the lift on Wednesday telling me that he had no money in his pocket but he had a new suit, and he was particularly smart that day. He drove us to meet Prof. Sempebwa in Prof. Sempebwa’s chambers. I sat with hon. Mabikke in the back of the car and we were telling the police officers, “How do you like our honourable driver?” There was no sign that he was suffering from any stress whatsoever that day. There was no sign that he was under pressure of any ailment. Whatever ailment he had, it was under control. Therefore, his death was truly untimely. 

Yesterday when we went to Lubaga Cathedral, we saw the crowds united by grief. Some people think multi-partism means being partisan; it means identifying who to oppose rather than what to fight for and what to support. Some people take the word “party” in the “multiparty” too seriously. Hon. Patrick Musisi put all of us who are very partisan to great shame because I saw people coming in multitudes: Christians, Moslems - I am sure even some people may have been won over by God yesterday. I saw NRM, UPC DP - everybody was united. I think that is why we are saying that we will miss him so much.  

So today as we come to pay our last respects to our colleague, we are remembering him. This is not a time for us to make eloquent speeches about what he was. It is simply like we are thinking aloud; it is just like when you wake me up in the middle of the night and say, what do you remember about hon. Patrick Musisi. So we are all here tongue-tied, thinking aloud, trying to remember something little that impressed us about him. It is difficult but we are all here because of what we call human kinship, what the Bantu languages call “Obuntu”.  

When you see the widow crying and the children collapsing with pain and grief, and for them this is just the beginning, because the rest of us, after the funeral, will go home. For them everything will be reminder. They will be remembering, this used to be Dad’s chair, this was his favourite music, this was - Everything will bring the tears welling up again.  

So, Mrs Musisi, if this will console you, know that your husband was loved across the political divide; everywhere he was truly loved. (Applause). And we are just not talking for the sake; some of us are very partisan by the way - he wasn’t. Some of us can roll in the mud with you, he could not roll in the mud. If you are dragging him towards the mud he will let you roll alone. That is the kind of character that we are missing. But for you, our words are empty; our words are not enough to console you. We know you will continue missing him.  

Yesterday the Rt hon. Prime Minister said, it is important to grieve. Even in the Bible when Jesus went and saw Lazarus’ body, he cried and yet he is God. So who are we now to claim that we cannot grieve? Grief is normal; this is what makes us human.  

Madam Speaker, let me end by outlining some admirable qualities that we have to emulate. Hon. Patrick Musisi stood for something. I read somewhere that if you stand for nothing you fall for anything; that is a major political disease. Many people are everywhere every time and they blow with the wind, they are like straw. Hon. Patrick Musisi was respected because you knew where he stood and you respected him in spite of knowing where he stood. He could not fall for anything because he stood for something. This is a quality we have to emulate.  

Actually, sometimes I am more scared of my own comrades who I know do not stand for anything than of my opponents who I know stand for something. I rather deal with somebody who honestly opposes me than somebody who is stalking me to stab my back. Hon. Patrick Musisi put his cards on the table; you hate him, you love him, you knew what his cards were.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, he was honest; his honesty has just been mentioned here today. That is why he was the Treasurer of the Democratic Party Parliamentary group; people trusted him with money. Also he had made some, by the time he came into politics he had what we call a hinterland, a source of income. Our politics is said to be dominated by stranded people who hang on to political office as if it is a Lusuku -(Applause)- that is a problem. We always hear lectures from our leaders about the need to fight poverty and so on, politics should be a service. 

In the case of hon. Patrick Musisi, politics was not his major source of income; he had successful businesses. I used to hear him lecturing those of us who were young on how to build a house without stress, where to get affordable furniture, where are the best tiles in town. Now, obviously that was not for purposes of promoting any political ideal, it was simply about putting a roof over your head, especially, some of us who had been blasted for not having roofs over our heads. His counsel was particularly welcome, and this is something many of us will miss. There are builders who have been reaping off Members of Parliament here. Hon Patrick Musisi invited them and said, “Stress no more, this is how you can do it”. He did it by example. 

Thirdly, he was diligent. If there is one thing he resented, it was disorder. I remember him coming in the meetings of the Democratic Party Caucus, “Where are the minutes? What is the agenda? 
I cannot attend a meeting without the agenda and with no previous minutes. Get serious”. And our secretary general would be there shuffling in his chair, trying to explain why minutes have delayed. 

Such people do not come along by accident, Madam Speaker. Only weeds grow wild. Real crops have to be tended and nurtured and this is because of the kind of training he had. He attended seminary and from what I was told in the seminary they do not train people, they form people. That is why they call it “formation”. They do not call it “training”, and it is universal. If you meet seminarians all over the world, their attitude to life is the same and they do not like disorder. They do not like dishonesty, and they believe that humanity is one. 

He was God fearing, but all these are the qualities, which made him civil. You know civility is a rare quality especially in our beleaguered Democratic Party. Of late all our dirty linen is all over the city; there is no more dirty linen hidden from public view. We go to court and we end up in combat, wielding pistols at each other and even abducting potential leaders. This kind of thing continues because there is a failure in civility. Why can we not disagree without being disagreeable? Hon. Patrick Musisi would disagree with a person but he was not a disagreeable character, and his death should put to shame the warring parties in the Democratic Party. They must be totally ashamed! In fact they contributed to the stress, which finally killed hon. Patrick Musisi. They have! 

Yesterday there were speeches about stress caused by the Parliamentary heavy schedule but I think there are other sources of stress. As a tribute to his true memory, without empty talk simply because there is a coffin before us, we must dedicate ourselves to the things that hon. Patrick Musisi stood for. This is the true tribute we can pay to him. I understand there is a meeting this weekend to be chaired by a mediator. He was so excited about this meeting that in fact he was looking for a venue for the meeting. He had offered to pay money to support the meeting because he wanted the party united, yet the business of the political party is to compete for power and not to engage in street fighting and scandalizing one another. These are things that those of us who are members of the party now have to talk about as we hang our heads in shame. 
Everywhere you go, everybody is now offering advice to the Democratic Party. It has become a scandal. President Museveni is busy offering counseling sessions to the Democratic Party. Doctor Obote from Zambia is offering counseling sessions to the Democratic Party. I am a member of the party and I am acknowledging it so we are very embarrassed by what has been going on that I do not know. So, I hope this weekend these warring factions will agree. 

However, hon. Patrick Musisi was not only for the Democratic Party. He used to talk to everybody whether they are NRM or whatever, and he listened. He used to talk to the FDC; he listened to them. He was a founder member of PAFO and he believed that the political parties that are in opposition should work together. These are things that made him a true leader.

Madam Speaker, it is for those reasons that we will never forget hon. Patrick Musisi. Obviously for the family the pain continues. In the nation people will continue missing him, but it is time for us to emulate some of these qualities, especially the diligence and discipline. It is said politics makes people indisciplined because no one is here to watch you. 

You can walk into the House and after one minute, you go to answer a telephone call. You do not even have to do any work in reality, and I understand that is why many members, when they leave Parliament, are in disarray because the world out there is a very hard taskmaster; you must really earn. The qualities that we need in a typical leader are the qualities that hon. Patrick Musisi had and they did not come by accident. He built them consciously. So to the widow and to the children, your father was a blessed man. Even as you weep, go home knowing that he was blessed. God gave him everything.

I witnessed yesterday a special prayer being said for him by those who were touched. He made relationships all over. Ultimately it is relationships that matter because when you are no longer honorable or when you are dead, somebody will come and say, “I am looking for a job. I am the son or daughter of hon. Patrick Musisi”, and irrespective of whether you are as different from your father as anyone can ever be, they will give you the job. Not on your individual merit but for the merit of your departed father. We will miss our Colleague. 
Madam Speaker, our condolences. I second the motion. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My appeal to you, honourable members, is that we should make this very brief. I do not want to have to call anybody to order on this sad occasion.

11.47
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Government I wish to convey our deep condolences to Mrs Musisi, the children and to the country upon the tragic death of hon. Patrick Musisi. Many people have made the point that the late Musisi was a reconciler; he was reconciling the different factions of the Democratic Party; but they have not pointed out the importance of his mediation role. Let me say that when parties are fragmented, they can cause political instability. When parties are fragmented, they can cause political instability. For example in 1966, when there was acute fragmentation and struggle within one political party, the leader of the party used the army to suppress the opponents and this partly contributed to the 1966 crisis.  

Furthermore, when parties face severe fragmentation, they will cease organising along issues and will focus attention on personalities. Additionally, fragmented parties will cease uniting ethnic and religious groups along issues. The overall consequence of fragmented parties is that they will undermine national integrations.

According to Matthew 5:9, “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.” The late hon. Musisi was a reconciler, has was blessed as a son of God. 

Secondly, I did not politically agree with the late Patrick Musisi but I admired the fact that he was politically predictable. In other words, he stood firmly for the principles of his party during the day, and at night, and it was possible to relate to him in a predictable manner. May we harness and institutionalize the practice of being politically predictable.

Thirdly, you have heard that he was enterprising as a businessman. He was also a good builder; many people tend to forget that one. Consequently, he was able to harness resources, which used to enhance the political integration of Uganda.  
Finally, for the bereaved, I wish to commend to you Psalm 23, especially verse 4, it reads: “Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me, your rod and your staff they comfort me.” May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. I beg to support the motion.  

11.51
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something about our brother here before us. He was a real brother to all of us. It is painful that we are talking good about hon. Patrick Musisi when he can no longer hear us or see all of us who are talking about him to know how good he was. We must thank God for hon. Musisi’s life and all that he enabled him to do during the only 50 years he has spent on earth.

I got to know hon. Patrick Musisi when we were campaigning in 2001. I met him and I really saw a confident man. When we were talking I got an opportunity to chat with him. He told me, “Rose, I am sure I am going to win the vote,” and we both agreed that when we reach Parliament we must work together, be brother and sister, and I thank God that we have ably done our work in Wakiso District together with hon. Patrick Musisi. (Applause).

Madam Speaker, who was hon. Patrick Musisi? My colleagues have talked about him. Hon. Musisi was a real honorable member not only in the status of an honorable member but also in whatever he said, in whatever he did, and in his personal character. He was such a calm man. Not at any one moment did I see stress over his face. He was an open-minded man; he always said what he felt was right and he was never driven into anything he thought was not right. So, hon. Patrick Musisi was never a double dealer.

He was a man full of passion in whatever he did, and he loved his neighbors, as the Bible says, just like he loved himself. And I give evidence of this in the way he loved the people of Wakiso District; the way he loved the people of his constituency. Although hon. Musisi was a multi-partyist, we never shared the same ideology, but he was never antagonistic. (Applause). Hon. Musisi always believed in dialogue and he never used coercion. Although hon. Patrick Musisi was a busy man, he was a businessman just like my colleagues have just pointed out, and he was a Member of Parliament, he was always here with us.

He was a family leader but hon. Musisi always had time for his constituency. He was a real representative. He set up a number of projects in his constituency. He built Mosques, he built Churches and he built schools, and he was a donor. His eminent contributions to poverty alleviation in Busiro South will always be remembered.  
Hon. Patrick Musisi was a father. He always advised us who were always near him on how we should behave, especially us the female Members of Parliament. I was always very close to hon. Musisi and I remember how he advised me to love my husband. I always told him that, “I love my husband so much”, but he emphasized it and always gave us tips on how to be successful wives despite our busy schedules. (Applause).
Just as hon. Mao has pointed out, he would encourage us to set up personal projects and not to depend on Parliament alone. He always emphasized having a “plan B”. He always asked, “What will you do after Parliament”? So, we commend hon. Patrick Musisi for his fatherly advice. He always gave us his personal experience from which many of us had a lesson to learn.  
As a politician, hon. Musisi had a political conviction and his involvement in political struggles is evidence of the love he had for his country. Our colleagues have just pointed out how he has struggled so much to ensure that he brings the Democratic Party together. Hon. Patrick Musisi loved his country. The country is going to miss this great son.  
He loved Buganda so much that he anxiously looked forward to debating about federo issues. We have missed a vote. I admired hon. Patrick Musisi - (Member timed out)- allow me. I am sorry but I have to say this. I admired hon. Musisi because he was a loving man. He loved his family and he loved his wife. I remember one time he told me, “Rose, whenever you get some money, even if you do not have enough, always spare money to go out with your husband for a honeymoon”. 
Hon. Musisi always went out and he told us that at least once a year he used to take his wife out for a honeymoon. How many African men can have that kind of spirit? (Laughter).
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honorable members!
MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I say this because it is a lesson for all of us to learn. You will agree with me that many men and women, when they acquire such status, they forget their spouses but hon. Patrick Musisi never forgot his spouse; he never forgot his family.
He was principled of character. He was never driven, as I said earlier on, into whatever he thought was not good. Hon. Musisi was so good. He was such a hardworking man. Our friends have told us how he was involved in business. He guided us on how to do business. Hon. Musisi will be missed by all of us. 

Allow me to say this to our dear Catherine. My dear Catherine, my sincere condolences on behalf of my family and on behalf of all the people of Wakiso District to your family. I want to tell my dear Catherine that although Patrick is gone, Catherine, you should take care. Continue from where he has stopped. This is not the end of your life now that Patrick is gone. The children need you and they have to live, so Catherine dear, take heart. The Lord you believe in will give you enlightenment and will strengthen you in whatever you will do until you meet Patrick in heaven because I am optimistic that Patrick is there with our Lord. 

I also want to ask Catherine that she should not dwell on the past. She should now look forward and ensure that the future moves smoothly. The children should emulate their father so that we still see Patrick through them. 

Finally, allow me to give a word of caution to all of you my dear brothers and sisters. Let hon. Patrick Musisi’s death be a lesson to all of us that when we hate, when we desire ill of others and when we desire death of others, they go fast but we shall follow sooner or later. I also want us to learn to acknowledge others when they are still alive. Death does not matter. What matters is how you will die and where you will go. Let us aspire to inspire before we expire so that there is what to be said or remembered about us. May the Almighty Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, today is the last day we are saying goodbye to our friend. Let us say a little so that many of us can do the needful; one minute each. 

12.01
MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, the bereaved family and colleagues, on behalf of Acholi Parliamentary group and myself, I express our shock at the death of our dear friend. Patrick used to sit here; he was my neighbour in Parliament and we shared a lot with him despite our different political thinking. 

He was a leader of very high quality, very high humility, honesty and simplicity. That is perhaps because we had the same background from Kisubi St. Mary’s College. I do not know but as part of his build Patrick was a true nationalist, peace loving and he would cherish social harmony - a rare quality in today’s cruel world. Today the world is so cruel and selfish, with corruption and the rest of it, which actually demeans humanity. Patrick, I believe and I know, was a fighter for righteousness in our society. We shared with him anguish most often on what has been happening in the North, in my constituency, where hundreds of lives are lost in a senseless war. We shared with him deeply particularly recently when eight women’s lips were cut in my constituency. We had a long session with him over that and I could see and feel that it was touching him right at the bottom of his heart. 

To the bereaved family, I would like to tell them that we share the loss of their family head. To his wife, we share the loss of her husband who was really a true patriot, a rare human being and a leader. We pray that the Almighty keeps his soul in an eternal peace. On behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group we shall we negotiate to find time and pay homage to the family upon the love Patrick has exhibited to us as a community. Thank you very much.


12.04
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion. Hon. Patrick Musisi will be remembered by the people of Bugabula North for many more years to come. Some time in September 2001, I made a trip together with my sister hon. Salaamu Musumba, Patrick Musisi and the late Amos Galiwango to Wobulenzi Field offices for the VEDCO Project. Following that visit today there is a VEDCO Program being executed in Bugabula County North and Bugabula County South constituencies, being funded by Ohio State University to the tune of US $3.8 million. It is for poverty alleviation. That was an initiative of Patrick Musisi and the people of Bugabula will remember that forever. 

When I made that trip with my sister, we were four people in the car. At that time my sister was driving and in the front passenger seat was Amos. Amos died in 2003. I was seated with Patrick at the back. Patrick is also dead so it is only the two of us left now to inspire the people of Bugabula. That is a very big challenge to us. 

I had the opportunity to be hosted on three different occasions on radio talk shows with Patrick. Twice on the Spectrum programme of Radio One and recently on the 9th April, on the Crossfire programme on CBS Radio. I discovered that Patrick was a very well read person. My high school headmaster, the Rev. Fr Damien Grimes, used to distinguish between studying and reading. In studying you do so for purpose of passing examinations, while in reading you use the information you have acquired to guide your life forever and ever. Patrick was much read in areas of law. He used to read law, he used to move with law books; he used to move with encyclopedias and dictionaries. 

If he wanted to make his point he would challenge you with an encyclopedia. Of course on all these talk shows he would come with encyclopedias and I would tell me that, “You know, those were written by human beings, you are also capable of writing your encyclopedia and giving your interpretations, so do not take them seriously”. But the fact of the matter is that he could take time to research and read. That is something that many of us do not do in this Parliament. I wish we could emulate Patrick such that when we debate we do so from a very well informed position. 
I do not want to talk about his efforts to reconcile the Democratic Party but I just want to say that the Democratic Party should take hon. Mao’s message very seriously because on Tuesday I met hon. Musisi, hon. Mao, hon. Mabikke, hon. Olum, Mzee Kitariko and some other people I did not know but I just believed that it was a DP affair. They were all walking out through the northern gate so I asked them, “Where are you going; reconciliation again”? And Patrick said, “We shall try until we reconcile”. He is now gone, where do you move to next? Much as I am on the other side, definitely an organised position gives us challenges and it is what we desire.

I, therefore, convey my most sincere condolences to the grieved family, to the Democratic Party, the people of Busiro South and the nation at large on behalf of the Parliamentary Movement Caucus, the Busoga Parliamentary Group, the people of Bugabula North and on my family’s behalf. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.09
CAPT. (RTD) CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, I thank you and hon. members of Parliament for having prayed for me because I was supposed to have passed away before the demise of hon. Patrick Musisi. I am very happy to be alive to pay tribute to him and to say farewell to him.

I would define Patrick as a patriot and a real friend, and I am happy to be alive to express these words. I call him a patriot because Patrick, as defined by Edward Abby, was able and ready to defend his country against his government where he saw things go wrong. I call Patrick a real friend because to many people Patrick would always walk in when the rest of the world was walking away. And although Prince Machiavelli says politics has no relations with morals, to those people who knew Patrick, I pay tribute to him because he is the man who could not forfeit his confidence or who could not forfeit the confidence of his fellow citizens. I think this made him die a respected and esteemed man.

Many words can be said about Patrick but Martin Luther once said that if a man has not discovered something that he will die for, he is not fit to live. I think Patrick had discovered what he was ready to die for because he was ready to die for democracy. 
That is why in all his endeavours he was trying to unite the Democratic Party. And I pay tribute to Patrick because he is the man who would stand with anybody that stood with him when he was right and part with him when he was wrong. Patrick would tell you, “This is right and that is wrong”. 

To me Patrick has passed the file test of a leader because he leaves behind what other men and women have conviction to carry on with. And to my fellow colleagues in the House, as we pay tribute to hon. Patrick Musisi, let us think of his family. Let us also think of the families of all other members and let us measure our words and our ambitions.

I am talking about that because I was in bed on Sunday when and I read the column of hon. Karooro Okurut in the Sunday Vision where she was talking of by-elections and was happy about replacing the quality MPs we have lost in the names of Bernadette, Ayume and Wapa. She was happy that Movement candidates were succeeding. I saw that she was not thinking about the quality of MPs we are losing. As we are paying tribute to Patrick, let us not think of which Movement MP we are going to bring now. Let us think of what the family needs and what the family thinks of us as Members of Parliament when we are writing or talking. 

Finally, to borrow the words of Mother Theresa, kind words can be short and easy to speak but their echoes are truly endless. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appeal to us not to disturb our friend; we have said he was non-combative. I do not want to hear about succession. I do not want to hear about succession because we are saying goodbye to our friend now.

12.14
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues and I want to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen friend, hon. Patrick Musisi. As you are aware, this is the corner where hon. Musisi used to sit and I want to pay tribute to hon. Musisi as a Parliamentarian. I want to take this opportunity to say hon. Patrick Musisi has been a regular attendant in this Chamber. Very often we have had a squeezed bench here and I felt so hurt when I received the news on Wednesday morning because on Tuesday we were scrambling to get seats here and I told him, “Please, push up”, and he said, “Extend the other side”. It is a tragedy. 

Hon. Patrick Musisi resided in Lungujja of Lubaga Division of Kampala District, and he has lived there for a long time. I want to take this opportunity to extend my condolences to the people of Lungujja, to the family, Catherine here and the children. I have had opportunity to share in the family happiness when he was giving away his daughter, among others, and I think it is a very big loss.

I also want to mention that hon. Patrick Musisi, in his Parliamentary work, has been a man who stood on his two feet on objective issues. Much as we did not have the same political thinking, he always insisted that his side must take his decision. I remember when we were taking the vote on the referendum recently, he came in a bit late and the whole bench was full. This time he had to run to the other side and I think everybody can remember him in that corner putting up his hand. I told him, “You know, we have finished voting so better vote on my side”, and he said, “That cannot happen”. And he has always cherished the political point of view he thought was right. May he be recognized, as many other people have said, for this kind of stand. 

I also want to talk about him as a devout Catholic. Madam Speaker, you remember that we have a Catholic Chaplaincy in this august House, which we started at the beginning of the Seventh Parliament. Hon. Patrick Musisi is one of the founder members of the Catholic Chaplaincy. We had a lot of challenges in establishing this chaplaincy. 

I remember at one time, myself and hon. Patrick Musisi, we had a very important assignment to go and talk to one of our very senior colleagues, the former Vice President. And in our discussion with her, she was challenging us, “How will you ensure that this does not paralyse the House?” And I remember the able word of hon. Patrick Musisi saying, “ Although we are politicians, we need a moral nourishment and we think that in the chaplaincy, we shall get this moral and spiritual nourishment.” I want to salute him for that! (Applause). 

In the same breath, we have had a lot of challenges as we look towards this year. I wish to report that the Parliament of Uganda, along with Kasese Diocese, is going to host the June 3rd celebrations of the Martyrs Day and this occasion is going even to be bigger because it is going to host all the bishops of the eastern and central African area namely; the AMACEA. As a co-host, we have a big challenge, we need to raise funds.  

Recently, we were drafting a small motion to bring on the Floor myself and hon. Mukabera and we sat together with others and we said, “How do you go about this?” And he said, “Let us write a motion, bring it on the Floor of the House so that colleagues will support us in this.”, and he had already mentioned that he was going to bring in a new car to support this cause.  It is unfortunate that we are going to host the June 3rd when Patrick is not with us. But we know very well that, as a devout believer, as a Catholic, he has gone to Heaven where we all aspire to be.

Madam Speaker, as a commissioner, let me wind up by saying that, we do yet have another brother of ours laying here. As a commission we still have a challenge, we need to go ahead and have what we call retirement benefits, pension benefits put in place. (Applause). This is what will assure the family, whom we can see now and whom we are mourning with, but maybe due to our very busy schedules, we may not be able to call on them again. So, I want to call upon my colleagues, that as we bring forth this motion of the pension scheme, as we bring forth all the emoluments of the Members of Parliament, the Executive will support us in this course. May the soul of Patrick rest in eternal peace and may we meet in Heaven!

12.19
MRS RUTH NVUMETTA KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here mourning hon. Patrick Musisi and a good number of people here are mourning hon. Patrick Musisi as a parliamentarian. I mourn hon. Patrick Musisi as a person who cherished where he came from, and that is the Ssese Islands. Patrick was very proud of knowing that that is where he comes from. And on behalf of the Ssese islanders, we mourn him because he also respected the natural leaders of these islands and he always knew that I represent them wherever they are. I would like to plead with the wife and the children to always take that ahead.  Your husband and your father loved the island, he knew where he came from, he cherished it, please do the same, because that is where you come from and if you do not know where you come from, you will never go ahead.

Patrick was well brought up, as most people have actually indicated, and this was seen in the way he behaved to most of us. And when you happen to share the same illness with a person, you share a lot.  Me and Patrick had a similar illness and we shared a lot about it, so we came closer because each one of us gave the other advice as to what to do in life. It is a pity that Patrick has gone very fast and has left us to learn quite a lot from him. May we be blessed at this time! God gives and takes away, may we learn from Patrick’s life! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.22
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I bring heartfelt condolences from the people of Teso to the family of our late colleague, to you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable Members of Parliament. In my neighbourhood today, there is somebody who is conceptually missing, that person lies before us today in state. Yesterday morning when I learnt about the sudden death of Patrick Musisi, I felt like the roof was falling on my head. I went into my privacy and wept, I really wept, Madam Speaker. But I wept for a person I had known for nearly four years.  

I met Patrick Musisi when I came to this Parliament as a Member of Parliament and I got attracted to him immediately. The very fact that we share the name, the very fact that he was a devout Catholic like I am, the very fact that he was human like I believe I am, made me get attracted to Patrick Musisi. Ever since then, we never referred to each other by name, but we referred to each other as namesake. So, our password would be “namesake” whenever we met. I found the late Patrick Musisi or my namesake a consistent and calm politician, as already been mentioned. Somebody who was prepared to woo you to his side.  He was non-antagonistic.  
The person, who lays before us, Madam Speaker and honourable members, was a likable person, a person of humble character, and a person who mentored many of us. Occasionally, he called me outside and said, “Look! My dear young brother, in this life you have got to see beyond the years just before you” and so taking from him, I was able to do a lot of things that could be attributed to that advice.  

Patrick Musisi, my namesake, was a hardworking person, he moved around this country carrying out his duties. You know, because of limitation of time I will cut this short. Above all, Madam Speaker, he loved God. A lot has been said about his contribution towards our chaplaincy, and I would like to stand here to testify that Patrick Musisi linked us as Members of Parliament with the Archdiocese of Kampala. I would be very unfair to the people of Teso if I did not say this; Patrick Musisi was a non-tribalist, he was a Ugandan indeed. And we the people of Teso experienced this at a time when my late departed namesake came to Teso and physically visited the camps in Teso.

Today, as we mourn as Parliament, I know the people of Teso are mourning for the demise of the late namesake. Many times Members of Parliament would ask for facilitation to go to the internally displaced people’s camps, but he did not ask for facilitation. He drove his car, he had associated with the bishops and clergy in Teso during the time when we were seriously in need. We believe that a friend in need is a friend indeed.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to have a few last moments with the late Patrick Musisi and this was on Tuesday. Somehow he was walking down from the 3rd floor as I was going to the 3rd floor of the South Wing of Parliament and I accosted him I said, “Look! My namesake, DP, seems to be falling apart, what is happening to the party as we go towards the political transition? I think there is a need for the party to get united and soon.” Patrick Musisi, my namesake, did assure me that in a matter of two weeks, the Democratic Party would resemble itself and ahead of the delegates conference- (Interruption)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, let us leave that.

MR AMURIAT:  May I just conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May his soul rest in peace.

12.28
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I stand here on behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, on behalf of the Madi people and on my own behalf. The late Patrick Musisi loved the church very much and he served it very diligently at all levels even as a Sabakirisitu (head of the laity). 

He has served the Lubaga foundation at various levels; he was always available at any meeting to develop the church. The late Patrick Musisi was very instrumental in establishment of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy in Parliament. He worked closely with the late Monsignor Obunga and this now reminds me of what yesterday we were discussing. My colleague Salaam Musumba was saying, ”You people are you not scared, for me I am scared stiff because in this Parliament when people die they decide to die in pairs.” People die in pairs, is this true, what are we going to do? We said, let us pray, and for us we believe that the late died shortly after Obunga, let that be the pair and we pray that nobody should die in this Parliament after Patrick immediately and we shall continue to pray for his soul for he has been instrumental in all the activities of the chaplaincy. Every time I met the late hon. Patrick, he would ask when are we having mass next, when are we having a retreat, what else he was so active that he wanted us to have activities after activities. 

He was instrumental in contributions and collecting contributions for the redevelopment of Namugongo.  He has been instrumental in contributing ideas about the celebrations of the Uganda Martyrs Day in Namugongo. Madam Speaker, the late Patrick was very virtuous, he had all the qualities the Catholic Church preaches; he was kind, he was open, he was selfless, he was a responsible person and he was very responsible with his family. Yesterday, we witnessed it at Lubaga when the association of the married couples gathered and said a special prayer for the late Patrick.

The late Patrick, as it has been said by many of my colleagues, would cut across all political divide. I attended many radio talk shows with the late Patrick. We would really argue for our convictions on radio but immediately after the talk shows we would walk out holding hands and saying, “Let us forget about that” parting each other, “let us forget about the differences on the radio but let us work together to build this country and thank you very much for raising the issues, which would strengthen me in what I am doing but also take what I have said very serious” and I would really miss Patrick for he gave good advice to all of us. Patrick, we will miss you! We gave our condolence message to the family and contribution from the chaplaincy yesterday. Just rest in peace, Patrick, till we meet you in Heaven!

12.32
MS SARAH NAMUSOKE KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like many others who spoke before, I too wish to convey my condolences and condolences of the people of Rakai District to the bereaved family. I came to know hon. Musisi during this Seventh Parliament and he advised me on many things. I remember him as somebody who carried himself as someone and there was always a peace around him. He was a friend of many and indeed as we have heard, he loved peace, hon. Musisi loved to help people. If you told him of a problem, he would give you advise, he would seek to assist you in any way possible.

Hon. Musisi, loved his family, he loved his wife, he loved his children and he loved and cared for his parents. I want to tell you that Patrick talked about you with honour and respect. Children, your daddy talked about you to us with pride and love.  

Madam Speaker, death is normal in a sense that it will happen to all of us although it shocks us every time it knocks at the door of any person. In fact, it is even in the Bible in Psalms 103: 15-16 it says: “As for man, his days are like grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more.” That is how we are as human beings; we are here for a moment and the next day we are gone. 

But also we often ask ourselves the question, which question I am sure the family and all of us might be asking ourselves at this moment, why Patrick, and why this time?  Again in the Bible there is an answer. In Isaiah 57: 1-2 it says: “The righteous perish, and no one ponders in his heart; devout men are taken away, and no one understands that the righteous are taken away to be spared from evil. Those who walk uprightly enter into peace; they find rest as they lie in death.”  

Madam Speaker, I want to believe that the Lord has decided to take Patrick at this moment for a reason best known to him. But maybe as the Bible says, he is being saved of the evil in this world. May we, and especially may the family be consoled that the Lord gives and he takes away at his own time. I personally pledge I pray for you Catherine and the children that the Lord will console you and take care of you.  May God bless his soul!

12.35
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mama Catherine, I rise as Chairman of Buganda Caucus and a Musese from Ssese Islands like your late husband. A lot of people did not know that Patrick was from Ssese Islands, but those of you who knew, who saw me greet him, he was and we used to greet like fishermen. Very hard, he is gone!  

Madam Speaker, I received this morning a letter of condolence from Kabaka Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the Kabaka of Buganda and this condolence message is in Luganda. But briefly it says that Patrick has made us very sad because in such a short time - may I be allowed to read it the way it is written?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether my Hansard will capture it. I do not know whether the Hansard will capture it in Luganda.    

MR LWANGA: We may miss it but it is okay. May I get permission, Madam Speaker? Thank you very much.
It reads:
“Hon. Tim Lwanga,
Ssentebe w’ababaka ba Palamenti abakikirira Buganda.

Tuwulidde amawulire ag’ekikangabwa ag’okufa kwa hon. Patrick Musisi, abadde akikirira Busiro South mu Palamenti. Kitalo ddala!

Omukiise oyo atusadde nnyo, kubanga mubbanga ettono lyamaze mu Palamenti yeraze ng’omuntu ow’obuvunanyiizibwa, alumirwa abantu bakikirira n’eggwanga lye.  

Tusaasidde nnyo Namwandu, abaana, n’abantu ba Busiro South.

Mukama abagumye mubuyinike buno.

Nze, 
Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II
Kabaka wa Buganda.”

Now this message, Madam Speaker, says it all. This was Patrick; in such a short time he made an impact on all of us. Patrick was a family man and we share a lot in children because I have children as well about the same age group. He loved Buganda, but not in a selfish way; he also loved Uganda and actually he shared with me once that he hopped to be President of this country one day, and I told him that I will be coming in 2011 we compete and we laughed it off.  He was a serious man and meant business most of the time.  

Madam Speaker, he was dependable. When we were negotiating the federo issues, we agreed as Buganda caucus that we keep quiet and do not mess up the negotiations and one of the Members of caucus made noise and Patrick was bitter he said, “We agreed, we agreed” that was Patrick, Madam Speaker. He was straight and consistent. In Patrick, we of the caucus saw a genuine human being. 

Madam Speaker, Patrick was smart he always dressed smartly; and whenever we commented on it, most of the time he would be talking to me and my cousin sister hon. Nvumetta Kavuma and he would say, “Your Dad taught me how to dress” because actually when he was young he got chance to live with the Kagando in Ssese Islands. We shall miss him in many, many ways. 
But one thing we must remember, when we have occasions like this one, Madam Speaker, why do we fight over issues, why do we fight, why do we fight. The DPs are almost shooting each other for what? Why do we not sit down and love each other, have a bit of love, a bit of love. We have got a list going around which I am happy to report, it is being signed by most of the Members of Parliament and when I checked last we had collected about Shs 5.0 million; we hope we will be able to collect about Shs 10 million and give it to the family because when the family loses the bread winner, it takes time for them to settle down and they need our help, honourable members of Parliament.

I want to leave a verse for the family. The verse I would want to leave for the family, Madam Speaker, is Philippians 4:13. Whenever you feel low and you feel like it is the end of the world, remember that verse it says: “I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.” He will give you strength.  May God judge his soul mercifully!

12.40
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South. Kamuli): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to pay special tribute to a special friend the hon. Patrick Musisi who was born on 18 August 1955 at Kitala village, Wakiso District.  The years I have known him it is like he was born in Namwendwa where I was born. He is the son of Elivania Nalongo Bayiga and Emmanuel Bugimbi Kagire who both live, and the family must be very happy to have born such a proud son to this country.  

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, our colleague who lies before us here attended schools and a special selection of schools by his parents, have turned him to us the way we have described him because it took the parents a very special selection. He started at St Donosio Kisubi Boys, at St Savio Junior School and also went through St Mary’s College Kisubi. I am sure the parents were thinking of creating a saint amongst us.

Hon. Patrick Musisi had a special legal language and many of you must have wondered where he got it. He studied for an LLB degree from Wolverhampton University in the United Kingdom and he was indeed planning to go and attend LDC so that he could practice.  So his contributions to this House and to this country came from a very wide spectrum of knowledge.  

Hon. Musisi as the name suggests, it suggests earthquake; actually his death the consequence of it were like an earthquake of scale of ten on Richter scale because since I was told about his death at 2.00 a.m. on the day he died, between then and in the morning I had lost two kilos.  The pain was so disastrous that I can only explain it to the disaster that can hit any place on that scale of ten on the Richter scale.

I want to remember Patrick Musisi as a gentleman.  There are very few people who pass that prescription in this world, and indeed he was a gentleman.  He was not anybody I would be scared of going in the lift with, never; and I am sure many of my colleagues would never.  He was not anyone that I would fear going for a trip with because I knew I was safe.  It never even crossed his mind; it never even crossed any person’s mind. I am sure our spouses were very comfortable with us taking a lift with him and that is a special tribute to Patrick Musisi my friend.  

Patrick Musisi to me was representation, the bright face of a Muganda.  He was everything that I thought and grew up to imagine a Muganda to be, and for this he deserves a special tribute.  He was a proud man, proud to be a Muganda; proud to be from Ssese Island, and we have very few proud Baganda these days.  So I pay special tribute because he was a special Muganda.  I cannot talk for a tribe, of course, but I can tell you that he fits that description as a special Muganda.

Patrick Musisi was a special representative, a special Member of Parliament for his people of Busiro South and for the people of Uganda. I bring special condolences from the people of Bugabula South who he also loved.  He took special time to speak on the radios of Busoga and also he had special friends from Bugabula South, Kamuli District and from Busoga.  

We are all sure that if there was a democracy test, Patrick Musisi would pass it because he was a true democrat; a true democrat by a description and for this we shall miss him at the time when we thought he was going to be a person of big things.  As a founder Member of PAFO, we had very beautiful selection of who he would be and he never let us down.  He never walked out on us; he never disappointed us.  So as true democrat he lives today and his legacy lives with us.

I have been searching in my wide knowledge of English and all those good words of Latin. I have looked at all the Philosophers to find a suiting description of my friend Musisi.  With all the pain in my heart, I have only found in the Lusoga Language an expression that could maybe appropriately describe the man we have lost. 

 I want to say that in Busoga, in Lusoga, we would say “Patrick taizikawo.” - you can never find a replacement for Patrick - and so we will continue to miss him as a great family man.  He is married to one wife, true to his religion, with six children from one address. There are no whispers and he has been happily married for 26 years.  As an admirable family man, I want to pay special tribute to him because those two are very rare in this country.  So as a family person, as a man who believed in the families, we must acknowledge that and pay special tribute to him.

I was one of the few political friends that had the honour of being invited at various family functions that he had. I want to confirm that, yes, Patrick’s family was one family; there were no different shades of families, different venues of families and so that attribute I hope can be emulated by the men of this country.

I want to thank you for this opportunity to pay this special tribute to my friend and my brother and I am sure his soul will rest in peace.  I thank you.

MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is a good opportunity for me to have moments of reflection on my knowledge of the hon. Patrick Musisi.  

On Wednesday, in the evening, it was after 5.00 p.m. he came and found me seated on the table outside there, and then because we have always challenged each every time we meet, he said, “You should say something differently” and this time I asked him, “How are the people you share a house with?” He laughed; I added, “How are the kanyamas?”  
I knew hon. Musisi Patrick’s family some time in 2001 around August when I changed residence. There was a little shop on the road going towards Natete.  We were looking for a place where we could do shopping and so we ended up in this shop. 

In this shop there was this woman always behind the counter, and there were these huge boys with heavy chests always serving in the shop.  Something about the boys kept telling me, “somehow you know these boys”, but I could not put my finger on it.  

It took a few months before I actually discovered that these were hon. Musisi Patrick’s children and the lady behind the counter was actually his wife.  From the time I knew, the resemblance on the faces of the kanyamas started showing, and I called them kanyamas from that time because if they were to take hon. Musisi Patrick’s height, they would be very big.  Catherine, you did a good job in reducing their size at least.  

It is a great family; I know them.  Every time the children were competing with their father about doing homework, about doing coursework, challenging each other and it is a family I admired.  The last time I asked him about his children, he started boasting to me how he had defeated them in coursework.  That is how they lived.  That is the reason he is going to be dearly missed by his children.

When I met his son this morning with the tears in his face he said, “I told Daddy to fight on, but he could not fight any longer.”  We are all sad that it has happened; it touches us; we share in the pain.  Everybody who has spoken, you can hear the pain in the voice.  The passion of the hon. Mao, of course, demonstrated it all and the tears in the voice.  We will miss him.  

But all is not lost, Catherine.  There is one man called God and his son is Christ, and he is the father of all orphans and a husband to widows.  Every time you feel weak, children and your mother draw strength from the Lord and know that in him you will have a renewal of strength.  We will all dearly miss hon. Musisi Patrick.  

All has already been said, I cannot say anything more, I just wanted to say I knew them as a family and it was a good family. The gap that has been created will take a long time to fill, and as a community who knew hon. Musisi Patrick, we should help the family fill that gap.  I support the motion.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand to support the motion and then I hasten to add that I thank God who gave us hon. Musisi Patrick. I also thank the parents who are both still alive, who gave rise to hon. Musisi Patrick and nurtured him. 

I thank the teachers, the wife, my sister, the children, my fellow colleagues, the Members of Parliament, and all Ugandans who have contributed in making hon. Patrick Musisi what he was.  

I will not repeat all the tributes that have been given to hon. Patrick Musisi or the words used because everybody here has agreed that indeed we have missed a colleague.  To us, particularly I, hon. Kikungwe and others, the Democratic Party, we have been close to him.  

On Wednesday we talked a lot and he had a lot of plans with us that even that very day of Wednesday we were supposed to meet here and finalize on those plans and then we help chart out a political future for the party and for the country, but God could not allow.

Madam Speaker, in a minute, because I know others also want to contribute, that man lying there has been selfless.  One time when we were touring the whole of Uganda trying to rejuvenate the party, we were on our way to Masaka road and he stopped his vehicle and said, “Let me check the tyres because recently somebody removed the screws of my tyre and I nearly died; and since I am transporting Members of Parliament, we double-check.”  So, that is the person who is lying there, who risked and even who cared for others.  

When they attacked his family, maybe because of political leanings, he told me, “Mukko” – he used to call me mukko –they attacked your children, but the Inspector General of Government (IGP) has called me. I am going to make a statement.  But whatever they do, that is my conviction.”  So, this is the kind of person we are with here today.
I thank you, Members of Parliament, very much for coming and giving him the last respects and the tribute.  

Mama Catherine, my sister, the children, I am happy that you are still around.  I know Daddy has gone, but we are going to be your shoulders to lean on; we are going to do whatever it takes to make his aspirations maybe become a success.  

Maybe some of you have come across the literal work of James Ngugi, maybe he is symbolizing the grain of wheat.  Let me hope his wishes and aspirations, his endeavours and struggles, will not go to waste.  He has left us with a challenge to put the party in order, to put the country in order.  But at the same time, we are not going to stop at that, to fight even for the pensions of your colleagues who are still alive.  He has gone, we are going to follow, and I wish him the best wherever he has gone.  May God rest his soul in eternal peace.  Thank you.  

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to support the motion and to convey our very deep condolence, first of all, on behalf of Lango Parliamentary Group of which I happen to be the Vice Chairman, and indeed on behalf of all the people of Lango.  

The late hon. Musisi Patrick was a widely travelled person, and therefore he was well known, and this is one of the attributes, which has endeared him not only to most Members of Parliament, but also to a lot of people of Uganda. 

Therefore, for the people of Otuke, the people of Lango as a whole, we have lost a friend.  Whenever I had anything small to ask for in form of contribution to help my displaced people, one of those who would come to my aid very quickly would be hon. Musisi Patrick

I interacted with hon. Musisi Patrick also at the level of the Old Boys of St. Mary’s College Kisubi of which he was a very active member, and together with him we were preparing for a 100 years celebration next year.  We have, therefore, missed a person who was not only contributing in terms of ideas, but also materially.

Finally, as a politician, I admired hon. Patrick Musisi my O.B. as we normally say together, because he shared with me three big ideals which I think every politician, truly Ugandans and a Member of Parliament should share: One of them is to see a united, peaceful and equitably developed Uganda. This ideal of a united, peaceful and equitably developed Uganda was high in the minds of many people, including my departed colleague.  

The last interaction I had with Patrick was on the day when we finished voting on the Referendum motion here on Thursday.  It was not the voting which devastated me and demoralized me, but they were the words used in this House, which demoralized me so much that when I walked out the only person who could comfort me was Patrick Musisi.  

I asked Patrick Musisi, I said, “Patrick, what is wrong with the leaders of this country who come to a national forum and use a selective part of our history to continue to divide the people, to continue to undermine reconciliation and to continue to hurt each other?”  I told, Patrick Musisi, I said, “Patrick, I do not know any area in Uganda, which has not suffered because of our bad history. Yet the emphasis of the history of this country seems to start in 1980 and end in 1985, whatever happened in 1971 to 1979 and whatever is happening now is not part of our history.” 

 I was so devastated by some utterances and I said, “Patrick what we do?”  He comforted me and said, “Honourable, I know how the people of Lango have suffered.  I know how the people of Lango are still suffering, do you know, forget about those leaders who think they can exploit people using lies and trust in God.  God put such leaders for a purpose but in the end God and the truth will prevail”. 

 I weep for my late brother hoping that from those words a better Uganda shall learn that from the true leaders will ensue a united, peaceful and equally developed Uganda using our history to unite the people.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Very briefly, as we pay tribute to this great son of Uganda and the continent of Africa, let me begin by recognizing the good speech, which the Speaker of Parliament gave at Lubaga during the service when we were remembering Patrick Musisi.  
It was a patriotic speech and without prejudice I would like to give it all the support and recognition.  

As we mourn Patrick Musisi, unlike William Shakespeare who once referred to the phenomenon of death thus, “Let death come when it wills”.  We cannot comfort Catherine and the family with the words of Shakespeare because death has to come. We pray that she gains fortitude at this difficult time. 

I knew Patrick as a liberator and as a fighter for freedom. On a number of occasions when he was on the talk shows on radio he did not fear to openly fight for the freedom of political detainees in Kigo.  On several occasions he was summoned, and the summons were just stopped there by CID because of his insistence that the political detainees in Kigo and safe houses be freed.  I would like to recognize that support he gave to the people who needed support.  

I am a Member of Parliament representing Lubaga South, I cannot forget to make the great contribution of Patrick Musisi towards the Good Samaritan Sisters now looking after the Bakateyamba, the aged, the sick, the handicapped without the support of this great son of Africa heaven knows whether those people would have survived. He did not leave long to see them go through the sufferance they are in today, but he always made a contribution almost weekly to ensure that those creatures of God were assisted.  We pay tribute to you because of that great duty you undertook.  

I would be unfair if I did not say anything about the commitment of Patrick Musisi in regard to his origin.  Patrick Musisi belongs to the Mamba clan; he was a devoted Muganda. 

I want to borrow the words of a distinguished political philosopher and a scholar of history in Uganda, namely, Prof. David Aputa.  He once defined a Muganda or the Baganda and he said, “They are humble; they are jolly; they fear to do wrong; they are God fearing; they are traditionalists; they crack jokes; they can be serious; they are dignified; Patrick Musisi was exactly that.  


Finally, I had the opportunity on Tuesday to communicate a small message to Patrick Musisi right from here. I usually scribble words of wisdom to colleagues in the House –(Applause)- I wrote to him a note. I said, “Patrick as we prepare to defend Buganda’s Regional tier why don’t we mobilize Members of Parliament from Wakiso and Lubaga division so that we create the semblance of Mengo District instead of Mengo Municipality. In so doing, we would strengthen the digits on which the kingdom traditional resources would lay and rest?  He wrote back and said, “Are you sure we can achieve that?”  I told him back that the likes of Lubaga South, Lubaga North, Kyadondo North, and Kyadondo South would make a semblance of Mengo District. 
Patrick Musisi said, “If you have made that proposal what is impossible?”  

Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to that great son of Uganda. I knew him as a fighter. I knew him as a joyous man. I knew him as a man with strong conviction capable of achieving anything without necessarily using arms. God bless him.

MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you Madam Speaker.  The late hon. Patrick Musisi has been a resident in my constituency in Lungujja parish staying in Ssendawula zone. We shall miss the late hon. Patrick Musisi. Hon. 

Patrick Musisi has been a propertied man. He was not a needy man and he provided for his family; and not only his family, he cared for others who needed to be assisted. I have interacted with him on a number of times. He one day asked me, “Tom, do you do this kind of thing?” I replied, “What do you do?” He said, “I do this, I do that, I do the other”. One day I met him in the bank and he was banking Ugshs. 50 million and I asked him, “Where do you get this money?” He said, “I am a hard working man” –(Applause)- and this is the man the family is going to miss. He never thought about himself alone, he shared with others regardless of tribe or religion. 

On behalf of the people of Terego in Arua, I would like to appreciate the fact that Patrick Musisi airlifted 12 Members of Parliament. I think honourable members, you were one of them, Angupale, she was one of them. Hon. Patrick Musisi paid their fare to Terego, Arua, to fundraise for a Church- (Applause)- so, he was a devout Christian. He was a devote Roman Catholic member like our Rt. hon. Prime Minister a devote Anglican Catholic –(Laughter)- and I would like to recognise the fact that even the Minister of Ethics is also a devout Anglican Catholic. 

My elder brother the late Bishop Misayiri Kawuma said, “Life and death are ours but we cherish life most and we forget about death”. Many of us here think of these two as sisters and brothers. Life and death are ours and we know that one day life came but it will have to go away.

My motto in life, which is in Latin, ‘noes est mutaema’ - that we change and change. Patrick has changed and so suddenly he has done so. I last talked to him on Wednesday at 4.00 p.m. and now he is no more. On behalf of Members of Parliament whom I represent, NEC in Kampala District, I would like to say that God rest his soul in peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members we have all agreed that hon. Musisi was a devout Catholic and we would like to give him time to get all the last rights as required under his religion. I know that many people wanted to speak but I have delayed the family by 20 minutes. 

So, I would like to just announce that hon. Janat Mukwaya has sent us a message; hon. Latif Ssebagala has sent in a message from the USA; PAFO has sent in a message and will contribute Ugshs 50 million to the burial arrangements. Please let me appeal to you honourable members that we allow our colleague to go and get the last rights and to give time for the family to travel.  I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

National Anthem (One Verse).

(Exit of the late Patrick Musisi) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for attending this Session. The House is adjourned to Monday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 1.22 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 16 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


 

