Thursday, 12 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like to notify you of a problem. Following a change of switch for our standby generator, it is now unable to load. So, if we have some difficulties with lighting and so on, I will ask you to bear with us. Over the weekend the technicians will be working to rectify it. So by next Monday there should be no problem but today things are slow. Please, bear with us. 

Secondly, I would like to inform you that in the public gallery there are 15 students from Makerere University’s Mass Communication Department. They are here to listen to the Parliamentary proceedings as part of their Public Affairs Reporting studies. Students, you are welcome to Parliament. (Applause).

The third announcement is that on a very sad note, I regret to inform you of the sudden and untimely death of hon. Patrick Musisi, Member for Busiro South in Wakiso District, which occurred during the night of Wednesday, 11 May 2005 at his residence in Lungujja, Kampala. The programme for his funeral is as follows:

The body has been to Mulago for embalming. At 2.00 p.m. the body will be taken to Lubaga Cathedral for the Requiem Mass. The Mass will begin at 4.00 p.m. this afternoon and by 6.00 p.m. he should be returned to his home at Lungujja. On Friday morning, tomorrow, the body will be brought to Parliament for viewing at 9.00 0’clock; and signing of the condolence book. 

At 11.00 0’clock we shall convene for a special session of Parliament to pay tribute to our colleague. At 1.00 p.m. the cortege will leave Parliament for his country home at Mpala, Nkumba, near Entebbe where there will be another requiem mass at 2.30 p.m. He will be buried at 4.00 p.m. So I would like, as the Basoga say, to ask you today to press your hearts and do some work and tomorrow to come back and pay tribute to him since we have put aside a special time for the late honorable member. Press your hearts and work.

2.35
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. May I get guidance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business on matters pertaining to the integrity of this august House and our financial situation? I read with great consternation today’s papers and not only is it in the papers but also most of my colleagues have heard from the head of state that he would be giving Shs 10 million to Members of Parliament. I do not know in what capacity he will do so but allegedly it is for the purpose of community and constituency development. 

The reason I am seeking –(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, before you go very far on this matter, this House discussed the matter, and the proposal was made by the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. Why do you not wait until the budget time and discuss it? You members are the ones who asked for it and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs made a proposal to the Government. So, what is there to discuss, hon. Awori?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was really not seeking a debate per se, but guidance from the Prime Minister who happens to be the right hand person of the President in this august House. When I see a news item contrary to the spirit of the matter, then I have a right to request for guidance. Do I believe what I heard in the House or do I believe what was allegedly passed on from my colleagues to me and through the media? Does he have the kind of money to pay me? 

Madam Speaker, I go by what you are interpreting and I think your ruling is very correct. I go by your ruling but this other report causes me concern. Is he bribing us? No, I have a right to that money the way you have put it but when I see in the papers: “President gives MPs Shs 10 million”, in what capacity does he give me money?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, the Parliamentary Commission should report on that during the budget session. Let us leave it. No, you leave the papers. The Parliamentary Commission will report on your pension.

2.39
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): As we go towards the last lap of our stay in Parliament, a few good things seem to be coming up. One of them is this development fund. I can assure you if it comes in time for the next budget, you will see most of our faces here in Parliament. 

However, the issue of our pension is also something, which we would like to have good news on, like this constituency development fund. Our colleagues who happen to have a very powerful caucus to discuss some of these things, please, this is another matter, which you should push so that it comes through. You never know, some of us may congratulate you properly when you go through with it. Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, I think you are seeking to undermine the Speaker of this House. This is the matter the Parliamentary Commission has been handling; even this morning we had a meeting over it. When the final stages – do not insult the Speaker, he is doing everything possible to get you that pension. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker and honorable members, section 89(8) of the Local Governments Act, 1997 requires the Minister responsible for Local Governments to lay before Parliament the reports of the Local Government Public Accounts Committees. In March this year I laid 157 reports before this House. I now wish to lay before Parliament 94 reports of the Public Accounts Committees of the following local governments as required by the provision of the Local Governments Act referred to above. 


The districts are: Adjumani District, 2003; Bushenyi District, 2003; Busia District, 2005; Hoima District, 2003; Kabale District, 2003 and 2004; and Kampala District, 2003, 2004 and 2005. Kamwenge District, 2003; Kanungu District, 2003 and 2004; Katakwi District, 2003; Kibale District, 2003, 2004 and 2005; Kisoro District, 2003 and 2004; Kitgum District, 2004 and 2005; Kumi District, 2003 and 2004; Kyenjojo District, 2003; Lira District, 2004; Masindi District, 2004; Mayuge District, 2004; Mbale District, 2003; Mbarara District, 2004; Moyo District, 2003; Mubende District, 2003 and 2004; Nakapiripirit District, 2004; Nebbi District, 2003 and 2004; Ntungamo District, 2003 and 2004; and Pader District, 2003 and 2004; Pallisa District, 2003 and 2005; Rukungiri District, 2003 and 2005; Sironko District, 2003; Soroti District, 2003; and Tororo District, 2003. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Minister. They are committed to the Local Government’s Accounts Committee for scrutiny and a report.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, it appears that hon. Aggrey Awori would like to become the Minister of Works –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is well-establish practice in this august House that a person who is supposed to make a statement or answer a question should be present and should oblige to the rules of this august House. When you called for a statement from the minister, I did not see one. So, I rose to –(Laughter)- to express concern that once again, for the nth time, the ministers have defied the procedure of this august House. 

In the process of me standing up, the Rt hon. Prime Minister got up, probably to say something on behalf of his colleagues. Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, in order to imply that in expressing of concern over the poor behaviour and the conduct of the minister in this august House I was intending to apply for a job in his Cabinet as the Minister of Works? Is he in order to imply such nefarious references against my name?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the speed at which you shot up after I had called the Minister of Works was so fast that it indicated that you are going to say something on behalf of the Minister of Works. (Laughter).

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is a propitious answer or ruling. I wanted to apologize on behalf of the Minister of Works because as you know, the statement was ready and yesterday. In fact he wanted to submit it yesterday but the contingent element is always ubiquitous. I will find out what has happened, and to err is human. I wish to apologize on his behalf and I shall find out what has happened. I thank you.

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, it is a well-known fact that hon. Nasasira has been Minister of Works, Transport and Communications for ten years. Therefore, he should be well acquainted with Parliamentary obligations. The clarification I am trying to seek from the Prime Minister, is this not a propitious occasion for the minister to come and address Parliament? And should the minister be allowed to waste our time or should we call for the appropriate Article? (Laughter).

MR MWANDHA: Yesterday you asked the minister to distribute his statement. I remember you saying so yesterday. The minister said the statements would be put in members’ pigeonholes. 

I do not know whether colleagues have got these statements from their pigeonholes, but I smell a rat. There must be something about this particular matter, which the Minister of Works is trying to avoid. Because if the Prime Minister is not aware where the Minister of Works is when the minister is supposed to make a statement to this House; in fact even the deputy is not here and the statement promised is not with the members. 

Do we take this lightly? Is it not a matter of trying to dodge responsibility when in fact the country would like to know exactly what happened about this most unfortunate accident? So, Madam Speaker, I smell a rat.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what to make of this. Let us move on to the next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker and I have been under attack over this matter for a long time. Yesterday I informed you that it would be on the Order Paper so let us proceed. We are also expecting an answer from the Government.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the Ministry of Finance are ready, willing and able to supply this House with our response to the report that was submitted to this House by the Committee on National Economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am calling upon you to do.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give a statement that responds to the report of the National Economy submitted to this House in December 2004. In submitting this statement I will follow the structure of the committee’s report and I will place emphasis on the recommendations of the committee. 

Let me also mention that the statement that I am going to give is an abridged version of the longer and more detailed one that was issued to the House on the 9th of March 2004, which I believe the House did receive, read and internalise. 

I start with economic growth. The committee expressed concern about the overall rate of economic growth in the past ten years and the rate of per capita economic growth, which it cited as being 2.5 percent and considered low. Madam -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for obliging me to raise a matter of procedural concern. My honourable colleague for the purpose of Hansard, this is supposed to be a ministerial statement yet your statement here says it is a response. If it is going to be a ministerial statement, shall we treat it under rule 37 or shall we take it that this is a response to the concerns raised by the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy? Is it a response or is it a statement? We have to know under which rule to handle the matter.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not know what the honourable member is referring to, but this is a response and I request the House to treat it as such. 

Per capita growth of 2.5 percent was considered by the committee as being low. That indeed would be low. However, the figures we have, which are supplied by the Bureau of Economic Statistics Census Report of 2002, the per capita income grew at an average of 3.7 percent per annum between 1992 and 2002. And a recent World Bank study, that is the country’s economic memorandum, has put Uganda among the top 15 fastest growing economies in the world.

However, the committee correctly notes that per capita income is lower than the average GDP growth rate of about six percent per annum. The per capita growth rate is lower because our population is rapidly growing at a rate of 3.4 percent per annum. This means that while we are producing more each year, we have more people to share the increase in goods and services. Our standard of living as a country has been steadily going up because the per capita growth rate is positive. If this were not so our standard of living, on average, would have been failing. This is of course good news. But the major challenge remains to accelerate the rate of growth so that we can get out of poverty even faster.

On income distribution, the committee expressed worry over the way that the income growth is distributed. The committee did make recommendations to government to develop a redistribution policy but it does not give facts and details. We have no objection to progressive taxes in principle, which aim to tax the rich more than they tax the poor. This is one of the reasons why graduated tax is being phased out since they seem to hit the poor the hardest. However -(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: I have two responses from the Ministry of Finance, one dated 9th March this year of our Lord, by hon. Dr Ezra Suruma - I have it and I have been keeping it. I also have this one of 27 April 2005 and they have different content. Can I be clarified on which one I would follow, because both of them are from the Minister of Finance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, which is your up-to-date response?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, both of them are from the same source but more importantly, I did inform this House and if the honourable member were actually in this House when I started my address, he would have noted that I informed this House that this statement I am giving now is an abridged version of the longer document that had been submitted to the members earlier. I told this House that I believe they had time to read and internalise the earlier document, but this is a summary of the longer document. I am on record for having said that. So, if you will allow me, Madam Speaker, I hope the member is well clarified. Can I proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are all the same, then there is no problem. The minister says that the April one is a summary. Proceed.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you; and what I have said is a point of fact. 

I was submitting on the income distribution and I was saying that whereas we have no objection to progressive taxes in principle, these as you know aim at taxing the rich more than the poor. We should bear in mind that the maximization of economic growth is best brought about by increasing incentives. For the time being emphasis must be put on producing more income and more wealth rather than on taking income from one group to give to another growth. Economic justice has its place but economic justice without growth will make all of us poor. Indeed even the socialist countries, which in the past espoused the policy of “from each according to his ability and to each according to his need”, are now concentrating on growth now and fair distribution later.  

The other point that was raised was monetarization of the rural areas. Madam Speaker, the committee did recommend that we increase monetisation of the economy from the current 80 to 90 percent. But it does not make a convincing case that a fully monetised urban dweller is necessarily better off than a less monetised rural citizen. 

For example, the Bureau of Statistics reports that 86 percent of our people in rural areas own their homes while only 30 percent of the urban dwellers own their homes. Are the 70 percent of the urban people who rent better than those who own and live in their own homes? In the developed countries many families dream of owning their own homes one day. Many spend an entire lifetime working and paying 30 to 40 year mortgages just to own a home. It is a serious economic error to equate monetisation with wealth and welfare. After all money is merely a medium of exchange and a unit of account, it is not actual wealth.

Concerning the improvement in recording the economic activity in the so-called “gray economy”, we shall, beginning next financial year, start to establish a rural reporting system or community information system. This will substantially reduce the unrecorded economic activity and improve data accuracy and data availability for the whole economy.

On agriculture, Madam Speaker, the committee expressed deep concern over the agricultural sector and made some recommendations for its improvement. Many of these concerns have been well taken and we agree to report that some of the policy changes, which are underway, will actually address what the committee was concerned with. For example, we have articulated a plan to increase micro-credit for agricultural input to rural households. This will require increased support to farmers and farm organizations in terms of extension, creation and management of micro credit organizations and marketing co-operatives.  

Additionally, both the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture and NAADS programmes are being evaluated to determine their effectiveness. Considerable attention is being given to all entrepreneurs in the agricultural sector. For example, funds have been provided, or will be provided in the 2005-2006 budget, to clear all arrears for seed to cotton ginners and to other providers of seed and seedlings. Our attitude is to do everything possible to boost the productivity and income of our farmers. In this regard I believe that the views of the committee and those of government are in substantial agreement.  

The committee made a study of these selected sectors: transport and communication, energy, health and water. Madam Speaker, I wish to propose that the issues raised in regard to these sectors be answered in detail by my colleagues the heads of ministries that are responsible for these sectors. This will allow us time to deal with some fundamental issues that are mainly the core function of the Ministry of Finance. However, let me mention that in the paper we distributed to Parliament on 9 March 2005 we included details of some of these activities especially in the energy and water sectors. 

On some selected topics like privatisation, the committee did recommend a conscious and careful analysis of all privatisation to avoid mistakes, losses and fraud. This we agree with.  

The committee further recommends investigation of the Nytil transaction and payment of interest by the buyers who have not fully paid. A request has been put to the Privatisation Unit to provide us with the report on the Nytil transaction, which we shall present to Parliament at the earliest opportunity. Of course if Parliament wishes to investigate the matter, it is in their purview. As for payment of interest concerning debt by buyers of parastatals, I expect that the terms of the contract must be observed by all parties and where repossession is inevitable so be it. 

On employment, the committee’s emphasis on the importance of employment is fully shared by government. The employment policy of government is before Cabinet and will undoubtedly come to Parliament after Cabinet has cleared it. Needless to say, this is perhaps at once the most difficult and most important single policy economic issue. Employment means personal income. Personal income means access to all the material well being that money and wealth can buy. It is, however, important to caution members against equating employment with wage income. Most Ugandans are self-employed. What we should aim for is higher incomes through higher productivity and access to markets for our people who are in self-employment. For the reminder, wage employment is of course essential. 

Regarding human resources classification, which the committee requested, some of the data is available in the Census Report, 2002-2000. Madam Speaker, let me hesitantly add here that the Census Report of 2002 was circulated to members in the pigeonholes. All members received these copies but in due coarse a copy will formally be laid on the Table before this House on which the members can pronounce themselves.

On prices, under this heading the committee deals mainly with the conduct of the financial sector. Presumably the headings refer to the exchange rates and interest rates. The committee recommends that government should not extend financial services to districts, which do not have these services. Government has withdrawn from commercial banking and cannot tell private banks to go here or there. However, government’s policy of promoting micro-finance services to rural areas is an attempt to assist areas, which do not have access to banks.
Regarding the physical policy, government is keen to lower the cost of public administration. But the solution could lie more in increasing revenue collection faster than public administration grows. This might reduce public administration as a percentage of gross domestic product. It is essential to bear in mind that governance, including democracy and elections, are the rock-bed of stability. In a universe where the natural order is for chaos to tend to be maximum, order and stability are expensive but chaos is of course much more expensive. The committee’s recommendations for outreach micro-finance to every sub-county and for the money laundering Bill are all underway. 

On the exchange rate, the committee did recommend that government should regulate the inflow of donor funds and that Bank of Uganda should be cautious in its foreign exchange intervention in the market so that it does not hurt exporters. This is in line with our view that aids funds should not - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, can I ask you to either switch off the telephones or get out of the Chamber? There are telephones on either side, please, if I hear any other telephone ringing, I will arrest that telephone. (Laughter).

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was saying that the committee did recommend that the Government should regulate the inflow of donor funds and that Bank of Uganda should be more cautious in its foreign exchange intervention in the market so that it does not hurt exporters. This is in line with our view. We agree with the committee that aid funds should not destabilize the exchange and interest rates. We shall, therefore, continue to exercise caution so that we maintain a stable micro economic framework consistent with high investment and high economic growth.

On international trade, the committee was concerned with the imbalance in trade with imports significantly in excess of exports. Consequently the committee recommended that government should provide support to exporters. This is fully in line with government policy. Government does not for example tax exports, and the upcoming export processing zones are also intended to boost exports.  
Additionally, the export credit guarantees on non-traditional exports have dramatically raised these exports. We shall be pleased, Madam Speaker, to receive further suggestions on this important programme.  

On debt, we do share the committee’s concern that government should borrow for productive sectors only and not for consumption, and that government should reduce the rate of indebtedness to manageable levels. The idea of a debt strategy is clearly prudent and the ministry has submitted to Cabinet a debt sustainability plan. We also agree that capacity building and technical assistance components and grants should be reduced noting, however, that these proportions are the result of hard negations in which Uganda does not often have a superior strength.  

On the office of the Auditor-General, Madam Speaker, the powers and the independence of the Auditor-General are the subject of constitutional review and we shall support all efforts to increase the independence and integrity of this important office.  

On poverty, the committee does acknowledge that Uganda made significant progress in reducing poverty during the last 20 years. It also recognises that we still have a long way to go. It recommended strong efforts to invest in productive ministries especially agriculture, and urges formation of well-managed programmes to assist the peasants and promotion of equitable income distribution. These recommendations are substantially in accord with the strategies we have announced and so we believe that the focus of Parliament and the focus of the Government are fundamentally in harmony.

In conclusion, we share a fundamental, economic vision of a Ugandan citizen who is educated, skilled, employed and capable of participating in the creation of food security and effective health services, good housing with power, clean water and sanitation. That citizen should live in secure borders and in a society that is clean, law abiding and democratically governed. These are the efforts that we think both Members of Parliament and government should support. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

This abridged statement should be read side by side with the statement that was provided in this House earlier. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we came to the discussion of the national economy we were anxiously waiting for a ministerial statement. So, let us receive that and then come back to this debate. Let us have the Minister of Works. So we differ this for 45 minutes. 

MR AWORI: Procedure, with your permission, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, what rule have I violated?

MR AWORI: It is a matter of the Order Paper and I do agree with you that we have conveniently amended it. However, the purpose of amending it was to accommodate a minister who has come to Parliament late, and I think we should register our concern and disgust in his presence. We have changed our Order Paper because he is not attending to the work of Parliament seriously. We need to register that in his presence and perhaps in his statement he can explain why he is late for the second time in the same week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I hope you will explain why you were not here at the agreed time. Let us have the statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.12 
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am not late for the second time in the same week. I do not know where hon. Aggrey Awori keeps his roll call but I was here yesterday -(Interjections)- no, by the way honourable members, ministers and the Leader of Government Business are always in touch with the Office of the Speaker on matters to do with the Order Paper. I knew yesterday that we were going to start with the second item on the Order Paper and then come to my statement, and I consulted the Office of the Speaker about it. 

Secondly, today I did -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, leave that. Just proceed with the statement.

MR NASASIRA: I wish to apologize for the hitch of delay because I was meeting – for today I wish to apologise for coming late because I was meeting with the International Maritime Organisation’s people who are leaving and are trying to help us in rescuing this ship, so I wish to apologise.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to make a ministerial statement with respect to the wagon ferries’ accident of the 8th of May 2005.  

The Uganda Railways Corporation was established under the URC Statute No. 13 of 1992, to operate railways services on commercial principles. In August 2001 Cabinet approved the Railway Sector Strategy and Privatisation Implementation Plan and brought URC on board for privatisation. Under privatisation, URC activities are supervised by the line ministry, which is my ministry, and the Privatisation Unit. 

In September 2002, URC Privatisation Technical Committee comprising officials from my ministry, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Reform Utility Unit, two directors from the URC board, and the Managing Director of URC, was formed to steer the privatisation process, monitor the corporation and report to the URC Policy Coordination Committee, which comprises the Minister of State, Privatisation, and myself.

In April 2004 the Divestiture Reform and Implementation Committee, DRIC, approved the URC divestiture action plan. 

The URC has three wagon ferries namely Kabalega, Kaawa and Pampa. The two wagon ferries Kabalega and Kaawa, were involved in an accident on the 8th of May 2005 at about 3.30 a.m. near Kuye Island at that location, which I have put in my statement showing south at the Equator, and east, on page 1.

Let me now give a brief description of the accident. Who were the crew of the vessels? The captain of MV Kabalega was Mr Katumwa Gerald, with Mr Charles Agiru and Mr William Mugisa as the first officer and acting second officer respectively. At the time of the accident second office W. Mugisa was in charge of navigation, having started at midnight on Saturday, 7 May 2005 and would have ended on Sunday morning, 8 May 2005 at 4.00 a.m. 

The captain of MV Kaawa was Mr Albert Ocaya, with Mr Sam Kyabukulu and Mr Kariisa Stephen as first officer and second officer respectively. At the time of the accident acting second officer Kariisa Stephen was in charge of the ship’s navigation. There were also other crew members of about 25 persons on each ship providing various services on board.  

The details of the accident: MV Kabalega left Mwanza for Portbell at 1700 hours and was loaded with 21 wagons of wheat grain for M/S Bakharesa. The captain, Mr Katumwa Gerald, who was in charge of the operations at departure from Mwanza, confirmed that the vessel was in sound condition.

Mr Mugisa William, first officer, took over watch from captain at 00:00 hours, as I said already, and was shown the vessel position and route. MV Pamba, which was sailing to Mwanza, passed MV Kabalega at a separation of about 11 knotical miles. Behind MV Pamba was MV Kaawa.

The two ships, MV Kabalega and MV Kaawa, due to a possible change of course, came too close and collided. This happened at about 3.30 a.m. on the 8th of May. Details on the change of course will be investigated to find any errors in navigation.  

What did our people try to do to save the crew and the cargo? All the crew from MV Kabalega was evacuated to MV Kaawa. Communication by the captains with Kampala Control office and Mwanza failed, but they picked Kisumu at around 7.35 a.m. 

The safety of MV Kaawa was in doubt. Therefore, MV Pamba, which was also in the waters, was called to the rescue and tow Kabalega. It was eventually decided that Pamba sails back with the rescued crew to Portbell and to get the necessary assistance to salvage MV Kabalega. Kabalega, however, finally sank at 11.25 a.m. at Kuye Island at that position, which I have given you in my statement.
Kampala Aeroclub and Flight Training Centre provided an aerial search and rescue for the two ferries, which had collided. The UPDF provided a helicopter, which assessed the needs for the accident ships. The Uganda Police, URC management, UPDF Marine base department, the Presidential Guard Brigade, the UPDF Air Base Brigade and the CAA provided support during the rescue exercise. 

The National Lake Rescue Institute provided rescue speedboats, which escorted MV Kaawa up to Portbell, to avoid unlikely mishap from the accident site.

I take this opportunity on my own behalf and on behalf of the Government to commend these organizations for the co-operation and efforts made to save the vessels and the lives of the crew during that difficult moment.  

I would like now to tackle the loss and damage. Loss and damages include the sunken MV Kabalega with wagons and containers; damaged MV Kaawa; the lost cargo and the lost revenue from the ship operations. The loss also include the under water survey of the position and possibly of recovering the sunken Kabalega. 

The preliminary estimates are as follows:
1. The ship that sunk is estimated at US $6,568,772. 
2. 20 URC wagons are estimated at US $1,258,616.
3. One Tanzania Railway Corporation wagon estimated at US $25,000.
4. The 17 containers, each 40 feet, which belonged to the shipper and are estimated at US $25,500. 
5. There were 840 tonnes of wheat estimated at US $294,000.
6. The repairs of Kaawa are estimated at US $30,000; and
7. The under water survey of the sunken Kabalega is estimated at US $17,000 but as I said when I was expressing my apology, we were in a meeting discussing this matter with the International Marine Organization and they have promised to send us some people as support. So, this cost is expected to go down.  

On the insurance of the workers, cargo and vessel, all URC employees, including those on marine vessels, are covered by workman’s compensation insurance policy. 
The cargo on URC marine vessels and trains is insured by the owners of the cargo up to the point of destination. 

With respect to the insurance of the ship, a lot has been said here and in the newspapers. Following the interviews we held at Portbell, we have since got more details from URC. On the 8th of September 2003 URC advertised in the press for the insurance of these vessels. Seven bids were received and opened on the 16th of September 2003. Their contract committee evaluated these bids, forwarded the evaluation to the board and eventually in March 2004 the board awarded the tender to M/S Liberty Brokers at a premium of US $472,416. 

You will have to change the arithmetic on page 5 because it does not add up. I queried it with the URC as well but they have not sent me a clari5fication yet. Those were the installments paid on the said dates as on page 5, and we will have to harmonize the figures to determine whether they paid US $304,421 or US $304,000 only. There is a discrepancy of US $421. I will clarify on it at the end.

In the meantime M/S Liberty Insurance Brokers Ltd had changed to M/S Alexander Forbes Ltd. The insurance was with Liberty Ltd, then eventually they were taken on under the company with which they combined. When M/S Alexander Forbes Ltd took over, they notified the cancellation of the policy on the 1st of December 2004. This policy should have been valid up to the 13th of May this year. 

There was an impression created that the boats had not been insured. The problem is that the insurance was cancelled in the middle, having served for some time. The reason for canceling it by the new owners of the insurance company was that the ferries insured were in breach of the warrant they contained in the policy of the insurance. The reasons given were that the vessels were not maintained in class and not on the Lloyds register. In other words, it is this firm, Lloyds Ltd, which assesses the ships and classifies them. 

After giving them the class, then they also certify their maintenance. Now Lloyds were querying the class and the maintenance certificates. So, Uganda Railways Corporation has been exchanging letters with this company, first of all to reimburse part of the money they had already been paid. The URC is trying to solve it internally or in court and it was in the process of doing that when this accident happened. There was an insurance policy that had been agreed on to last until May 13th, but it had been cancelled in December and the arguments that were still going on, and then the accident happened.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, why are you intimidating the minister? Proceed, Mr Minister.

MR NASASIRA: What is the way forward? The Kampala-Portbell-Mwanza route to Dar-es-Salaam will continue in operation. Uganda’s strategic route to the sea will continue as one of the strategic routes to the sea, and the following measures will be taken to sustain operations on the route:

1. Inspect, maintain and ensure that MV Pamba resumes operations. That is the third ship, which was not involved in the accident. 
2. The URC has already got a team of divers from the Kenya Port Authority on site to locate the ship and assess the damage to MV Kabalega, which sunk. 
3. M/S Alpha Logistics from Tanzania will make a detailed survey and advise on the methodology of how to salvage the ship.
4. We contacted the International Maritime Organization through our High Commission in London and their Chief Executive sent the regional representative, whom we met and had discussions with today. He is based in Nairobi and they have now offered to give us assistance in the recovery of the vessel. 
5. I am in the meantime consulting with the Attorney-General to set up a commission of inquiry to come to the root of this accident.
6. Some importers have been advised to re-route some of their cargo to Mombasa port; and 
7. To increase on the Dar-es-Salaam route the roll-on, roll-off operations. That is, the remaining ship, MV Pamba, will now operate four trips per week instead of three. Under this operating arrangement, cargo shall be driven off at arrival in port, stored and another train loaded for dispatch within two hours. They will not have to wait as if there are still three ships.
8. The repairs of MV Kaawa, which was involved in the accident and is back at Portbell, are starting immediately and the estimated period for repairs is one month. M/S Southern Engineering Company of Mombasa, which has been repairing URC vessels, will do this work.
9. We are also consulting our counterparts in Tanzania and Kenya to see how we can use their wagon ferries. Kenya has MV Uhuru and Tanzania has MV Umoja. These arrangements will be made among the three countries’ railway corporations.

As I conclude I want to thank all colleagues who expressed their sympathy to us through me. As you were informed, last Tuesday I was on another assignment in Munyonyo but my colleague who was here promised that I would give this statement. This accident has remained a shock to all of us. I personally have not yet comprehended how, on a wide lake like Lake Victoria, three ships of the same company, with radio communication, knowing their routes, can collide. So, I am as perplexed and disturbed as you and the whole country are. 

However, I want to assure you that we will get to the bottom of this. We will find the cause and that is why I thank all of you who expressed their sympathy to me. Unfortunately, when I read the papers the following morning, as we were grieving I saw a paper reporting that my honorable friend, hon. Awori Aggrey, came here with an axe to chop off my head. I will just pray for him as we pray to recover this ship. 

When we have surveyed this - we are contacting companies and although I have shown the cost of the ships, if we can salvage the ship and get it repaired, which we hope we shall do - I think the cost will not be as high as this. But once again, we are going to put in place a team that will involve the International Maritime Organization representative, to carry out an investigation and find out why such a bizarre accident happened in the first place. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Minister.  

3.34
MS OLIVE WONEKA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed this was a terrible, which happened in our country especially at this time. I would also like to express condolences I suppose to the minister on the loss of the MV Kabalega.  

My concern is, whereas the minister is really sorry and all, on page 3 under the efforts to save the vessel, crew and cargo, the Minister says, “All the crew from MV Kabalega were evacuated to MV Kaawa. Communication by the captains with Kampala control office and Mwanza failed, but they picked Kisumu at around 7.35 a.m.” 

Madam Speaker, when I look at the way forward, I do not see anything mentioned in as far as the communications are concerned. Why did they fail? What was the problem in as far as communications are concerned? It took that long, so what does the minister intend to do? I do not see anything under that particular aspect, on the way forward. Thank you.

3.35
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also express my sympathy to those who lost whatever they lost as a result of this accident. 

However, I would not worry about the accident because I know accidents can happen any time; even if the lake is wide or small, it can happen. But what worries me is the insurance bit. You are aware that I have an insurance background and I am a broker at that. The minister has informed us that an insurance broker was identified, and also my company happened to get the tender documents, which were asking for bids for the provision of insurance services. This one –(Interruption)

MRS WABWIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for a member who seems to have an interest in this particular issue –(Interjections)- no, let me finalize -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MRS WABWIRE: Is he in order to stand up and tell us that he is not worried that a ship of this capacity sunk in the lake? He is telling us that it is not really an issue and yet the whole nation is concerned that a certain accident could take place? Is he in order, with all these damages that the country has suffered? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, when you say those other losses are not important you are hitting at the business people who invested their money, and you are hitting at the consumers. So when you are talking about damages caused in this accident, do not treat it lightly. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I said that my concern is not the accident but the lack of insurance for all items, which were supposed to be insured; and I stand by it. I said Uganda Railways Corporation wanted tenders and in their document they said that the vessels are registered with Lloyds. That was in 2003. I also got information of the reports of the valuers who carried out the valuation, which lead to the cancellation of the policy. The ultimate insurers were British Marine Managers Ltd.

In one of those reports they said that Kabalega was originally classed by Lloyd’s Register of Shipping 100A1, but they put a note that this class had been withdrawn. The report went on to say that, “According to LRS’s faxed massage of 22nd July 2003 the class was withdrawn with immediate effect for failure to confirm with Classification Rules and also delays in payment of classification survey fees, according to other correspondence that ensued between LRS and URC.” 

The worry of the members that these vessels could not pick the signals is also in the report. I will need to read it for the benefit of other members; “The vessel has no Gyro compass on board, and magnetic compass error is not recorded regularly. There is a danger of errors in navigation developing, while navigating between islands and narrow channels in the Lake Victoria, in poor visibility and/or at night. 

The search and rescue facilities in Lake Victoria are very poor, and also radio contacts to the nearest MRCC are not so good. Vessel was only fitted with an SSB transceiver and VHF radio, and not fitted with GMDSS equipment. We understand the search and rescue facilities are now about to be set up with the collaboration of the Aviation Authority. 

Lack of carriage of a Course Recorder and Speed Log may contribute to navigational errors. 
Pyrotechnic and other visual signals have either expired and/or not fitted/missing on board. Apart from radio communications, the vessel has no other means of raising alarm to rescue in the Lake Victoria.” 

Madam Speaker, this was in November 2004 when this report was sent to the Uganda Railways Corporation. It subsequently led to the cancellation of the policy because it means the vessels were not supposed to be operated; and this message was sent to the Managing Director of Uganda Railways Corporation. The Chief Marine Manager also acknowledged receipt of this report. 

For the world to lose US $8 million out of sheer negligence is not an excuse –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. What you have read to us my dear brother is shocking. It is extremely shocking and I wish you would throw a little more light on that document that you have read to this House. You should probably lay it on the Table later, especially considering that this matter is going to be subject to further investigation. 

The clarification I would like to get is: how far did that document reach? You have just told us that at least it got to the Uganda Railways Corporation. I do not know whether the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications is privy to it, or whether the Commissioner in charge of Transport is also privy to that document. As it appears this is a matter of gross neglect and I think it is necessary for this country to apportion blame to people who may have known about these misgivings and yet went ahead to sail the ship as if it were normal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, why do you not let the honorable member finish? He was building his point and I do not know where – maybe, he is going to say all these things.  

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and honorable members, when one wants an insurance policy a company can provisionally cover that client or whatever item one is talking about. But for vessels and cars and things of that sort, which have big sums of insurance, you definitely must make an evaluation or inspection. 
I was informed that after the issuance of cover, the people of Uganda Railways Corporation were not ready to receive the people who were supposed to make the inspection, up to late November when they were allowed to make the inspection. When you make the inspection that is when you can verify what should be the case as stated in the bid document, and you cannot insure something, which is not supposed to be operated. 

What this report says is that according to the defects, which were found, these vessels were supposed to be grounded. And they were talking of the things, which actually happened to be true because when they had the accident it took them five or six hours to get radio communication to the nearest rescue and the vessel had already sunk. If it had those facilities they could have rescued it soon.

When the minister says that the cargo was insured by the owner of the cargo; that is wrong. I insure my cargo because of what I feel I will loose and the transporter, in this case URC, insures the legal liability. It is URC, which is responsible for the loss, not Azam. Therefore, URC will have to pay for that loss. 

I have also read that they are getting back money, which was deposited. I think it is easy to get it back because when someone has covered you for less than a full year, you are charged time on risk on a pro-rata basis for the number of days, which have been covered and for the remainder you can get a refund. 

I am also equally informed, Madam Speaker, that the insurance company requested URC to re-instate what was highlighted in their report so that they could come back on cover but they did not. From December up to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much my brother for giving way. What you are talking about is very important in business. But on the issue of goods, which were on this ship, the owner of the goods is the one to pay for them. That is, he has to pay the cost of insurance and the freight, and not Uganda Railways. Uganda Railways is supposed to insure its vessel and the people’s lives. If you are talking of people’s lives, then we are together. But on goods, I am sorry with my little knowledge on insurance, you are wrong.
MR KADDUNABBI: I just wish he had sought a clarification because the insurance of the owner of the goods is not in the wrong so their client was not responsible for the loss. Insurance for Azam will go ahead and pay their client but will have subrogation rights against URC, and URC will definitely have to pay. They would have taken a certain policy, the goods in transit policy, for all the goods they transport and it is an annual policy. It is not an expensive policy. I think I can leave it at that, but we are sorry for the loss. 

Next time the Government should be serious and know that insurance is not a luxury. When we are talking of insurance for the Members of Parliament, facilities or monies were not given, and many things are happening. Even the pension schemes and the like - I think I should rest my case, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of non-insurance on these ships is not new. When this matter came up the other day, my colleague hon. Kawanga who at one time was the Chairman of the Board of Directors of URC informed the House that during the time he was chairman, these ships were not insured. 

In the Sixth Parliament I chaired a committee to investigate corruption and malpractices in Uganda Railways Corporation. During our investigations, indeed we found that these ships were not insured, and I think the reason was that URC did not have the money it needed to keep these ships in a condition that would make it necessary for insurers to take the risk and insure them. So, URC did not have the money required to get those ships insured. 

The question now is whether things have changed since then. It is interesting that the minister tells his story on page 4 under insurance from the 8th of September 2003, mind you we are talking about 2005 now. He says that URC advertised in the press on the 8th of September 2003 for the insurance of the vessels. The minister does not tell us whether at that particular time the vessels were not insured or they were insured. And he tells us that seven bids were received and eventually one bid, which succeeded, was awarded the tender in March 2004. We do not know whether during that time the ships were insured or not. He does not say this.

On the next page he says a policy covering the period of 12th May 2004 to 11th May 2005 was issued, which implies that perhaps until 12th May 2004 these ships were not insured. It is vague. So, the minister has got to make that clear. He added that then this new insurance firm, which changed its name or was taken over, cancelled the policy on 1st December 2004. It means that they had covered the ships from 12th May up to first December 2004, a few days after receiving a third installment.

The reasons given were that the vessels were not maintained in class and not in Lloyds register, a matter probably, which had not been checked by the successor of the insurer. I think the original insurer was Felix and the successor was Alexander Forbes. Of course you cannot stop Alexander from finding out what was wrong with the policy, so maybe they were justified. But the interesting thing is that URC has also approached the bankers for an overdraft of 300,000 dollars for repairs to vehicles to bring them in class and subsequent insurance. Which means that URC was aware that actually these vehicles were not fit to be insured by these people according to their regulations.  

Now, we would like to know whether the minister was aware that in fact this is what was happening to these assets of government, because I think the minister cannot avoid responsibility. For us, Parliament, the minister is answerable to us for the way he is managing the affairs of business under his charge as minister responsible for the sector.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, when you look at page 6 of the statement, the minister says that the remaining ship MV Pamba will now operate four trips per week instead of three trips. This naturally puts more strain on an already dilapidated ship whose navigation system is defective.

Secondly, it is the same ship, which is not insured. I do not know whether when the minister makes this proposal it also takes the account into the probable risk that the increased number of times means increased risk on the waters and what effects it is going to have and what arrangements have been made?

MR NASASIRA: I want to inform honourable Dombo that in my statement on paragraph 6 under way forward, I said the Kampala – Portbell - Mwanza route to Dar-as-Salaam will continue in operation. But I also said Uganda’s strategic route to the sea and the following measures will be taken to sustain operations in that route. One, inspect, maintain and ensure MV Pamba resumes operation.

MR MWANDHA: Well, that information by the minister does not deal with the situation as reported earlier. Has the 300,000 dollars been obtained by URC to repair this ship, which is now going to be used four times a week so that it is actually insured? You see, he said, the remaining ship will now operate. To me, that implies that it has been properly repaired, according to the requirements of the insurers, and it actually has been insured.  If it has not been insured, why should the minister again go ahead and risk the only remaining ship and operate it, in case it also sinks so that at the end of day we shall have no ship?

Madam Speaker, I see this whole scenario as a gap.  No person charged with a responsibility has a right to gamble with public assets. You cannot risk public assets and use them when they are not insured. Insurance is a very necessary thing to do when you are carrying out business. I cannot understand how the minister can allow a situation like this one, because he knew that URC did not have the money, URC is now going to borrow and allowed –(Interruption)

CAPT STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank honourable Mwandha for giving way. I remember very vividly when he was speaking, he said he chaired a committee investigating URC on corruption and found ships were not insured. As a senior citizen, when you found out, what recommendation did you get and yet you are here lamenting? Thank you Madam Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: That is a very interesting question. I think the honourable member needs to go to the records of Parliament and find that we made many recommendations, which recommendations in fact caused some ministers to be censured. Also among the recommendations and in particular with regard to this one, we told government that they should not operate the ships until they are insured. It is on record, the honourable captain can check the records and find it there.  

But Madam Speaker, I will not go any further, I am only concerned that if the minister was aware that URC, which is under his charge, was operating ships, which were carrying people’s cargo, which are so important to the economy of this country without these ships being insured. I think the minister has to apologize to this House and to the country.  I thank you.

4.03
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you Madam Speaker. I will focus on the way forward, which was being proposed by the minister. On page 5, he is saying that we shall spend more money for the KPA divers to sight and locate the ship, and so on. My question is, why shouldn’t we give that ship a decent burial in the lake so that we do not have to spend taxpayers’ money?  

On the last page, the minister says that he is consulting the Attorney General to set up the commission of inquiry, but he does not give us the time frame. It is extremely important that we know how soon the commission of inquiry will be set up and how soon Parliament will get the findings of this committee. Otherwise, we may keep on procrastinating as has been the case with government and not get anything out of this commission of inquiry.

Madam Speaker, I was a member of the Board of Directors of Uganda Railways Corporation and at one time we were very much interested in the operations of this particular department, the marine services.  During our investigations, we found out that this was one of the departments, which did not have well trained persons. The qualifications of the officers in that particular department left a lot to be desired. I would like the Minister to assure this House that these officers are competent because reports said that these officers were sleeping at the time the ships knocked. We must have a clear explanation because I do not know how people sleep on the lake. The Minister will have to explain this.
I am also interested in the future of marine services in this country and particularly water transportation policy. I am not very sure whether the Government now has a fully developed transport policy and the section concerning water transport in particular. I think Uganda has not seriously addressed itself on this matter and I believe that is one of the reasons why these ships are not insured. We are also not developing landing sites and piers because we have not taken seriously the contribution of water transport to our economy. So these are some of the issues that I expect the Minister to come up with in his inquiry or in his next report.

It is also very important for us to know since the Uganda Railway Corporation is under privatisation and we have the Minister responsible here, can he tell us when the privatisation scheme will be completed and whether there are sufficient funds to pay off the workers. These are very important questions for us to get answers to before we leave for recess.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to give my friend, hon. Nasasira, chance to deny categorically because I do not believe these rumours that he must be interested in the privatisation of Uganda Railway Corporation in order to acquire these ferries on the lake. These rumours have been circulated, so he should use Parliament to deny these allegations firmly. I do not believe them myself, I thank you Madam Speaker. 

4.08
MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is sad to note that one of those institutions or monuments in the memories of our great King of the great Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, Kabalega, had its fate on the 8th May 2005. As members of Bunyoro Kingdom, we were really struck and we are bereaved. Madam Speaker, whenever the name of Kabalega is mentioned here, I feel hurt and this is because of my background and history. We really need condolences, Madam Speaker, and I would have asked your Chair, if you allowed me, to accord Kabalega a one-minute silence. 

Madam Speaker, I want to find out from the Minister of Works -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I would not recommend this one minute silence because the Kabalega is not dead, they will get it out of the sea and repair it, you cannot have a one minute silence for a person who is not dead yet.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I have looked at the report by the Minister of Works and in the way forward he has pointed out that a team of the KPA divers are on the site to locate the ship and assess the damage. The ship that sunk must have been heavy and I wanted to find out from the Minister whether it will be possible to recover this ship and if not, what programme does the ministry have especially in maintaining the memories of Kabalega?

Secondly, I want to find out from the Minister about the way forward of the remaining ship MV Pamba. He has talked of the ship operating four trips per week. I want to find out whether this applies only within this one month when the Kaawa ship will be undergoing repairs or it will continue even after the repair. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR NELSON WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you Madam Speaker. As a member of the Committee on Works, I am very much aggrieved for this accident to have happened in view of the fact that we have been having three ships on Lake Victoria. We have been the master on Lake Victoria in that we have been having a good bridge between Tanzanian railway and Ugandan Railway. When about two-thirds of the capacity of the bridge is damaged, then we have got a problem. 

I think all of us have to accept that if you want to be classified as a living person, you should accept that you take a risk everyday to be alive because whenever you wake up, you could actually either hurt your knee or in the process of going into a car or actually the car moving or the ship moving. So risk is inherently for any living person including organisations. An organization can only be classified as living if it is willing to take risks. So risks are inherent, and what we should ask the Minister to clarify to us is, did the management of Uganda Railway Corporation evaluate the risks of putting three vessels on lake Victoria? Was the risk worth taking instead of leaving those vessels not operational? Was there business to be done by all these vessels?  Would it have been more prudent to allow one vessel to go in view of the fact that the insurance cover was not big enough? Was it necessary to take insurance or was it unnecessary? Were the vessels insurable in view of the fact that they are 20 years old and maybe they lack a lot of modern navigation gear? I think these are the questions which the minister should clarify to us; that he has asked the management to clearly tell him why this has happened.

If the vessel is worthy 6.6 million dollars, the issue of cargo is peripheral after all we can carry cargo on a ship at the owner’s risk. So the issue of insurance coming in because cargo has sunk when the transport was signed “I am transporting your things at your own risk” is not a big deal. I think our concern right now, as Parliament, would be our vessels.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to be clarified whether the age of these vessels compared to the expected service life is within the limits that these vessels should be still on the lake.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Wambuzi, those points were raised by hon. Kaddunabbi; maybe you can touch on something else.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, the next point which I would like to touch on would be who actually is the authority on lake Victoria in view of the fact that there are vessels of Kenya government, Tanzanian government and of Uganda government. We are lucky this incident was between two of our own vessels. Maybe if the accident was between foreign vessels maybe even the loss and insurance things would become so heavy that – and in view of that we are going to continue operating on this lake. Who is guarding against the other, who is actually the authority, who licenses the other to be on the lake in view of the fact that we are going to have actually accidents on that lake whether we like it or not.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and Engineer Gagawala. Engineer you are saying 8.2 million dollars is not an issue to talk about?  You are talking of if they were foreigners, what about Ugandans, this is our own money. The clarification I am seeking from you is, is 8.2 million dollars equal to 800,000?
MR WAMBUZI: What I am saying is that 8.5 million dollars worth of both cargo wagons and the ships, if you subtract the cargo value of about 1.6 million dollars, it is a periphery matter compared to three vessels each worthy almost 7 million dollars. We should be actually concentrating as Uganda on our part of the property, that is, the vessels. Therefore the insurance of cargo is something, which you should consider secondary. 

Our primary concern should be on the vessels and the lives of the people. You, yourself have said it in this House that actually the cargo itself is not the issue, the issue is the lives of the people and the vessels. So I have not stood up in this House to say 8.5 million dollars is something on the periphery. 

In fact, I am discussing the centre of the matter. I am saying that if there is no license, over 80 percent of the small boats on the lake are actually not licensed. Maybe all the three governments have never even woken up to supervise the companies, which are operating. We are soon to privatise the railway, now there will be more wagon ferries on the lake more ships. Who is the authority; who is licensing who on lake Victoria? I think this is very important. It means Uganda railways corporation has been its own licenser, its own monitor, its own authority and it has been doing as it wants. There was even no need to ask for insurance because it had a field day in everything.  

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Gagawala. When you talk of insurance, I am happy the minister of finance is here. The minister of finance we have is actually the man responsible for the day to day running of Uganda Railways Corporation and all vehicles of these honourable ministers are not insured. 

At one time the Minister of Finance said that all the vehicles would be licensed, but up to now these government vehicles are not licensed and comprehensively insured.  So, I think it is an eye opener to all of us that we better be more serious with government and people’s property. Uganda Railways Corporation alone cannot do it because they are under another Ministry of Finance, which has been squeezing many ministries by not giving them money. So I think it is an eye opener to the government that Ministry of Finance should be able to help parastatals and ministries. I thank you.
MR WAMBUZI:  As I wind up I was going to say that Madam Speaker, we are slowly being throttled, why? We do not have Uganda Airlines Corporations. We now entirely depend on foreign airlines and if the people in Kenya get flu, Madam Speaker, you may be stranded outside there when there is nobody who can fly you here. Slowly it is now coming to cargo.  

Once the bridge between Tanzania and Uganda which was developed in 1977 - I am sure the chairman of the Board of the URC remembers the pressure which the government of Uganda had when Kenya started wanting to close the way from Mombasa to here, and Idi Amin had to in spite of being an enemy of Nyerere, eventually convinced Nyerere that we must open a wagon so that there is an alternative route to this country. Now, when you see your wagons sinking in doubles, when you have only got three, then the likelihood of the bridge being closed is there, and that means we are going to remain with one leg. If you have one leg to Mombasa, when it breaks we shall be in problems. 

I think it is very important for the minister to take up that this issue of keeping this bridge as a primary concern. I think it is a bridge, and a bridge is a bridge; when it breaks, it must be immediately restored because we need a permanent way between here and Dar-es-salaam. 

So with those few words, I would say that the minister should clarify to this House what is going to be cost of the interruption to the economy from the time these three vessels are not sailing. 

Secondly, what are our partners saying about having a serious authority in place to run lake Victoria and to navigate and control and license the vessels on the lake Victoria. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I will be as brief as you have directed because the majority of the questions which I should raise in this House will be going to our Parliamentary committee we have set up to investigate the matter.  

However, I would like to deal with generic issues pertaining to the ministry. Number one, not long ago in this august House, I stood up to give compliments to the minister for reviving the railway line from Tororo to Soroti and beyond, I think that was a wonderful achievement; I am proud of you.  However, I have to withdraw it now, or I quickly come back to the Floor baying for the minister’s blood - not actual blood but political blood. 

You are right, Mr minister, where you opened your remarks in the august House saying among other things that I asked for your head, I am still asking for it for the following reasons:

One, we have had a string of accidents in your area of operation. In aviation, we have had a string of accidents some of which are due to pure negligence, dereliction of duty, others purely because there has been no adequate. Take for instance, just as an example, in aviation where we have had three accidents in the past three months, again pertaining to a specific type of aircrafts, that is, Russian-made Antanovs. 

Mr Minister, you are aware that the CAA has brought to your attention that the Instrument Landing System (ILS) we have at Entebbe could be a problem.  We are using at the moment the Military Radar System, which is subject to all kinds of situations –(Interruptions)

CAPT BASALIZA: With deep pain, Madam Speaker, I would like to put the honourable member on order. Is he in order to bring in Civil Aviation and other road accidents when we are really concerning about URC’s Kabalega vessel? Madam Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please let us focus on this marine accident. On another occasion, we talked about the aviation accident.    

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your ruling. But permit me first of all to correct what might have been misunderstood by my hon. colleague that I gave one example as a string of accidents happening in the area of communications.  I was just giving one example in addition to the current one, that is why I said I am baying for his political blood. How can we have somebody responsible for the management of state affairs and yet there is a string of dereliction of duties. I gave you a compliment; you have done very well.  Tororo-Soroti, wonderful, but when it comes to other areas, there is a problem.  

Coming back to the marine situation, indeed there is a problem.  –(Interruptions)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek a clarification from my hon. colleague about the relationship between a defence information system and what we are debating here and whether it is responsible of him to give weaknesses within our defence system to everybody and yet he is privy to give this information to the Minister of Defence to address it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May be I was talking too fast. I gave an example that we have problems in Insurance Aviation System. To avoid accidents in future, we need to get our own CAA instrument landing system, radar system instead of relying on military radar. Not at any given moment did I imply that the military radar system is poor or not good enough. I am simply saying, stay on your own; there could be operational problems coordinating CAA and military.  

As a matter of fact I am supporting the Minister that please, in the budget, come up with money to cover all these things, we shall support you, we will give you the money. So honourable - [Hon. Mukwaya: “I withdraw; he is clearer now.”] Absolutely, I thank you.  

Now I will go at my usual rapid speed. Madam Speaker, the matter of marine insurance is of major concern. Between 4th November 2004 and 4th May 2005 definitely is a big gap. Hon. Kaddunabbi can confirm, he is an Insurance expert, that while you are waiting for a substantive insurance policy, we have what we call a temporary cover which we can use while you are negotiating for a substantive insurance so that you are not left naked. In this case, because of the dereliction of duty, my hon. Minister did not take advantage of that option. You should have had what we call a temporary cover. 

Just like right now, you are telling us that you are going to be using MV Pamba. Why don’t you take temporary cover while you are negotiating for a substantive one? It may cost you one or two percent extra, but you are still covered. Why do you go out naked without your jacket when it is cold? Put on a kabuuti.

Two, the matter of collection of the money from the Insurance Company. Again you contacted a private debtor, I think, Agaba and Company Advocates to collect the money for you. Really, is this the procedure of recovering money owed to the state by a private entity? There is an established procedure of recovering money. There should have been litigation. In this case we are going to lose cost simply by asking Agaba and Company to go and collect money from somebody owing to us.  There is a procedure to be followed, Madam Speaker.  

On navigation, the equipment - I do not want to repeat what hon. Kaddunabbi has said. Virtually all the navigation equipment was not in working order. Some of it was actually too old. But as I said this is a matter to be covered by the Commission of Inquiry.

Matter of insurance again pardon my good friend, if I give another example, where we have failed to carry out our duties in accordance to our terms of service. Not long ago, when we acquired a Gulf Stream IV for the transport of His Excellency, the President this matter was almost neglected until I brought it to the attention that this aircraft we have acquired it on loan, it must be covered in the event of accidents. 

My honourable Colleague, Nathan Byanyima there, Chairman of a Committee on Transport.  Madam Speaker, we have a license, we pay import duty on government vehicles, but we do not pay a miniscule third party insurance. If a government vehicle hits a civilian, really who is going to cover that? Again we go back to the Treasury, when we could have just paid Shs 40,000 a month. Really dereliction of duty. Why do we take public resources as if is nothing to care about? This is very simple procedure.

Madam Speaker, again going back to dereliction of duty, I noted with great concern that even when the accident took place, the gap between the time it happened and the time the other organs of the state came to their rescue, no, it is not safe.  
Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister gave us some kind of indication of what we call navigation gap between the two vessels, which is 11 kilo-nauts, about 18 kilometres. Now at the time of the accidents, what really happened? How do you narrow that gap suddenly may be from 18 kilometres to the point of contact when there is no response from the Captains at all? 

MR NASASIRA: I thought I should clarify that for the benefit of hon. Awori Aggrey. The 11 nauts I talked about was the gap between MV Pamba and MV Kabalega when they passed each other, it was not the gap between MV Kaawa and MV Kabalega.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague. I like that, when you come up with the accurate information, that is all; otherwise I would not be baying for your blood.  

Madam Speaker, again on a matter of cargo, they have told us about the wheat. Really, you owe us the cargo manifest, you just cannot come and tell us there were just four containers of wheat, no, there is more to it. You display, give us the cargo manifest; we want to see it complete, there is something you are hiding. Madam Speaker, I have reason to doubt that particular information. For a ship to come all the way from Mwanza just carrying wheat; no, that is not business, there is more to it.  

Again on the matter pertaining to cargo, if there was classified cargo, it is very simple, we know that; once you say it is classified, it is classified, we will not interrogate you; we will not harass you.  So these are little things, which you need to give us and we will not harass you.

In conclusion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, is it prohibited to transport classified cargo on Lake Victoria?  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, essentially what I am trying to tell my honourable colleague, that if there was classified material, just tell us, we will not harass you; it is not illegal. But I am just saying that it is bad business to carry –(Interruption)
MR MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Awori. Is it the classified cargo, which caused the accident or what?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, if I were to go into details of that inquiry, I might be accused by my honourable colleague here of diverting away from marine into security. I think the Minister will answer. But he and I know what was there.  

So, Madam Speaker, in the end I would like to make the following recommendations as the way forward. One, we separate marine transport from railway transport, come up with a proposal in this august House before we sell or give away the railway concession to separate the two because one is more lucrative than the other and the assets are easier to handle. Marine transport is a lot easier, you are only dealing with vessels and little infrastructure at the two ports, and the chances are the other port is not your responsibility unlike the railway where the tracks are yours and very expensive not only to construct, but also to maintain. 

So, really I would recommend that while we are considering giving away the Railway Corporation concession, we retain the marine transport as a separate system altogether, and I am saying so for two reasons: 
One, it makes business sense; you can make more money out of marine transport. 
Two, given our landlocked nature and our national security, we want somebody who can transport these things safely and under our custody. 

Last but not least, maybe this recommendation should go to the Chairman of the Cabinet. I think, Mr Minister, you are tired, why don’t you try another ministry?

4.35
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Uganda, past, present and future, the name Kabalega is very important and therefore should be guarded very jealously. 

On the 8th of this month, the son of Kabalega, Kaawa, hit Mzee Kabalega below the belt and Kabalega ended up sinking with over US$10 million worth of wealth of this country.  

Madam Speaker, on the second page in the Minister’s statement, the two vessels were being navigated by second officers, and the captains are said to have been either resting or something to that effect. Could this have caused this very fatal accident, that both MV Kaawa and MV Kabalega were being navigated by junior officers? What is the level of competence of these navigators?

The second issue that I would like to raise is on page 3 of the Minister’s report where it is reported that communication by the captains with Kampala control office and Mwanza failed, but were picked by Kisumu after four hours of the occurrence of the accident. The accident was at 3.30 a.m. and the Kisumu was raised at 7.35 a.m., that is four hours. Madam Speaker, I believe that Kampala is nearer to Uganda than Kisumu so that Kampala should have been raised earlier than Kisumu. Madam Speaker, the importance of communication cannot be over-emphasized. If we are to have any continuity, what is the resolve of the Minister to ensure that the communication will be efficient and effective?

Madam Speaker, still on the same page the Minister reports that rescue workers came from various places, and none of these was from Uganda Railways Corporation. You will recall that some time back there was a train accident near Mukwano Industries. At that time this House was in session and you did effectively suspend the House to enable the Members to go out and carry out rescue operations because the Uganda Railways Corporation did not have rescue equipment. Can the Minister assure us that if these vessels are to continue, we would have rescue equipment belonging to Uganda Railways Corporation so that we do not have to use other people to come to the rescue of Uganda Railways Corporation?  

The final issue, Madam Speaker, is on page 5 of this report where it is said that Messrs Alexander Forbes Uganda Limited, after pocketing the third instalment for the insurance refused to maintain the cover of the insurance for this MV Kabalega vessel and other vessels. I would like to get clarification from the Minister; one, whether this was in order, and two –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Omach, unfortunately you came late. We had a very elaborate presentation from hon. Kaddunabbi about this process and I think the Minister will answer. Move to something else.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Finally, I would like to know why they had to change from Liberty Insurance Brokers to Alexander Forbes Uganda Limited at the very time when this accident was about to occur. I thank you Madam Speaker. 

4.42
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that this accident occurred, but it occurred, and the reasons why it occurred we cannot be precise until the investigations are made and hopefully a report is made available. 

However, Madam Speaker, my concern touches on the presentation of hon. Kaddunabbi on the part of insurance. There is a very big problem here. He said that the policy of insurance was cancelled because there was a breach of warrant, a warrant that the ship had to be registered by Lloyds. If this was stated in the proposals, which formed part of the contract, then there is a problem. 

The insurer discovered that these vessels were not sea worthy and had to be equipped with modern navigation equipment. He found the ships first of all not sea worthy and not insurable. If somebody inadvertently had stated that these vessels were registered by Lloyds and therefore sea worthy and this is the reason which led to the cancellation of the contract then this process to recover may not be tenable because there is a breach of that warrant. 

I think this is true because both sides, that is, URC and the insurers accepted the position that there was no policy, the policy had to be cancelled. That is why the insured goes on to say, okay, if you cancelled the policy refund, and the other one says, I cannot not refund because you breached a warrant. I think our committee and the commission, when it is set up, should try to elicit this problem; I think this is where the matter lies.  

Concerning the cargo, one of our honourable members on the Floor from the new district said you see we do not mind about the cargo, we mind about the ship. But both are very important. The cargo belongs to Ugandans and we were contracted to transport the cargo; we have a liability. 

If the accident was due to negligence then the insurers or the owners’ insurance does not absolve you from the responsibility. They will compensate the owner but still the insurance company can recover from the transport company; therefore, we also mind. 

I do not think when URC contracts to transport they insist that whatever you put on their wagons must be insured, I do not know, I have not looked at that contract. But if they insisted that this cargo must be insured by the owner then maybe hon. Gagawala is right to say that the goods carried on these wagons is on owners risk. Otherwise it is not common to do that, the responsibility remains that if it is negligence then the transporter is responsible. 

So, there is not much more meaningful we can add to all this; we have been saying because we do not have full information to debate effectively. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.47
MR KAGIMU KIWANUKA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I was listening to the Minister I was not convinced of the reason why these ships collided. I read somewhere that the collision was intentional; I do not know whether the Minister read that somewhere, maybe he could clarify. Because there was classified cargo on the ship I do not know how far true that is. 

Again when I was listening to hon. Kaddunabbi, his kind of testimony could really make you cry. But we have a saying in our language “olwata Omwami na’lumanya” (that when somebody dies you say I knew the sickness that killed this man). But why did you not say it in time? For example, he had all this information and he would have raised it on the Floor and maybe something could have been done.  But it seems nothing is coming out to say oh! I knew and nothing was done –(Interruption)
MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Kagimu. Does he imply that it should be me to read this information to this august House because this information was already given to Uganda Railways Corporation and the Minister is aware of whatever is happening there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Kagimu is saying is that as an important citizen in this country who had information about the possibility of loss of our property, why didn’t you come here and shout? You wait until the accident occurs then you say, I knew, it is because of this. That is what he is saying. 

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, you deserve another Kisanjja. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, let me give you an example. I used to go to Mwanza to do some small business there and I used these ships. One time I travelled on Bukoba ship to Port Bell, which was going to Mwanza thereafter. I detected something, at first I did not raise it, but the next time I raised it with the people concerned there on the ship - It was long ago I was not in Parliament at that time. Do you know what they told me! They said, no, this ship has a problem - That ship was called Bukoba. 

You see a ship has two water tanks to balance it. They said one tank was leaking, and we have to go on filling that tank all the way to Mwanza. I said, what! “Yes, we have to fill it”, they said, but I said this thing should be grounded. Shortly after that, the ship was grounded and Dar-es-Salaam ordered that this ship should no longer work. Do you know what those people did in Mwanza? They said “ ok, if we go to Kampala and we kill Ugandans, they may realize it…” –(Interruption)   

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. I have been listening attentively to the hon. colleague. Also if he knew that problem long time ago, why didn’t he come here and say it? (Laughter)

MR KAGIMU: No, we have another saying Madam Speaker, “Nsumulula onsuna?” meaning that I am untying and then you are pinching me! I am giving you the story. At that time I was not in Parliament. But Dar es Salaam stopped that ship from going to Mwanza. In fact, I had got concerned; I was going to raise it.  
But those people decided to operate between Mwanza and Bukoba, despite the damage. But of course it was now doing it in Mwanza, there was no way maybe I would have gone to the High Commission. But they were filling that leaking tank. It was pathetic. Do you know what happened! One day as they were filling that tank, the shi collapsed. Of course the thickness had grown and all of a sudden it overturned and killed 1,500 people. Unfortunately it was a holiday and about 1000 students were killed. They were down in the third class where you pay less. 

It was a very sad situation and it took three days to sink. Meanwhile whoever was on the ship was asked to write on a piece of paper where they were from and to you put all the money they had and the chits in the socks. So, that is how they managed to identify the bodies. But it was terrible.

Now the advice I would like to give is that this is a kind of an eye opener. All the ships are in very bad condition, and as hon. Kaddunabbi said, they were supposed to be grounded.  Madam Speaker when the concord got an accident, it was because there had been a crack on the wings. What they did was to check all the concords and they found that all of them had cracks. In fact from that time the concord is no longer flying. So, I appeal to the minister to check these ships. There must be a very serious problem where these ships collided. We should not take it lightly.

Madam Speaker, I am ending by using this opportunity to appeal to the minister about life jackets. Just last month I buried my constituents, after a boat capsized. People are dying on the lake because of lack of life jackets. I do not know the government policy whether – I think Parliament had waived the taxes on life jackets but I do not know because people are going on without life jackets. People are dying; another boat capsized and killed 8 people, one of them was my constituent. So I think the government should do something about that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

4.50
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Not more than six or eight months ago, a minister in Canada flew on a plane with a businessman. And that was very dangerous, they say that is conflict of interest, he had to resign immediately. He left his own car. 
Somewhere in another country, a minister also was in a business meeting with a contractor of something, when somebody saw him he said that was a conflict of interest; he had to resign immediately. But in Uganda if you do the worst, that is when we want you more. Madam Speaker, for me, by now the Managing Director of Uganda Railways should be in Luzira Prison because he knew the condition of these vessels. Why did he allow them to travel when they are not sea worthy? 

Before they are licensed to travel, the conditions are: One, they must be sea worthy. Two, they must be insured. Now who allowed these vessels to travel on water without an insurance? Also on Marine, these ships are supposed to travel about 20 kilometres apart. By the time you clear the distance of 20 kilometres to come to zero, what exactly was the problem? 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter, the minister should not seek the Attorney General to help him to get clearance to investigate, by now the investigation would be complete because the fact is there, the two ships have crushed, property is lost. I am told that Uganda Railways had written to the Permanent Secretary asking for 200,000 dollars to ensure the ships. Then the PS said there was no money. 

Another question, which comes to mind is, who is taking the profits from Uganda Railways Corporation? Because it is a profit making organization and these vessels are doing business. Who is taking this money? The moment the business is not profit making, you stop. I think it is not right to go to the Ministry of Finance for now. Is this a charity organization or it is a business making organization? 

Madam Speaker, I have completed the losses –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Nandala raised an interesting point that the Managing Director of Railways wrote to the responsible Permanent Secretary, I think of Works to seek clearance to give him 200,000 dollars to insure the vessel. My understanding is that Uganda Railways Corporation is an independent, self accounting corporation; it generates it own income and uses it, it has a board of directors and so on and so forth. 
Would you clarify to me and to the House why the Managing Director would write to the PS to clear as if it is a government department? This is not a government department. If he was going to borrow the money, possibly that would need clearance from government. But if the Uganda Railways was generating its own income, it has its own board of directors; I do not see how that would arise. But it is a very interesting point you have raised and if it is true, I am sure the minister also will have something to say. 

MR KAKOOZA: May be the minister should throw more light because if Uganda Railways Corporation is under privatisation, where does this money go? And if they are under the Ministry of Finance, then the Managing Director of Railways could have known this problem and seen how to deal with.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you can see even here I think Uganda Railways Corporation did not have resources; it is even going to the bank to borrow. On page 5, it is borrowing 300,000 dollars to be able to repair these vessels. That means Uganda Railway Corporation has no money and that is the reason why it had to run to its parent ministry for aid. That should be the reason. 

However, Madam Speaker, at a later date I will provide that evidence because somebody has told us a few minutes that he is going to bring the copy of the letter. 

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, having heard from hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Nandala, is now the Managing Director safe because he had promised him to go to Luzira. But we have heard the problem is not with the Managing Director, it is with Finance and – thank you.

MR MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, the Managing Director should move because, first of all he is running an enterprise, which is not profit making.  Two, his crime is to take the vessel to the water, which is not water-worthy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sea worthy.

MR MAFABI:  Whatever.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sea worthy, not water worthy.
MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much, “seaworthy”! If we had taken out the insurance policy, there is no way Uganda Government or the taxpayer was going to lose 8.5 million dollars.  The reason is the insurance company was going to pay for all this cost. Now, in addition to that, Madam Speaker, you are supposed to pay the people redundancy. There are people in Uganda Railways who have been working on these ships, they have to be paid, we are supposed to pay the profits we are going to make, because even the minister himself says, there will be a loss of profit. That means this ship has been making profits, now some people must be carrying away these profits.

Now, the businessmen; it is true, when you are going to buy goods and put them on a ship, you pay what we call cost insurance and flight to the transporter. In this case, the transporter is Uganda Railways Corporation who always has a contract with an insurance company about those goods. So, if Uganda Railways has been collecting money of insurance of goods and has not got an insurance policy, that is a big crime again, because you cannot collect money, which is not yours and we must find out who has been taking the money on insurance of goods.

Madam Speaker, there is a big issue here. Nowadays when a parastatal is in problems, we are first crushing the parastatal leadership. We should start with the ministries, because if Railway Corporation is doing badly, that means the ministry itself is doing badly. We should start from above, not with the Managing Directors, the boards and whatever.  If I am overseeing something and it collapses under my hands, I should have disciplined the people I was overseeing, but not to allow other people discipline them for me and I stay around. That is promoting inefficiency. Madam Speaker, it is important that when disciplining these parastatals –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you Madam Speaker and hon. Mafabi for giving way. Hon. Mafabi is bringing a fundamental point, but I think it will help us when you bring such a fundamental point to quote any necessary section of the law, because we manage things in accordance with the law. I will make more detail on this matter when I come to sum up. But as you start apportioning blame, I think it is better to say, these are the powers this person had to deal with this and he should have used this section of the law to do this and he did not do it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Mafabi.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you have heard that – who appoints the board?  All boards you hear that the Ministry of Works has appointed the Board of Uganda Railways Corporation, that means he has authority to do that and right now I do not know the law. You will hear that the Ministry of Agriculture has appointed the board in Uganda Coffee Development Authority, you will hear the Ministry of Health has appointed the board in National Drug –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Mafabi for giving way. The information I want to give is that, the law should not worry you, because it is just but the beginning of the investigations. Keep on track of what you are presenting, I am actually following you precisely and I propose that there must be somebody somewhere who is creating inefficiency in the Uganda Railways Corporation. I sit on the Committee of Works, I have interfaced with the Managing Director and the Board of Uganda Railways Corporation; issues do not spring with the workers, but even with assets in Uganda Railways. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have seen things happening. There is what we call asset striping, there is what they call – you have ever heard one boss who decided he wanted to buy a vehicle from the ministry, he said park it, when it was new so that it becomes dirty, then he says it is not good, it is worthy a million shillings and he took it. So it is those bosses who are very interesting. Madam Speaker, even the totals the minister has given, there is a problem. 

I respect Engineer Nasasira so much, it is 8.2 but the addition I am getting 8.218, then I am suspicious.  That is why they might have left some figures, maybe as they were trying to delete, they deleted some figures and left something, because if the figures do not total well, I am now even more or less concurring with hon. Aggrey Awori, that there might even be some classification, which are missing.  But anyway, that cannot be the big issue.

In conclusion Madam Speaker, Ugandans are going to spend over 10 million dollars in this case. Three ships have been on the lake running without insurance policy. We have a full ministry responsible for this, we have Uganda Railways Corporation responsible for this; this does not need us to say that there is nothing to be done.  It is a very serious matter; people should have now been arrested. 

In fact, this is corruption of the highest order, and then we can carry out investigations when they are there.  In fact people should have been suspended by now, then they do the investigation when people are – if they are not inside prison, they must be suspended and then they do the investigation when they are outside.  Otherwise, short of that, they are going to tamper with the investigations and this is a very worrying thing.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.05
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, it is Uganda Railways again. On page 2 of the statement, on the details of the accident I think there are some mistakes. As far as I know, Bakheresa is a factory here located in Bweyogerere dealing in wheat. But from these statements like “the wheat was coming from Mwanza to Portbell” and yet the wheat is supposed to have moved from Uganda to – because this is where the factory is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which page are you reading?

MR OKUPA: Page 2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which paragraph?

MR OKUPA: MV Kabalega left Mwanza for Portbell at 17.00 hours.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Complete what you are saying.

MR OKUPA: From the statement, it left Mwanza at 17.00 hours, loaded with 21 wagons of wheat grain for EMS Bakheresa, the captain Mr Katumwa Gerald who was in charge of operation at departure from Portbell. So, there is that confusion on that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that was corrected.

MR OKUPA: Okay, that is fine. Madam Speaker, there are issues which are really very dear on this case of this Kabalega. It is not an offence to have an uninsured vehicle or ship but it is an offence for you to use an uninsured vehicle or ship; it is a criminal offence.  

Two years ago, I sold my vehicle to a friend. Unfortunately he got an accident at Clock Tower and two people. He had not finished paying and I had not signed the transfer forms. They came for me, I had to appear in court over this matter and I had to pay heavily. So the person who allowed the vessel that was not insured to be on the water must be held responsible, must be punished for allowing uninsured vessel to move in the waters. 

I happened to be on the committee of Works, last financial year, this matter came up in the Committee, all the three vessels were not insured, the Committee did make a recommendation that this vessel should not move, they must be insured before they move.  Today, what have we seen, the vessels that the committee had raised issues on got accident. So the ministry and the members of the Board did not take the committee’s recommendation seriously.  

Hon. Kagimu here said that why did hon. Kaddunabbi not give this information to Parliament? The committee did. We met with the Board and the ministry, this information was given. To hide behind the Minister of Finance and you do not give money, you ground the vessels, do not allow them to move. 

MR MULENGANI: Thank you hon. Okupa. The extra information I want to give, that actually really creates suspicious in the issues that are being indicated here in the figures is that when we interfaced with the Uganda Railway Corporation, the issues of the figures being given to the various insurance firms and eventually the jumping of the contract, withdraw of the contract by these companies was not informed to the Committee because possibly at that point is where we would have picked up these issues. 
In other words, what I am informing you, hon. Okupa, is that we interfaced with these managers not to grill them but usually to find out issues that we can help them solve but if somebody goes on to appear on the committee and such information that is being brought now to save a situation that is bad, is equally showing suspicion, in the management of the Uganda Railways Corporation, thank you.

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, honorable colleague, for giving way.  I heard hon. Okupa correctly when he said that it is an offence to operate a vehicle without an insurance and then it seems he is aware of the relevant law but I would like to inform him that that law is for the civilians, not for the Government because we are informed here that, all those vehicles which belong to the Government are not insured. All the buildings belonging to the Government are not insured. All the water vessels belonging to the Government are not insured. So it is not a surprise that things are moving that way, the issue is that, that law was made for other people, it does not concern the Government. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: The law is meant for all of us whether Government or what but I think the application is being applied selectively. So the issues of what cargo was on board should have been clarified here but I think the committee that is going to investigate this will help because we shall be able to ask for the cargo manifest that shows what was being transported. 

On privatisation, I do not know what we are going to sell because if all the three are grounded, what are we going to sell? What are we going to privatise unless we are just going to give it out. I do not see what we are going to privatise now because all the three vessels are not sea worthy, they are not insured.  

Hon. Kaddunabbi has told us the defects in all these three, so I do not really see anything maybe it is a token to be given to someone else.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the way forward, I strongly recommend to this House that let a committee be constituted, if not the Committee of Works be constituted into a Select Committee to investigate these matters because the committee has had some information as regards this issue, it will be the committee that will report to this House. If we leave it to an outside commission, we may not be able to get a report to this House, thank you Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Mr Kikungwe, procedure, what is the problem? Let us know.

MR KIKUNGWE:  Madam Speaker, it seems as if you are winding up and I thought you would give me a chance to say something.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I should be given opportunity to determine how much time we should spend on this matter.  

5.12
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues of the House. Definitely we are performing our job as an oversight institution, as Parliament when we express our concerns about this tragedy that has befallen our country. But Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues that let us take things step by step. Where things are correct, you say so, so far so good, where there is a problem, then we indicate it. Once we get an accident, even the way we manage that accident itself is important, because if you do not manage an accident properly, say, if it is a motor vehicle accident, people have been injured, we could loose them but if we manage the accident properly, we could save some people. 

So I would like to start there, I think that post the accident, immediately the accident happened our colleague hon. Nasasira in my view has handled this matter very well. He immediately came to Cabinet after appearing at the site of the problem and did outline the issues, as he knew them at that time.  

One would say, perhaps, that is what I expected, but I know of situations where serious situations have taken place and ministers have not conducted themselves in a similar manner. He has also come to us in the House and he has been open so that we are able to say these figures are wrong, or something here is wrong and something here needs to be followed up.

We go by this statement to ensure that we can salvage what we can. There is communication with Tanzania; there is communication with Kenya; there is also communication with other international bodies so that we can even see, post-accident, how we can we minimize losses that our country is likely to suffer.  

So, I would like to plead with my colleagues, first of all, to commend efforts that have been taken post-accident because things could have gone the other way round. We are happy that at least the people who were on the ship were rescued and they are now with us.

There is an issue of procedure here. My good friend, hon. Awori is already making a judgment; the Minister should go; he wants his blood.  Hon Nandala says these people should be in prison. Unless we are disagreeing with the Minister, the Minister is saying, “Friends, I want to investigate this accident. There are things, which have also puzzled me.  I want to do a proper post-mortem so that we can know what happened”.  

If we accept that line of argument, then in my view, madam Speaker, we should be focusing more on what type of inquiry we are going to do, so that tomorrow, we do not get the report of the Commission of Inquiry and we say things have been fixed. I think that is where we should focus more. Who is going to investigate?  

CAPT. GUMA:  Madam Speaker, I want hon. Kiyonga- yesterday, I used a word which nearly caused me trouble- but I want hon. Kiyonga to really convince me.  

On Government investigations, which have been conducted, including Judicial Commissions, from 1986, I want you to cite one that has helped this country in respect to fraud, in respect to mismanagement, in respect to many- (Interruption)- I do not know about murder, but someone is talking about murder, which is in your knowledge, Mr NPC. You have been a senior Movement person; can you cite one that has come to any material meaning to this country?

MR AWORI:  Thank you, my hon. colleague for giving way. I just want to supplement information on two fronts. One, you made some passing remarks regarding my own remarks about pre-judgment.  It is true that whenever there is a problem of this magnitude, generally the political head and the immediate management usually yield. They go away and let other people investigate. Essentially what he was saying, maybe there is no element of sabotage, but we are suspecting there is an element of direction of duty. We do not want you to cover up while we are investigating. 

I was not just baying for my colleague’s blood for nothing. I am simply saying there is a string of incidences which indicates that somebody is tired. Can we replace him in the light of what we have seen?  We normally promote when we see performance. When we see poor performance, we demote or fire.

DR KIYONGA:  Madam Speaker, if I could start with clarification sought by hon. Guma my good friend and brother.  For example, there was an investigation into the Uganda Police Force; all of us are aware about that, and that Commission of Inquiry resulted into the re-organization of the Uganda Police Force. All of us now do see that there are improvements taking place in the Uganda Police Force.  

Recently, we had investigation in the Uganda Revenue Authority. There were some technicalities and some controversies but still the executive arm of Government picked some of the information, hence some of the re-organisation that we are seeing in the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Hon. Guma said that perhaps there are some commissions of inquiry, which have been carried out and the results are not yet out.  But to say that nothing has come out of Commissions of Inquiry is inaccurate.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much.  I thought I should also supplement the information hon. Kiyonga has volunteered to Ndugu Guma Gumisiriza. Sometime back, there was a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into Posts and Telecommunications headed by Justice Egonda Ntende and our Government followed up the findings of that Commission of Inquiry.  So, it is actually a fact that when these commissions are set up, Government is always prepared to take on the recommendations. Thank you.
MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The clarification I want to seek from the NPC is very simple. It is well documented that the vessels were not supposed to be on the sea; they were not sea worthy. Is there a need, therefore, to put an investigation to establish who authorized them to go to the sea when they were not sea worthy? National Political Commissar, please let- (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA:  Hon friends, we set laws here and we believe in natural justice.  Really the reason for carrying out investigation in my view is not just to look for blood, that is not the ultimate objective. Yes, if there are people who have made errors on the way they will be dealt with. But ultimately it is to better our country. We find where faults have taken place; if they are faults of systems, we correct them. If they are weaknesses of individuals, we correct them.  The objective is not just to see who to suck, but to manage our country much better. 

The point I was making is that Parliament would be using its time much better to ensure that when this investigation takes place, it brings accurate results. It guides us better so that when we take action, we are effective; and incidentally when the judgments come back, there are people at different levels who can take blame.  It could be technical officers, it could be political supervisors; it could even be institutions.  It could be institutions- (An hon. member rose_)- if I could make this point, honourable member. 

We as Members of Parliament provide an oversight function on behalf of our people.  So when the report comes out, it will also make a judgment. How did the committee itself, the Committee of Parliament responsible for works supervise that department? When Parliament received reports from the committee, how did Parliament itself make use of these reports?  

Like what my brother, hon. Guma, has just been saying that Parliament is aware Commissions of Inquiries are conducted but Parliament does not see the results.  I think when people on the streets hear us saying that they really get concerned because we are here as Parliament. If we think there is an action in a particular point, we have power to stop actions taking place.  Guma is saying so; I am surprised. What are –(Interruptions)
MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. NPC in order to insinuate that the Committee of Works, Transport and Communication did not do its part yet it is on record that it did find out that the vessels were not insured and did recommend in the last financial year that this vessel should be insured and they were not insured?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. NPC, we approved the report by the Works Committee and it is true that that is one of their recommendations.  So, the committee has been vigilant. You are out of order.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I respect the ruling.  But the point I was making- I did not say that the committee did not do its work properly. I said there is an investigation going to take place and everybody in the chain of command is going to be investigated.  It is possible that in that particular respect, the committee did its work, but maybe the investigation may find other –(Interruption).

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is an established practice in this august that once the Chair has made a ruling the matter rests.  No member is allowed to follow it up except with the permission of the Speaker or with a substantive motion of challenge.  Is my hon. colleague in order to continue with the matter on which you have made a ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. NPC, again you are out of order.  You abandon that line of argument.

DR KIYONGA: I will abandon that line and I respect your ruling. So, if I may conclude, Madam Speaker. First, I want it on record that in my view, post-accident, the Minister and the ministry have tried their best to salvage the cost of the loss.

Two, that l think what is before us- the most useful thing we can do now is to ensure that we get a proper investigation so that we have a good basis to make a firm judgement and take firm action.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the matter is in a way still in the pipeline, both from our committee and from the Government side.  So, I think we have indicated all our areas of discomfort.  So, let the Minister respond and we make some- Honourable members, I have the report of the Economy to conclude.  I have asked the Minister of Works to respond.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I was wondering that if it is a $10 million matter, I do not want to say that the Minister should not respond now. But he will understand why the House is in the state in which it is; yet we are dealing with a $10 million problem for this country.  

I was wondering, Madam Speaker, with a lot of humility that if this debate could be concluded and we give the Minister a bit of time. You know why a number of our colleagues were speaking and going away, because there is a funeral requiem Mass for our departed Brother.  

So, I was just wondering that in view of the importance of this ten million dollar issue before us, would it not be proper if some new issues- and I am talking about new issues that were raised- then we give the Minister time really to come back after consulting or getting the facts from the ministry, the board and the management of the Railways. This is not the first time; we have done it with other Ministers like the Minister of Defence.  So, this is really the matter of procedure I was asking you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will say two things.  The first one is that the Speaker and I have been blamed for not enabling you to do work in this Parliament.  You have complained about work which is on the Order Paper, which has been there for a long time.  So for me the work of this Parliament takes precedence over everything else.  

Secondly, I am an African, I know that we are all grieving for our colleague, but I have set aside four hours of tomorrow’s Parliamentary time for the affairs of the late Musisi.  I think it is unfair for me again to adjourn Parliament, to let people go to church and then tomorrow again I give another four hours.  I think that is not fair.  I think the Minister is a responsible person; he came here knowing what he is supposed to do. Let the Minister answer and we go to other business.  
5.30
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have the facts for most of the clarifications members wanted.  But during the debate, they wanted some clarifications from my colleague, hon. Kasenene, with respect to the privatisation process.  I want to beg that I let him answer the questions on the privatisation for a minute and then I continue.

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think they were three questions which were raised in relation to the privatisation process of Uganda Railways.  Two were raised by hon. Nabwiso and one by hon. Awori.  

The first question was concerning the divestiture process as whether it is moving properly and the progress we expected.  

I am happy to report that, as I had reported earlier on, there is a joint process by the Government of Kenya and the Government of Uganda for a joint divestiture of both jointly Kenya Railways and Uganda Railways and it is moving smoothly and on schedule. 

The schedule is as follows: The companies which were pre-qualified for bidding have completed there due diligence process and the bid submission opening will be on the 30 June 2005.  So, we are waiting for their bids and on the 30 June 2005 we shall open the bids.  In August we shall notify the successful bidder. On 8 September 2005, to be more exact -(Interruptions)

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, the company bided on the basis of understanding that the URC has three ships.  Now that you have no ship to talk about, what do you expect the bids will be? 

MR ATUBO: The Minister has talked of the process of privatisation taking place. I want to hear from the Minister how this privatisation has adversely affected the management of URC.  In other words, if the emphasis now is on privatisation, is it a having negative effect on management to the extent that the management is saying, “After all, this thing is going why should we bother about the ships?”  Therefore, whatever little they could do, they are saying, “Well, there is already a process of this taking place and it has a negative effect on management”.

MR KAKOOZA:  Mine was also on the going concern because according to me I know that a cost is a committed resource to achieve an objective.  If Uganda Railways Corporation has been getting money and nothing has been invested in, how do you expect the cargo from Tanzania to Uganda which, might also be affected, to know that we do not have transport and the Government is not willing to invest in. 

What provisions are in place that the Minister can tell, because Uganda Railways Corporation now is collapsing and we know that we are getting a lot through that Uganda Railways Corporation from the transport of Tanzania up to here? so I feel there is a big problem we need to know.

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Let me complete the divestiture process and then I will respond to the questions of hon. Guma Gumisiriza. We are saying that by September we hope to sign the contracts with the successful bidder, and by the end of this year, December, we should have financial closure of the divestiture process.  In other words, the point I am trying to make is the divestiture processis  moving smoothly and on schedule.

Two questions have come up as to whether the accident is not affecting the divestiture process. Hon. Guma Gumisiriza was saying the three ships have gone and they are not- as the House has been informed.  We have lost one ship and the Minister has said there is still room for recovering it.  But as to the other remaining two, one is for repair and securing insurance and they will operate.  So, if this accident is going to impact on the value of the divestiture, it is the loss of one ship if that is not recovered, but the other two are still with us.

Hon. Omara Atubo was asking how has the divestiture process possibly negatively affected the management of the Uganda Railways Corporation (URC). I would like to say that it has not at all.  As we speak there has been a privatisation technical committee, a committee that steers the divestiture process. 
On this committee, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Works, management of the URC, the Board, the workers, are all represented.  That means there has been close and constant consultations and monitoring of what is going on. As it has already been said, the Privatisation Unit has been monitoring.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, you go and look at the foreign purchases of Uganda Railways Corporation as a component; go and look at it as a component of that organization.  

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I will look at it although the honourable member did not guide me as to what I should look for when I am looking at it. I will look at it, but I do not know what to look for.  But I will do that, and if I find anything I will communicate to my colleague.

The honourable member was asking, do we have terminal benefits for the workers at the end of this privatisation?  The answer is, yes, and as we had reported to this House there has been disagreement. 

As to the calculation, negotiations are moving smoothly between the workers and the privatisation technical committee. As soon as these are concluded, we shall pay all the workers their terminal benefits at the right time.

Madam Speaker, this was not a question, but it was a suggestion from hon. Awori Aggrey to the Minister of Transport.  He was recommending that the marine should be separated from the railways operations and divestiture of the railways leaves out the marine operations.  

But, Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I have already said we have reached a stage – these two have been operating as one unit. We have reached a stage where the due diligence has been completed and all the bid documents included both components. 

I think as far as the country is concerned, what is important is whether through the divestiture process we are going to get a capable and experienced investor who is going to improve the performance and efficiency of these two operations. The country will benefit from this divestiture –(Interruption)
MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable Minister.  I have a concern and my concern is in relation to the East African Federation. I do remember at one time when we were in Arusha at the signing of the Customs Union, one of the issues raised was that of the transport sector. I remember that there was a promise that the East African countries would enhance the transport sector, especially the railway communication and the marine.  

Now if we have an investor, will the investor be committed to enhancing this sector to levels, which we anticipate in order to facilitate the Customs Union as well as mobility of labour and what the East African Federation had hoped to achieve?  I would like some clarification on this matter.  Thank you.

MR MAFABI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to seek a clarification from the Minister of State for Finance (Privatisation). You have sold over 120 enterprises; you have got money, of this money how many enterprises have you again put up to sell?  The money you will get from Uganda Railways Corporation, are you building another Railway Corporation for sale or you are going to eat the money?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I was concluding on the other recommendation that it is not possible now in the divestiture process to separate the two.  Now, as to the unity that we are working towards to in the East African Community; Besides the Privatization Technical Committee of Uganda, there is a joint privatization technical committee of the two countries where our technocrats from Uganda and technocrats from Kenya work together from time to time. 

All the concerns of the two countries, unfortunately Tanzania was not able to come with us but it was not our making; an attempt was made to attract them into this joint concession, but they did not come with us.  So this Joint Privatization Technical Committee which brings together the two countries has been taking care of all the concerns of the two countries. I am sure it is actually strengthening this objective.  

Madam Speaker, as to the funds that come from the divesture of the enterprises, I will make here the required statutory report.  This has been outlined - the amount of money that proceeds from the divesture account, how much is it and where and in which banks it is.  The money is available in the banks and we are following strictly the PERD’s Act as to how these funds should be used.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, all the enterprises which are being sold were put up during Obote’s time and Amin’s time.  Now this government of ours, the best government, the elite, for us we are selling for the unelite.  What enterprise are we putting up, because if Government is the engine for growth it is supposed to take to the private sector? It should have used the money to build another thing and then sell.  

Now my question is, is it just to keep the money in the bank or it is supposed to build another enterprise for another sell?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The money, which will come out of the proceeds?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, the PERD Act clearly outlines how the proceeds of privatization should be used. I am saying that we are following the PERD Act and the PERD Act clearly outlines how this money should be used.  Thank you.

5.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honorable Mafabi, you should know that the policy is that we have people centered, market driven and private sector led. 

I will start with hon. Kaddunabbi. First of all, I am happy to hear about the report he read but I was hearing it for the first time.  I think this was a communication between the insurer and management. It was still at management level, it had nothing to do with policy level and that is why it was not brought to my attention.  But I am interested to have that report. I will also read it since it was highlighting the weaknesses within the ships.  

Many honorable members talked about breakdown in communication. It is also still puzzling us as to why the ships could not communicate with Kampala.  I was briefed by the marine department that their ships communicate on the lake throughout Kisumu to Mwanza; we do not know why the communication broke down.  Whether it is because of the accident that the communication system was damaged. We are trying to find out because these are radio communication.  

Was there insurance of these vehicles for 2003? The answer is no, the vehicles were not insured for 2003. If you check the statute of URC, URC was set up to run on commercial principles and make its business decisions. In fact, when there is an incident like this and colleagues are bashing ministers, “you should have done this, you should have done this”. It again reminds me, because I have had an opportunity to be in this House for some time, the spirit in the 90s when new statutes and bills were being debated here. There was a mood that “Do not give Ministers any powers, there is political interference here, the board will do.” Most of these Acts were done in that spirit of removing powers from the ministers because they thought they would be political influence and they suggested that public enterprises should run on commercial principles.  

In fact, it reached the point where URC was providing what we call “Public Service Obligations”, Government had to pay because we removed subsidies. 

So, URC was trying to balance its budget. I am not trying to defend him on that but how do we balance our budget for our operations to run – you hope you are taking a calculated risk and then you run into this serious problem.  
I know they keep telling us to have life insurance and suddenly when you fall sick you find you cannot even manage the bills.  We have been trying to get some ships to hire, and the information is that some of the ships that we were trying to hire, URC have found that they might not be having insurance at this stage. So, this is the other dilemma we have on this matter. 

 So, I think the issue of insurance has been looked at, but this is a good lesson for us. This is why we have said, “Pamba you will not leave Port Bell until you are insured.” We cannot take chances anymore. 

I cannot comment on Government vehicles. I think that one I will leave my colleague to come here and discuss, the Minister of Public Service who handles the policy on Government vehicles. As to why they are not insured. I am sure the Minister of Public Service will come and clarify. 

Honorable Nabwiso, time frame for the commission: In fact, one honorable member said, “You do not have to get permission from the Attorney General.”  I am not seeking permission from the Attorney General. I am seeking advise on this kind of commission where I intend to involve even representatives from international bodies like the International Marine Organisation. I have also consulted with colleague of Tanzania because being landlocked we do not have many experts in Marine law, marine engineering and so forth. The only ones we have are actually in URC and I cannot use the URC people. 

So, I am getting some people from Kenya and International Marine Organization to set up clear terms of reference. So, my contact with the Attorney General is for legal advice. It is my hope that this Commission of Inquiry will be set up within a week. Looking at the work, I do not think it should take more than a month to complete its work. This is just a rough estimate. I will give you a definite one when the commission is set up. 

I hope this commission is independent and expert people who will go and give us a report. Let me at this stage assure the House, Madam Speaker, that when this report is finished it will be for the public, but it will also be brought to this House. There will be nothing to hide. 

MR MULENGANI: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is on the proposed inquiry you intend to set up. Is it specifically for the cause of the accident or it will involve even the management and the accident or both? Thank you.

MR. NASASIRA: Terms of reference are going to be published, but it is the cause of the accident, not the only the physical cause but all the related operations of the marine services. 

Hon. Nabwiso, qualification of officers. I have been informed that all the officers have got competent certificates to operate these machines; the officers who were on these machines. 

The future of marine transport, the marine transport has a future. Hon. Nabwiso wanted to know whether we have been doing any work. Definitely Marine transport at the moment is poor. For example, the whole of Lake Victoria has got no navigational infrastructure in Kenya and Tanzania and our side. This matter is being addressed through the East African cooperation. But on our part as Uganda, the development of the inland water transport study was completed and the safety of navigation on Lake Victoria study was also completed –(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: Hon. Nasasira, I do not know who said it, Hon. Nandala or hon. Kaddunabbi. The honourable Minister must have heard- I think it is from hon. Kaddunabbi’s report which the Minister has not seen or read by his own admission - that the vessels were not sea worthy. This is in full knowledge of the management of Uganda Railways. I am not talking about its political headship, but the management. 

So, this commission of inquiry or the investigation you are going to set up - I think it is hon. Nandala who asked something like that- what is it going to establish? Vessels were not sea worthy. Mr Mulungi and his management were in full knowledge. They were not sea worthy; they were not supposed to go to the water; they knew. So, the investigation, Mr Minister, what is it going to bring out? I do not understand. I cannot comprehend.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Minister, you know we have lost a dear colleague –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware of that.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, taking note of what hon. Guma has stated, I would like to find out from hon. Minister whether he is aware that one of the factors which caused the strike of traders here in Kampala was a problem of congestion of the sea ports at Mombasa and inability of Uganda Railway to provide efficient service for traders to use alternative routes of Dar–as-Salaam. 

Noting that, what immediate action are you going to put in place to ensure that the interruption in terms of suspending the movement of Pamba until is insured, the condition of the Marine and the Kaawa is restored so that the traders can have opportunity and the business of this country is not interrupted for a long time?  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya and hon. Wambuzi raised those questions. I think the Minister is going to answer them

CAPT. BASALIZA: For an extra report for hon. Ekanya since he has just come-(Laughter)

MR. NASASIRA: Thank you very much, hon. Omuduumizi. So, I had reached what we are doing. The safety and navigation of lake Victoria study has been completed and the project for safety development identified. The national transport master plan, which has just been concluded, also includes elements of the inland water transport. There are other ongoing studies and policy preparations on water transport. 

Then hon. Nabwiso says that he has heard rumours that I have an interest in wagon ferries. But at least he concluded by saying that for him he does not believe it. I should categorically state whether I have interest in these wagon ferries or not. I definitely have an interest as far as their work is concerned. I want them to work. I want them to be efficient as a minister responsible for transport. 

But if he is referring to interest in acquiring them during the concessioning, even if I had an interest, I cannot. It will be a conflict of interest and I have no capacity to compete for privatization under hon. Kasenene. I do not think I would qualify as one of the bidders. So, in that area, definitely I do not have any interest there.

Hon. Bintu, it is unfortunate that MV Kabalega sunk, but we still have hope depending on the survey on the machines that this ship could be retrieved. We are consulting all the companies that have retrieved ships. Lake Victoria is not necessary a deep lake and depending on the quick survey, which has started, we think we will be able to retrieve this ship and repair it. 

But in any case there are more ships to come. Soon we shall be launching MV Kalangala and if this one does not come, I think we could take its features. When we get ships we can name another ship in remembrance of this ship. I am sure we shall retrieve it- (Interjection)- Well, I am not an expert. I will have to wait until I am advised technically.


Honourable Gagawala asked, “Was it necessary to take insurance or not?  I have explained that. It is a high risk to operate without insurance. This is a public asset, that is public money, losing it is a very high risk.

Now age versus service:  The three ships, one was launched in 1983, another one in 1985 and the other in 1986. They have been operating for 20 years.  I will consult, but I think ships last longer.  I do not know how many years they last, but definitely more than 20 years.  Yes, they can last for a very long time.  So those ships were still in good mechanical condition to operate.  

What was the problem? Those areas that were being identified needed ratification, which I think because of budget constraints were not always on top of things.

Who has authority over lake victoria and who licenses the other?  The licensing to operate URC is done through the Uganda Railways Statute of 1992.  The law empowers URC to operate on land and transport goods on water.  So they are empowered.  We do not have a common regulator.  But if you leave the Uganda waters and you enter the Tanzania waters, then you have to fulfil obligations of those countries.

Hon. Aggrey Awori, first of all, he wants me to resign.  He says when an accident happens whoever is responsible – there are a series of accidents, I agree, but I have not been in charge of the Ministry of transport.  You cannot expect to get accidents in a field of maize if you are in a Ministry of Agriculture. You cannot expect accidents in potato fields and sugarcane fields – these accidents happen on the roads, in the air and on the sea. These are transport vehicles, which have accidents. Now what can I do, because that is what I am in charge of?  I will bring the records here.  I am sure you have been reading this in newspapers.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori knows very well how many, for example, train accidents have happened in London alone. How many ministers have resigned as result of these accidents?  Aviation accidents in United States happen almost on a daily basis.  You can go and check.  But they have the federal Aviation Board and the transport board, immediately the accidents happen these boards investigate and find out the reason.  That is what I am trying to do, to investigate and find out. This is what I do with aviation.  

In any case the Instrument Landing System (ILS) at the airport is fine.  I would agree with you that the radar is old, but the ILS is fine and the accidents that happened actually were not only for Russian planes.  One was a Boeing belonging to Ethiopian airline, which was coming here to refuel and decided to collapse in our lake. Now what would I have done?  This is an Ethiopian airline; I have not heard the Minister of Ethiopia also resigning.

The other one was a Russian Industrial. You should have noticed in the newspapers, as soon as that accident happened, I directed CAA to ground the two Russian aircrafts. They have not been working for two weeks.  So, action is being taken.  As soon as we find a fault they have got to fulfil each and every obligation.  So, I do take action.  

But if ever as a Minister, I find some action I have taken has caused a problem to the country and it is directed to me, I will definitely resign. I can assure you on that.  Where I find I am responsible as a Minister, I will resign.  But at this moment I do not think there is any cause for me to resign.  Otherwise, all these accidents, you would be having new ministers of transport everyday anywhere in the world.  Since, honourable Awori, my friend, you are planning to be a president, you will run out of ministers if you are going to change ministers on everyday basis.  You will have problems of reshuffle.

The private debt collector, those issues I have taken. URC chose to use private debt collector because they wanted some lawyers to keep taking these companies to court. They have done some recovery on whoever failed to pay. URC was failing to collect its money and we were also pressuring them?  

The cargo manifesto, you said you are suspicious of what is under the sea. Is it true it was wheat grain?  Yes, it was wheat grain. Definitely as you said, even if it was classified material there is nothing wrong with transporting classified material.  We could have stated here that it was transporting – because there is totally nothing wrong with it.  
We could have stated that it is classified.  And to allay your fears, I want to lay on the table the manifest.

The way forward –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Awori, that is the Speaker’s document for the time being, please.

MR NASASIRA:  This is the property of the House.  Hon. Awori, as my colleague said, separate marine from rail; it was discussed during the plan for concessioning.  But you should see these wagons as part of the Uganda rail; you should see them as a mobile rail.  

You can imagine, if you had a company that was running those ships and Uganda Railways is transporting goods from Dar-as-Salaam to Kampala by rail and they reach Mwanza and this company says, “I am busy transporting other things,” how would the transporting company be able to bring this?  

You just see the wagons at the rail bridge between Mwanza and Port Bell and in some extent, between Mwanza and Jinja and linking them off the rail is cutting the railway operation and depending on some other operator to do your business.  Just see them as a bridge.

I think it is hon. Omach who had also asked about the qualifications of the officers.  Yes, they were junior officers and when I inspected the ship and I asked the captains, they told me that the captains according to their procedure of work they have shifts of eight hours each. 

When the ship is sailing off, the captain is in charge for eight hours and goes to rest. The second officer takes over for another eight hours and then the captain is in charge when they are coming back to the dock.  So they had had their shift and they had called in their second in command to take charge.  But anyway, we shall get more details with this inquiry.

Delaying communication, I have explained it and I think all of you followed honourable Kagimu’s story of MV Bukoba.  The unfortunate end of MV Bukoba is that hundreds of people died.  In fact that ship has never been recovered, but it was a big disaster.
I have taken the issue of life jackets. I think life jackets have been increasing on our lakes.  

Hon. Mafabi, I am not aware that the Managing Director of Uganda Railways Corporation wrote to the Permanent Secretary, but I will have to find out what the Managing Director wrote to the Permanent Secretary. 

The main reason why URC was having problems with insuring these vehicles is financial.  If you look at the revenue of URC versus its expenditure, I am not saying they should not insure. They will definitely insure, but I think they were trying to balance. URC actually does not make money.  I tried to get these figures, the sixth months that end in December last year, the total revenue of URC was Ugshs 14.2billion and the expenditure was Ugshs 16.5billion for the six months. So, they are on a string; they are really running on a financial string; they are not making a lot of money.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Minister.  If the revenue has been less than the expenditure, that means, the operational costs have been high, either the staff is too big or you have a huge board, which is being paid a lot of money. Whatever the case, Madam Minister, there is management accounts. How do you continue to sustain an enterprise? It might be transport, which is making a loss and at the end it brings us an extra problem of about $10 million.

MR NASASIRA: I want to refer you to my statement.  In my statement, I said that in August 2001, Cabinet approved the Railway Sector Strategy and Privatisation Implementation Plan. In April 2004, the Divesture Reform Implementation Committee approved the URC Divesture Action Plan.  All these actions are to make URC a viable entity.  Soon I will bring a new bill that is going to set up a new URC where you will have a concession on one side and the Uganda Railways Company on another, which will be the landlord. So, the complaints you hear where we are downsizing staff is one way of reducing costs; where we are improving operations, like blocked trains to Mombasa is another way of reducing costs. 


MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In terms of determining whether you are losing money or whether you are making money, have you been able to put into categories the core activity and the core assets, non-core activity and non-core assets? Where are you losing the money?

MR NASASIRA: First, we were first losing money on public service obligation, where we are running trains at a loss. If you wanted to make- unless you provided subsidies on one side as Government, otherwise, you want to make Uganda Railway Corporation run only on those activities which are profitable.  Now, we have completed all the due diligences and the core activity. You do not lose money on core activity and core assets?  

I want to admit that there are a lot of idle assets of Uganda Railways Corporation. As soon as we finish this arrangement, you will find a non-core asset that can be turned into money and the core assets which are more for running. URC is one of the biggest landlords in this country.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Once again you have mentioned a very interesting point.  You are one of the biggest landlords, do you occupy prime land which is a no-activity or asset? What are you doing about it? Can you liquidate part of it in order to offset the other loss especially provision of public service.

MR NASASIRA: That is exactly what I said. I said after doing due diligence, we have separated core activity with core assets and non-core activity with non-core assets. This is why I said Uganda Railway Corporation is one of the biggest landlords. You are going to see how these non-core assets are going to be converted. We want to do it in a most transparent and open way- (Interjection)- the policy will come. 

MR MAFABI: Honourable Minister, you may be making a loss somewhere but at the same time making a saving somewhere.  Let me give you this example.  You are saying public transport is the one causing a big loss. Supposing you remove many cars from the road and as people are going to the train you are making losses, you are saving your roads, you are saving the spares of cars and many other things.  But, honourable Minister, it should not go by the only motive of profits; you should look at what implications it has on the economy.  There are also social benefits Bwana Minister, which are attributed because it can be a cost way of production.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think some of these issues you can invite the Minister and discuss them in your committees.  You are asking him to provide an alternative route in view of the problems but again you are saying, “we are advising you how to make profits”.

MR NASASIRA: I agree with hon. Mafabi, that is exactly the line we are on.  Now with respect to what hon. Mafabi is saying, as soon as something happens throw people in prison and dismiss them; we are trying to run a democratic law abiding Government. I think our form of justice is that you are innocent until proved guilty. This is why we have adequate laws to establish Commissions of Inquiry and this is not the first time. 

Let me give you examples: These wagons have had some accidents before, not as severe as this one, and those who have been responsible, investigations have been done internally and action taken.

Now let me give you example two; in 1995 MV Pamba was involved in an accident; the accident was investigated and it was found that it was the fault of the officer called Olwa and that officer was sacked.  

In 1999, MV Kaawa ran on ground and investigation was done and Capt. Koba and 2nd officer Zziwa were dismissed. So, we have had a trend of where we do investigations, decide who is responsible and take the necessary action. I think that should be a process if you want to run a democratic law enforcing Government. Otherwise, throwing people in prisons as soon as declaring them guilty before you know- (Interruption)

 MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, in the light of the way forward, consult the Attorney General.  

I am inquiring from the Minister whether you as a minister, you are having any problem or difficulty you face anywhere to have the top management suspended in order to allow investigation when you reach the moment of implementing item (b) of inquiries.  

Do you personally have difficulty in suspending the top management to ensure that there is smooth running of the investigations? Like in NSSF, various people have been suspended off job before investigations are done. I wonder, you personally as a minister, do you have difficulty in suspending the top management? Kindly, clarify.

MR MAFABI: Are you happy that the top management, the Uganda Railway management, allowed the ship or has allowed the ships to sail on waters without insurance?

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have asked that question and hon. Guma has asked it so many times.

MR NASASIRA: I have no problem at all. Everything will have to be done in accordance with the statute. I have to follow the statute. I know investigations have been done on ministers, on honourable Members of Parliament, but we continued doing our work and eventually the reports came.  

A number of us have been investigated as ministers and Members of Parliament for different reasons. I did not see anybody saying, “now leave Parliament until the investigations are over.” We stayed, nothing was interfered with investigations and names were cleared.  Let us move this country that way rather than saying there is this problem off your head. We do not want to go back to Amin’s days.

Hon Okupa, I have answered your question about the person who allowed ships to sail.  I would like to beg honourable members to let me consult on one point, which I have not yet got a proper legal advice.  I can share this with you, whether insurance is compulsory and what type of insurance, third party, comprehensive, or whether insuring anything is just a business decision. I do not have an answer for that and I will have to consult.

MR KADDUNABBI: I would like to inform this august House that we might be having about two compulsory classes of insurance. There is third party and workers’ compensation. 
The other type of insurance you determine it according- the vehicles of Government were excluded from making a compulsory insurance because Government is doing what we call self-insurance.  Government has the capacity to pay a claim of 100 millions in case one of its vehicles gets an accident. So that is allowed also in self insurance.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable members, I still agree with the Minister having listened to hon. Kaddunabbi because if you are going to operate in international waters, and you say that it is- we are not talking about our local seas here. Under marine law, I think you require insurance. So Minister, please find out.

MR NASASIRA: That is why I asked the House to find out more.  I have really gone through, Madam Speaker, most of the clarification. I want to assure members that we are going to carry out thorough investigation and get to the bottom of the cause of this accident and those responsible for it and we shall bring the report back for this Parliament and for the people of Uganda.  Thank you very much.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, maybe Minister, just one thing. You are being asked now that MV Kaawa and MV Pamba are grounded. How are we going to handle that channel of trade, that one you have not? -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: First, as I said in my submission, Madam Speaker, we are in touch with our colleagues. We know Tanzania Railways or Tanzania Government has got MV Umoja like these wagon ferries- no let me start from us.  First, Pamba must be made insurable and insured as a matter of urgency so that it is back on the waters.  

Two, in 30 days Kaawa will have been repaired because this company has been doing work for URC and also made insurable and it should be back.  

So, I am saying that I see two ships back working between 30 to 45 days.  In the meantime, if we can find any of these wagon ferries that we shall hire, we shall hire them to clear the stock.  Then we are advising the shippers to use temporarily those we have been using from Dar-salaam so that their cargo is off loaded at Mombasa and they come by rail. 
The delays as hon. Ekanya was saying was more to do with the Port than the rail. The congestion at the Port and the stages to go through: We are discussing this with our Kenya counter-part to see how to solve the congestion at the Port.

MR MULENGANI:  Madam Speaker, I had wanted one clarification from the Minister, whether he has been informed that the information, which Uganda Railways Corporation gave when it was seeking insurance, was wrong. In their document, which was advertised in September 2003, according to the Minister, they were saying that they maintained their ship according to Loids Register specification. It was withdrawn on 22 July 2003. So by the time they put up the advert, it was not the fact. 

 One of the principles, the cardinal point, is utmost good faith. So the client was giving wrong information to the insurer and that is one of the major points and they can defend it that way.  Is he informed of that and, how does he want us to move as Government?

MR NASASIRA:  I was not, but now I am taking that useful information, Madam Speaker.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, thank you very much.  Government is doing their part, and on Tuesday the Works Committee had indicated that it had already started taking an interest in the same matter.  Now, considering that we are coming to the end of the fourth session, I am not in position to set up an ad-hoc committee. So I will assign this work to the Committee on Works, because they will always be in a sessional committee, to also look into this matter and report back to us.  So, I think the sessional committee or whatever the composition either now or next week will handle this matter on our behalf. Thank you.

MR OKUPA:  Just on the Report on the National Economy. I do not know whether the Minister- but since we have one Minister from the Ministry of Finance here- there was a part which the Minister in his statement did say that there are some issues which they cannot answer, it will be answered by other ministries.  

So we are appealing to ministries to be around possibly tomorrow or on the day when we are going to debate this matter.  
We thought Ministry of Finance, as being the central part would have been able to answer all these questions. But again the Minister of Finance is saying respective ministries will be in position to answer those specific issues, which were raised in the committee report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Guma Gumisiriza, do you have the ministries concerned so that we can notify them?

CAPT GUMA: Madam Speaker, I would request for your indulgence to have this matter debated next week, because I consider it really extremely important to have the Government ministers here. Many of them who are concerned like Energy and Water are not here- (Interruptions)- No, no.  Madam Speaker, we are not more than 50 in this House. So, I think really this is such a serious point and a matter for the country.  

It is necessary that we discuss it when we are fresh and members delve into the issues of the report raised.  There are many, many concerns especially in the respect to the report, which the Minister Musumba read before us.  He never touched on the major fundamental aspects of the report.  So, it is very important, Madam Speaker, that I request for your indulgence to look into this report on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, just name the ministers who are required.

CAPT GUMA: But we need all the ministers, Madam Speaker, to be here so that we can really have a meaningful exchange of views. The Minister of Finance is talking of four sectors of the economy: Transport and Communications, Energy, Health and Water, on whose issues were raised in the report. The Minister of Finance is saying the Minister responsible for all these sectors, on page 3, should answer in depth in respect to the issues the report talked about.  

My view is that really there are not many MPs, quite a number has gone and it is already late.  Maybe they are in Lubaga for the funeral service. I would request that we really discuss this report next week.

MR NASASIRA: You see in the Committee on Economy, the report is really directed to the Minister of Finance. Now they want specific ministers in charge of certain sectors to respond to some of those areas.  Are we going to do it once, when the Minister of Finance finishes, then these other ministers come in and eventually there is debate?  The Minister of Finance finished today and the Chairperson of the Committee can come in. I just wanted a procedure or guidance on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we would require them to be around and they respond and then we have a debate and finish.  Okay, we defer it to next week.  

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER 

QUESTION NO. 21/05 TO THE MINISTER OF WATER, LAND AND ENVIRONMENT

6.38
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (Woman Representative, Busia):  Madam Speaker, question 21/05: “In the 1940s, the Government evacuated communities living in the present day Sitamboko and west Bugwe forest reserve, Busia distrct, due to tsetse fly infection and it’s associated effects. By the ’50s the epidemic had been contained thus paving way for the resettlement of the affected communities on the land they had been evacuated from. Parliament approved the said resettlement in 1962 and the Government sanctioned the resettlement of the affected communities in accordance with their clan groups and the community arrangements as they were before, with specific instructions not to tamper with land already allocated to the college.

However to date, the process of resettlement remains incomplete with 54 clans still unsettled who recently sent a memorandum to the minister of Water, Land and Environment to this effect.

In the meantime, the forestry authority is instead reportedly:
a) Securing the boundaries of the existing forest reserves occasionally encompassing adjoining land already settled upon;
b) Denying local communities access to the land, not even for grazing, and;
c) Demolishing and destroying crops;
In the circumstances, would the Minister;
1) Explain the arrangement, if any, the Government has put in place to finalise the resettlement of the remaining 54 clans in Bulumbi- Busitema
2) State whether Government is aware of the above- mentioned activities of NFA that have, among others caused socio-economic hardships to the affected communities neighbouring the forest reserves and hence disrupted the resettlement process?
3) If so, what steps so far been taken to address the plight of the affected people?”

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I submitted an oral question in October 2003.  Now what is the procedure of allocating numbers of questions or answers?  I would imagine 2003 is earlier than 2005.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you are asking me to help you look for it; we shall look for it.  Proceed, Minister.  

Maybe, before the Minister answers. Honourable members, last year we invited an expert from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association; we spent the whole evening with him discussing really the contents of questions.  But you find members are still asking questions which are two pages long.  By the time the Minister finishes answering and then supplementaries, those are three hours.  Honourable members, please, you will have to review how you ask your questions.  Minister proceed.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker, we are supposed to have Parliamentary staff to guide, summarize the question and make it specific and it is their work really.  So the Clerk’s office should ensure that some questions are summarized and they are specific.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have inquired from them why they continue doing this, and they say when they try to guide you, you insist on the entire question.

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I hope the staff have distributed the response, and if they have done that, I have a few corrections to make on page 1, the fourth line from the bottom.  It should read not NFA, but National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003 and not 2004.  

The next correction is on page 3, the ninth line from top should be “Saw Log Production Plant Grant Scheme (SPGS) and Collaborative Forest Management”, cross out what is in brackets and replace that with “CFM” and then the next line you cross out what is in brackets.

Towards the bottom of that same page, the highlighted, it is saying, “insecurity the boundaries”, the word should be “securing” not “security”.  Having made those corrections, let me quickly go through the answer to the question by hon. Munyira.  

The question as colleagues may recall is related to Sitambogo and West Bugwe Forest Reserves.  Now in 1939, following an investigation, the District Forest Officer of Bukedi recommended reservation for protection of Bulungwe Hills, which actually constitute Sitambogo and this area has generally poor vegetation.  

The provision administration approved the proposal and Sitambogo Forest Reserve located in Samia-Bugwe in Busia District was first gazetted under Legal Notice 275 of 1940 at a native African Reserve, covering an area of approximately 2.29 square miles (593 hectares). The reserve consisted of a ridge of mountains running south west from the Jinja-Busia road and includes those hills, which I have indicated.  

In 1948, details of the forest reserve, together with West Bugwe and the Sukulu hills were consolidated and updated in Legal Notice No. 41 and were repeated in the laws of Uganda in 1951 Vol. III page 2143. So, this is how West Bugwe and Sitambogo forest reserves came into existence.  

The management of these forest reserves is mandated to the National Forest Authority (NFA) and governed by the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003.  Now, since NFA was launched on 26 April 2004, it has been re-establishing both the physical and legal integrity of the Central Forest Reserves (CFRs) following the mal-administration and institutional instability that we went through since the 1970s.  

Now, the specific questions, which the honourable member asked are: One; “Explain the arrangements, if any, the government has put in place to finalise the resettlement of the remaining 54 clans in Bulumbi-Busitema.”  In July 1964, a Member of Parliament from this area in the names of hon. F. X. Mugeni moved a motion for the de-gazetting of part of West Bugwe Forest Reserve, and Parliament at that time approved his motion. This, therefore, set in motion the de-gazetting process. 

The chief conservator of forests at that time computed that 16.92 square miles, approximately 4,188 hectares, out of a total 29 square miles, which consisted of West Bugwe Forest Reserve to be released to Bukedi District Council for resettlement. What was eventually computed was actually more than what hon. Mugeni had asked for in his motion. 

On 6 April 1965, the chief conservator of forests notified Bukedi district administration to arrange for the resettlement of the excised area.  If you look at the back of this I have indicated a sketch map, which shows the excised area. With this notification, therefore, the question of resettlement was resolved. Hence, there is no new question of resettlement of any 54 clans.  

The second question was: “State whether government is aware of the above-mentioned – now the above-mentioned seems to refer to the preamble to the question –“activities of NFA that have, among others, caused socio-economic hardships to the affected communities neighbouring the forest reserves, and hence disrupted the resettlement process.” 

Late last year, there was a meeting specifically to deal with the questions of resettlements, evictions and encroachment held in the Office of the Prime Minister. In this meeting, NFA was tasked, among other things, to carry out the following six activities: 
·	To re-open and maintain the boundaries of the Central Forest Reserves (CFRs).
·	To create awareness among local communities living in and around the CFRs.
·	To register the encroachers.
·	To stop any new encroachments.
·	To ensure there is no buying or selling of land belonging to the CFRs because it has been observed in some places that this is actually taking place.  
·	To patrol the Central Forest Reserves against all forms of illegal activities.  

So, when the honourable member asks whether I am aware, yes, I am aware of the activities of NFA and indeed Members of the Natural Resources Committee of this Parliament are equally aware. And as I indicated earlier, the issues, which she seems to imply, that is the issues of denying local communities access to land, demolishing of houses and destroying of crops, I will deal with these a little later in greater detail. But the question is, am I aware, and I am saying, yes, I am aware. 

Thirdly, the honourable colleague is asking, if I am aware, “What steps have so far been taken to address the plight of the affected people?” Now, the issue of encroachment, which this question seems to refer to, is not so big in Sitambogo and Samia-Bugwe forest reserves. In fact, records show that there are only five families of encroachers within these two forest reserves, and the area affected is only 20 hectares. The evictions of these, if and when it will occur, will be done in a systematic and humane way and in collaboration with all the relevant government institutions.

Presently, local communities are being encouraged to apply for licenses to grow trees on the central forest reserves, and NFA is providing some support through the Saw Log Production Grant Schemes (SPGS) and through Collaborative Forest Management (CFM). Collaborative Forest Management is intended to benefit the local communities in as far as resources from the forests are concerned.  Government is also promoting investment in eco-tourism in West Bugwe central forest reserves so as to increase forest-based livelihood options for the local people in this area.

As I said in the preamble, the honourable member raised three issues: The issue relating to the securing of boundaries and occasionally taking over land already settled upon; the issue of denying local communities access to the land even for grazing; and the issue of demolishing houses and destroying crops. So, let me briefly specifically address these three issues beginning with the question of taking over adjoining land already settled upon.  

I think, colleagues should note and really recognize that the forest reserves’ boundaries were established at the time the forest reserves were demarcated. Legal Notice No. 41 of 1948 established the boundary of West Bugwe Central Forest Reserve after the 4,457 hectares were excised for resettlement. Sitambogo Forest Reserve on the other hand was established in the 1951/52 period at the time of these demarcation after the issues were readdressed following the consolidation. 

Therefore, what is happening now is that NFA is merely reopening and maintaining the old boundaries established more than 60 years ago.  So, if you find yourself within the forest, it is not NFA that is taking over your land, you have actually entered the central forest reserve, which was there long before you came. 

The second issue is that NFA is denying local communities access to land even for grazing. Now, the central forest reserves are protected areas. They are not for free access for anybody for that matter to carry out any activity without a licence.  This is what we must remember that for you to carry out any activity within the forest reserve it should be licensed; if you do not have a licence it is illegal. 

In another words, you can actually carry out something so long as it is licensed and a licence is got after an application, and I think this is what should be made. So, grazing can be allowed so long as you apply and get a licence, but you cannot wake up and walk in and then say they have denied me when you know this is a protected area. 

So, as I said, grazing is one such prohibited activity, unless a licence is issued and when a licence is issued it comes with conditions. So, when your activities are performed there are conditions under which you should perform such activities. NFA indeed is licensing Ugandans to undertake a wide range of activities inside the central forest reserves, including construction of permanent buildings. 

You know, some people think because it is a protected area then this activity cannot take place. It can take place so along as it is licensed, so long as it is according to the management plan of that particular forest reserve. So, the point I am driving at is that, there is a difference between licensed activity and illegal activity. So, when you walk in, it is illegal; when you ask for it and you are licensed, it is legal and you are permitted to do it.

Finally, the honourable member raised the question of demolishing houses and destroying crops. In Sitambogo and West Bugwe, no involuntary evictions have so far been carried out. Therefore, no houses, no crops have been destroyed. 

In February/March this year, we carried out registration exercise of illegal settlers and cultivators in Sitambogo and West Bugwe. We were able to establish that in Sitambogo there were only two encroachers in the names of Nabowa Thereza and Mrs. Yosana, and there were only three in West Bugwe Forest Reserve in the names of Mutwalibi Chediha, Mande Agustino and Jama Charles and there was only 90 hectares of land of the forest reserves affected. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, colleagues, for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister! Any supplementary? Supplementary begins with the person who asked the question. 

6.58
MRS ROSE WABWIRE MUNYIRA (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his response to this matter. Supplementary to the questions that I presented, I would like to ask the minister the following questions: Is the minister aware that the Bagwe as a tribe are threatened by extinction because of the activities of National Forest Authority and the government failure to honour the promise to return the land to the people? The honourable minister has clearly stated that this land was gazetted in 1940, but the minister should know that the circumstances under which government gazetted this land were not fair. 

I would like to find out from the honourable minister through you, Madam Speaker, if there is an epidemic in the neighbourhood and you come in to salvage the situation by forcing the people literally by burning the huts to make them out this kind of situation I saw that you save lives, while they seek refuge in other places, does it mean that you come behind them and register their land without their consent? 

According to the laws I know, if you are going to secure any boundary it is good for you to sit with your neighbour and the local leaders then come up with a boundary. This was not the case with Samia West Bugwe and Sitambogo forest reserves. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether the minister is aware that sleeping sickness as an epidemic ended long ago in this place. Government set up Busitema College in this place, there are government officers who are serving there and have not died of sleeping sickness. Sterling Strabag set up a camp when constructing a road in the heart of the forest reserve, and none of their staff was reported dead due to sleeping sickness.  Then there is also the URA checkpoint at Busitema it is in the heart of the forest reserve, and none of their staff has died as a result of sleeping sickness. 

So, I would like to call upon the minister to work on these issues and see how to complete or to finalize the resettlement of people. The people request that this area, which belong to their ancestors and was unlawfully taken over by government be returned to them. Some request has been formerly done through the district land board; I do not know the dealing between National Forest Authority and Busia District Land Board. But they have placed their request through the district land board for the attention of the minister.

Government made a commitment, Madam Speaker, to resettle the people and according to what the honourable minister has presented, this was done in part. The minister has stated that the resettlement was done in full. I would like to categorically state here that the resettlement was not done in full, it was done in part, government showed the goodwill to return the land.      

Next, Madam Speaker, is there today a clear-cut resettlement policy or it is not there or is it just ad hoc?  Because certainly, I think we need it since many of us are still agricultural, we have somehow to have access to the land. Now, if people are evicted from one place, then there must be really a way where they have to continue to have access to land elsewhere.
Next, Madam Speaker, do people have to be resettled in their tribal areas or can they be resettled elsewhere?  Thank you.

7.13
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga):  Madam Speaker on page 4, second point, where the minister has stated a way of accessing land by getting a license, is there a proper criteria of who gets this land, because I have an experience in Bbaale, in a parish called Misanga? The local citizens have been trying to acquire land but finding a lot of problem and one rich man called Kalangwa comes and gets a full village and the citizens remain suffering. Is the minister aware that some powerful personalities in this countries use the access to government offices to get chunks of land, which is in reserve and the rest of the population cannot get this?

7.14
MRS JANE ALISEMERA BABIIHA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted also to ask the minister on the same issue of population. Is he aware that the population has grown like my friend has said? And this is the time when government should look at the population growth policy effectively, because most of the time when we look at population issues, it seems we look at we should have more people to vote for us other than having a small manageable population. What is happening now, the people have encroached on this land because of the population pressures.

Another question is, can government reconsider re-gazetting these areas? When I visited the National Forest Authority in Fort portal, when they were showing me the areas, which are under forest reserve - in fact on their map they were saying that this is supposed to be a forest reserve, but there is no forest! And the areas they were telling me are areas where even my fathers were born and there is now cocoa, palm trees and some other coffee plantations. So now, if you say you are going to evict these people from here, it means you are going to cause absolute poverty. Now, can the government change its policy from 1940 and look at this policy now and looking at the areas, which are supposed to be government land? Can the minister change the policy at least to re-degazette land for resettlement?
And also I wanted to ask the minister, do you really see this resettlement as a problem in terms of society problems? Because when you pick my family and take it to Kabale and you leave my aunties in Bundibugyo, how do you think you are helping these families to grow, yet in our communities we are supposed – for example, in Bundibugyo, each clan has a whole area. So, when you say you remove some of these, it means you are disintegrating the clan, how are you going to handle that issue and the social effects of such resettlement? Because in the resettlement of this country, I have seen people being resettled with jerricans and small pangas. So, how do you really compensate for that?

Finally, I want to thank the minister that some of the issues I have seen here are new to me; I did not know that people can apply for some of this land and they can put in some trees or some inter-crop. But while they are inter-cropping, you see there was something here like, you have something to do, and you can have a programme where the reserves are attracting tourists. But how again is government trying to ensure that where those trees and forests are grown, they are attracting tourists, because some of the areas I see are like jungles of bushes. 

Like my area, really when you look at it, you think it is a bush, which has not been well kept and how best can it attract tourists if we are not looking at the infrastructures, the hotels and what goes on with the – do we have just to keep bushes? So, how is government trying to look at this as well? Thank you.

7.18
MR KIWALABYE MUSOKE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will bear with me because you know, many questions have been asked and I may be tempted maybe to repeat some of these questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no.

MR KIWALABYE: But, the minister I think is filtering these. My first question to the minister is, is he aware that some of these so-called encroachers were actually settled there by previous governments? And is the minister aware that even this very government has played part in encouraging these people to stay in these forest reserves by even providing permanent infrastructures for them like schools, health units and roads and so forth?  

My other question is, this NFA Statute, is it applied retrospectively? 

My other question is, according to the land law – I do not know whether this land law affects, because you know, people may think the government is not affected by the laws they are made for other people and not government. 

According to the land law, Madam Speaker, anybody who has been settling on somebody’s land for 12 years previous to 1998, is taken as a bona fide. Now, the consequences of this, I do not know whether the minister is aware, is that when you are moving out a bona fide occupant, compensation must be there and our Constitution is very clear and if you also want to acquire that bona fide’s land compulsorily there is compensation first. Madam Speaker, is the minister aware that the National Forestry Authority is exercising these evictions brutally and, if so, is he free to brutalize the so-called encroachers?

Finally, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this should go to the honourable minister but because he is a member of Cabinet, does the government have a policy of resettlement for these people?  

7.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have seen in the response of the minister a statement, “In 1948 details of the forest reserve together with West Bugwe and Sukulu were updated.” Sukulu hill is in Tororo County and it is bare and people have encroached it. May I find out from the honourable minister where this Sukulu hill is located and if it is located in Tororo County, what action are you taking to restore the green vegetation?

Supplementary, Madam Speaker, is the minister aware that in Busitema forest, this same area where Sterling Strabag excavated stones and murrum, the land was not filled according to government standing order?

And in your map here, I have seen River Malawa. Is water part of the resources that people need to seek licence for in order to draw and if so, are you aware that the Kenyan authority on the other side of Malawa have continued to release untreated sewerage on River Malawa. Honourable Minister, you remember we visited Kenya with you and discussed this thing with the Kenya authority. Last week, I met the district commissioner and I expressed this to him. What action are you taking to address the release of untreated sewerage on River Malawa?

MRS MUNYIRA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this is intentional to confuse the natives or what, because I find that this map here part of the contested area is not there and then also, there are so many main features that have been renamed. I could give some examples. There is River Namagombe, what I know locally that river is called Namukombe; there is Lugombe hill, it is called Bukombe hill.  I do not know whether it is intended to confuse the natives. These are the native words I do not know how the names have been changed on this map here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo): I thank you very much, colleagues, for these supplementary questions. I hope, I will, within the available time answer them but let me begin by the last bit of information by hon. Munyira. Is that map, which is attached to this response intended to confuse the natives? The answer is no.  

Secondly, I have lifted an old map, which simply shows the situation at the time of the gazetting.  Now, for me to begin to update it on my own now would really be plagiarism and I do not want to be accused of that. I am only lifting an old map and showing you what was done, how it was done after all, it was the Bazungu who did this.

Now, let me quickly respond to the questions: Hon. Munyira did raise three supplementary questions and she said, “Is the minister aware that the Bagweri are threatened by extinction? Madam, sadly, I am not aware, thank you for informing me. 

Is the minister aware that sleeping sickness ended long ago? Certainly, I am aware, it ended.  
The honourable member also raised a question that the land might have been taken unlawfully but I am not going to get- (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Latest information in this House shows that sleeping sickness is still there in Uganda. Now, the minister is telling this House that sleeping sickness has ended. Now, which one is which? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there were serious epidemics because even in Busoga that is how we got the problem of Mayuge, because our people had to evacuate for several years. But I think hon. Munyira’s point was, after that evacuation, there was supposed to be a phased return every five years and it says only two returns were done, the others were not completed, and she is asking why? 

LT GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Apparently, I have got two more new questions: The first one was by hon. Pajabo that I was confusing, no. I was answering a direct question, “Are you aware?” And I am saying, yes.

Now, Madam Speaker, you have raised another question maybe I will address it a little differently -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she raised it a little earlier, it was hers.

LT GEN. ODONGO: Because when you say there was supposed to be a phased - I have not yet come to the records to see that. All I know is that there –(Interjections)- let us not get into an argument. I am simply stating what I know that there was a request to degazette to settle people, the motion passed and 4,188 hectares were made available. The mechanics of resettlement was supposed to be done by the Bukedi district administration. I am not aware how they did it all I know is that land was made available for the resettlement exercise and that is what I am saying.

Hon. Kigyagi did ask whether National Forestry Authority does sensitise people in the process of reopening the boundaries. Yes, they do, in fact when they go to places, they call meetings for people in those villages, which are affected and they address them about the intentions or what needs to be done. They try to educate them.
There was a question by my honourable colleague whether there was a countrywide survey. Indeed, for the central forest reserves to be identified there must have been a survey and as I said, that survey established 506 central forest reserves throughout this country. If you like I can give you a list of these central forest reserves and indicate where they are located. 

She also asked a question whether government has a plan for gazetting land for resettlement. I think I am not competent to answer that question. 

How do you intend to handle the problem of eviction -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, if you are not competent who is, tell us the person the Members should look at. Can you tell us who Members should look at?

LT GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I am merely a Minister of State for Environment, resettlement is a much bigger issue at least the honourable Prime Minister would be able to advise.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of State for Environment the ministry is handling is under Ministry of Lands and the problem of re-location, displacement is under Ministry of Lands and forest authority is under his ministry, that is why we are tasking him. If he thinks is not capable of answering then the Prime Minister can answer but we want to know if government has got a policy of resettling the people.

MR OMWONY OJWOK:  Madam Speaker, I would like to give information that as far as I know, it is the Office of the Prime Minister itself under the portfolio of the Minister responsible for Refugees and Disaster Preparedness, that is responsible for handling such matters of resettlement. Thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, is the minister who has been on the Floor in order really to give us that information that, the Minister responsible for Refugees and Disaster Preparedness is the one responsible for such a matter like resettlement of Ugandans? I do not think he is handling that case because this one is not a disaster.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we may need to take advice from the Prime Minister because I am aware that some communities have been settled. I do not know how our friends who were living here were settled; I do not know which office did it. The friends who were living in our garden here. Was it the Ministry of Land? Okay, I think let us seek information from the Prime Minister tomorrow, not tomorrow the other day - ha! The Prime Minister is here.

7.34
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Muganwa Kajura): Madam Speaker, now the ministry, it is actually a sub ministry of the Office of the President. The overall policy of settlement is a matter for the Prime Minister. But as you know, there are divisions and departments and so forth under the Office of the Prime Minister. So, it is right to say that as he being the overall in charge of that outfit which includes the refugees and so forth, disaster preparedness, that it is indeed a broader issue it is a matter for the Prime Minister. I thank you.  

MS ALISEMERA: Madam Speaker, according to what the Third Deputy Prime Minister has said, does it mean that government should stop evicting people until this policy is well understood because if we are going to Ministry of Lands and our people are losing bibanja, they are sleeping in rain, others have lost property, what do we have to do now? Do you not think we should harmonize the policy from the natural resource, environment and the Prime Minister’s Office then we get one statement, which will settle all of us once and for all?

MR KAJURA: Indeed that is what is happening. This matter has been under active consideration taking into account all these factors and I am sure within – well, I do not normally handle this matter but I know our office, the Office of the Prime Minister does it. In the very near future, there will be a clear statement, which would encompass all the relevant factors regarding settlement. Settlement is a very important matter and it cuts across many disciplines and activities and rightly so that should be under the Office of the Prime Minister.  


MS KABAKUMBA: Really, the issue of Masindi maybe the honourable minister did not get it properly.  There was a forest reserve in Nyamakere and people were moved from Nyamakere to Kibeka where they are now. This was done by government of today and under an agreement. But now National Forest Authority has come and is evicting people from Kibeka. I do not know whether you are aware. That is the concern, which was raised by my colleague and you have really not answered it, and we want to know where these people will go because the land they were on before they moved to Kibeka was taken over by Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the government moved them to Kibeka?

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, and it is the same government now evicting them from Kibeka without giving them an alternative through National Forest Authority. Where do they go?

LT GEN. ODONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not refuse to answer the question relating to Nyamakere and Kibeka. What you are asking I think was one of the last questions, which I wanted to combine with the question of hon. Kakooza, the question of evictions. First of all, I wanted to draw the attention of honourable colleagues that last time when I was answering a question by hon. Sebuliba, I did promise that I would make a statement for this very subject of evictions and encroachment. The statement is ready and when it is put on the Order Paper, I will make that statement specifically addressing the question of encroachment and evictions from the Central Forest Reserves. That will be then.

What is important for us to know as of now is that eviction is a process. The first thing we ought to establish bearing in mind the fact that as a result of administration and instability in institutions, even some of the boundaries of the so-called forest reserves are not clear. Physically on the ground today they are not clear. So, what we are trying to do is first and foremost to establish those boundaries. Maybe some of us who are talking we are actually not in the forest. So, once we establish the boundaries, we will know the extent of the problem and then we will be able to address it. 
It is true some of the notices have been given for evictions and some of these are premature. If colleagues are ware, hon. Birimumaaso is leading a group of Members of Parliament who are affected.  Yesterday, he held a press conference, the other week on Wednesday he sat with me in the meeting. We are together with him discussing the way forward on this question of encroachment, evictions and what needs to be done. We are discussing it as I speak now.  

So, when hon. Kakooza said, a school has been built in a forest reserve, yes, it has been built.  Remember, I said earlier that the activity in the forest reserve can be legal or illegal, depending on whether it has been licensed or not. Moreover bear in mind that these fellows, NFA, government must not be crazy. After putting in resources, it cannot wake up to destroy resources. We will take into recognition the activities as they are on the ground after establishing the boundaries and knowing what is where.

MRS MUNYIRA: I would like to ask something about that point. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The way the minister is putting it, it is clear that the National Forest Authority is aware that the boundaries are contested. In case of land issues, I would request that National Forest Authority should stop putting up these new landmarks until when these issues are solved between the communities and the forest reserves.  I thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want the minister to clarify something. He has said that the eviction is a process, and I remember these people who evicted our people from Mbuke - they are the government of course. It was very brutal, they burnt their houses, they killed people, they raped them, they have never resettled them, they have never paid them. Is that part of the process? Can you explain to me what is this process? I thank you very much.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine really is in support of my sister, hon. Wabwire’s question. I think there is a bigger issue honourable minister and this is the issue of a national policy. Do we have a national policy on resettlement? Do we have a national policy on how these national forests are demarcated? Because the issue of hon. Birimumaaso was only started last week and there are very many of us who have such issues in our constituencies and in our districts.

So, Madam Speaker, although hon. Wabwire has got this issue and has used her own case of Busia District, it is very important that we have an answer. Otherwise, all over this country, what you have in form of maps differs very greatly from what is on the ground, and we do not wish to have a national catastrophe of people going up in arms where you will declare certain structures illegal and others legal by virtual of policies, which are not known to our people who cannot read and write and who just move on because the pressure on the land is forcing them to move into forest reserves.  Mr Minister, can you please clarify on this and reassure us because it is becoming a national issue. I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have to move consciously. First of all, the National Forest Authority Act was passed by this Parliament. That is one. Two, if the boundaries which exist on the maps are theoretical boundaries, I am sure these people have first to open the boundaries. The boundaries must first be opened so that you begin talking. They are now opening the boundaries and even before they open the boundaries, the people have risen up in arms. I think we must give them a chance nationally –(Interruptions)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the contribution from my neighbour, hon. Kigyagi, but some of us have been around for sometime in this House, making laws and following them to go down to the grass root to see how they are being implemented. The issue of boundaries, especially for some cases we are talking about, are very clear. It is not that we are just jumping up and we do not know where the boundaries pass; we know, that is why we are raising these issues here. 

The issue of Masindi, Kibeka is very clear; we know the boundaries. Ours have already been demarcated. Is he in order, therefore, to impute improper motive that we are just rising up even before we know the boundaries of the national forest reserves when actually we know these boundaries and our people are being victimized because of this? Is he in order?
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually let us advise our newest Member. I think you are a few days old in this House, please take time to understand what is going on in the country before you take on Members. That is my advice. That was the 5th Parliament and this is the 7th Parliament.  Please, this might be very genuine advice as a friend because I was there.  I can only speak through my other Members, but I have problems in Kamuli by the same NFA. I was here when we enacted the law, but violence, beatings, burning was not part of what we provided for in that law. So, let Members speak about their problems.

MR WAMBUZI: I would like to inform hon. Kigyagi that we congratulate him for having become an MP.  I am not intimidating, but I am saying that, yes, as an RDC he should take the stanza of that style.  But now you are the people’s representative, our people, Madam Speaker, are crying. Busoga region is being defiled as far as forests are concerned and I cannot take this issue standing down without informing my friend that even the President at Sembabule last weekend, he said the whole country is crying about what is happening, the way the people are being treated around forest reserves.  So, I think I would like to advise the honourable Member of Parliament from Mbarara Municipality that I want him to assert himself as the people’s representative and be on the side of the people 24 hours.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister answer and we go; we have been here for quite long.

LT GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I was speaking about the 506 Central Forest Reserves, and I said I would present to you a list at a later opportunity. But if I could just remind honourable members, if you could check in your archives and look for Statutory Instrument No. 63 of 1998, which was –[Hon. Members: “Lay it on the Table”]- I am saying look for it in your archives, I am not laying anything. I am just advising you on what to do. Statutory Instrument No. 63 of 1998 will tell you which are these forest reserves, their locations, their dimensions and what have you.  

Hon. Muruli Mukasa asked how thorough the sensitisation, which is being carried out is. I cannot be able to say with certainty the level of thoroughness, but all I know is that sensitisation takes place because thorough is judgmental and really I cannot be able to say that.  

Again hon. Muruli Mukasa also raised the question of resettlement, and as I said, the honourable Prime Minister did respond to that question.

Hon. Madada, raised the question of how to get the licence, and he wondered whether I am aware of segregation. If it is there, that is very unfortunate because it is not supposed to be there, and I would be very happy to be availed with specificities of instances of segregation so that they can be addressed. I would be very happy.

MR WAMBUZI: I have got in possession a certificate issued by National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) for the most important river in Busoga called Lumbuye. It has got a lot of spiritual, tribal and cultural sentiments. River Lumbuye, Madam Speaker, actually empties into Lake Victoria as well as Lake Kyoga; it is a river with double drainage. 

As we talk now, it is unfortunate that NEMA, who is supposed to assist the honourable minister, has issued a certificate for some foreign company, SPENCON, to grow rice there. The owners of SPENCON are foreigners. I think it is intentional discrimination to make sure the Basoga people do not have any piece of land so that they remain perpetually poor.  This is discrimination, and you have seen what happened to the forest of Butamira, again we lost out as Basoga. 

The Member of Parliament from Bunya, if she was here today, she would take maybe the whole day – hon. Isanga Nakadama and our daddy, hon. Kiwagama are crying and I am sure you know what they are crying about. There is actually discrimination of the local people in the interest of Germans, Chinese. The minister says there is no discrimination but it is glaring, the discrimination is there against the local people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please try to conclude.

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of the discussions that we have had, and the sort of lack of clarity of what should be done and what policy should be followed, I suggest that Government be given some time to come up with a policy on settlement and more in particular, with regard to the forest reserves because this problem is everywhere in the country and we need a systematic approach in handling it. Otherwise, it is infuriating a lot of people. So, I would suggest that we be given say, three months, to come up with a proper well considered course of action, bearing in mind in particular the question of the forest reserves. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Prime Minister, in the interim will you put a caveat on the activities of the National Forestry Authority (NFA) because they are really on a rampage.

MR KAJURA: Well, provided no advantage is taken by people to now move in because of this halt. So, we should also accept that the incursions should also in the meantime stop, the evictions also stop until when this matter has been thoroughly considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable members, the Prime Minister himself has undertaken that he is going to look urgently and expeditiously at this very intricate matter, which is causing a national uproar, and that in the interim the National Forestry Authority will desist from evicting people and we the population will desist from encroaching on those places. I think let everybody stay where they are.

MR ALONGA: Madam Speaker, there are people who are just in the open now in Yumbe District. What are we going to do with these people now as an interim measure? These were evicted from Moyo District, what are we going to do with them now? They are in the open and they are just staying in a grass-thatched school, and when the schools open on 23rd, these people are just going to be in the open. What is the Prime Minister’s Office going to do now?

MR KAJURA: Madam Speaker, we must have some system in approaching this matter because unless we have some restrictions on what is handled, the whole thing will just go berserk and this is why I am suggesting that incursions should stop; so should evictions.

Now, if you happen to have fallen in between, I think this is unfortunate, but we cannot be studying a problem when at the same time we are allowing incursions in and we are also kicking people out. I think this is a new sense or a suffering that people should accept in this interim period. This is I think a reasonable request –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have got a general solution. The particular cases I think should go to the Prime Minister independently, specific cases like Othman –(Interjections)- yes, those will go to the Prime Minister. The general thing, let us leave it to be handled as we have agreed. Even Malaba will go to the Prime Minister.  

Honourable members, tomorrow the body of our colleague will be here at 9.00 O’clock, I would urge you to come and keep vigil. At 11.00 O’clock we shall convene the sitting to pay tribute to the late Musisi. The House is adjourned to 11.00 O’clock but be here at 9.00 O’clock to receive his body.

(The House rose at 8.00 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 13 May 2005 at 11.00 a.m.)


