
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 11 May 2022

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am very happy to see our very own, Gen. Moses Ali, here. (Applause) He looks like he is in good spirits. As part of my communication - General, would you like to say something to the Members? Yes, I am allowing you. This is part of my communication. I am giving you my time. Do you want to say anything? General, I will allow you remove the mask so that we can hear you properly.

2.15
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I was going to ask you whether I should speak with the mask on or not. Thank you. I would like to thank the Speaker for making it possible for me to stand here today and brief you, in this House of Parliament. 

I arrived in Uganda after flying for, I think, seven hours. We first went to Kigali and then on the way back to Europe, the plane came to Entebbe. I arrived here on Friday night. Actually, I arrived home at 1.00 a.m. By standing here, I will not say much about myself because those of you here can see and give me my percentage of fitness. It can be 2 or 5 per cent; it is whatever you want to give. 

You also know the reason I went for treatment because you were all there when these things happened. The Rt Hon. Among will tell you. However, what I can tell you is that after the election of the Speaker, there was a video circulated on social media all over the world. Even the professor who received me in Munich had the video on his telephone. He showed it to me and asked if I was the one and I said, yes.

I would like to also thank those people for flashing that video to the world, anyway, for whatever purpose. Of course I did not check with them but they made it known that there was one Member of Parliament - a General in Uganda - that had run amok. It was made a world issue. 

For my part, I am happy because even that professor who was waiting for me had already known about my problem. That was the good side of it. Even for those who flashed that video - for whatever intention - still, that information prepared him to begin looking for the problems before I even arrived. I would like to thank those journalists for whatever they did.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am also – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, we do not have much time. I just wanted you to update the Members. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I know, but I think I should also tell them what I achieved. I am not going to take much time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, General. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I would like to thank the Government for being in charge of the system. First of all, it was peaceful to allow people to sit in Kololo for that long and some people could break away; there is a system that allows those who broke away to go and be treated. That was very important. If there was no good system, as it is now, it was going to be a problem.

Of course it is you, people in Parliament, who sent me for treatment. I am your colleague and it is Parliament that bought my ticket, paid for my treatment and so on; all this is because this arrangement is there. It is a system I am very grateful for. It is not meant for a particular person or people but it is there. 

I would also like to thank all of you for the prayers you offered. (Applause) I believe prayers are heard and God hears. I am standing here after the Speaker allowed me to thank you. Through you, those who elected you – that means I am talking to the whole country. 

I am here and I would like to thank my doctors in Germany for looking after me. I also thank my doctors here who prepared me to go to Germany. I thank those who elected you, and are not here, but they also prayed for my safe return. 

Of course I thank the President as well because he is in charge of this peace, which has a lot of advantages. Mr Speaker, I think I should stop here. Thank you very much. 
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, General. Colleagues, I am still communicating. I allowed the General in between my communication because we always feel happy to see the General in high spirits. Today, he has moved around Parliament: he came to my office and to the Office of the Speaker with a few colleagues, and he was in high spirits. He has said that he is still here and he is not planning to go anywhere. (Applause) General, we will keep praying for you and you should also pray for us. Thank you.

Colleagues, as the Speaker informed you yesterday, Hon. Margaret Rwebyambu, Woman Member of Parliament, Mbarara lost her dear husband, Afande Fred Mugasho. Tomorrow, the 12th of May at 10.00 a.m., we shall have a funeral service at All Saints Church, Nakasero. I request all of us to go there in big numbers; solidarity with our colleague is very important. What has happened to her can happen to any of us.

The burial will be on Friday in Kashari. The information is on our WhatsApp group and I think you have already seen it. For those who have not seen it, I will ensure that tomorrow, we give you full information in terms of the place of burial.

Now, colleagues, I have talked to most of you and many of you have come to me and I have also received very many messages from the public, in regard to the impunity by some military officers who were seen harassing a police traffic officer, who was on duty. Out of nowhere, an altercation started and it really looked ugly. 

For some of us who are mere civilians, when we see “uniform against uniform” - they usually call it “friendly fire” but I do not know whether that was a friendly fire. 

We are following up on this matter, as presiding officers, because sometimes it is not about how many statements we make here but the concrete action that follows up because this is distorting our image, as a country. We are arming our enemies with information to go out and say Uganda is a place where even a traffic officer is not safe: an officer is not safe from another officer. 

So, this is true – like the discussions we have had and we are going to escalate it further. We want officers to respect each other. Also, this has brought us to a point that maybe the police do not have people to speak on their behalf here.

No, colleagues, listen to my point here because I have been sharing with most of you: you come to my office and most of the issues we bring here are issues we gather from you.

We are going to bring it to the attention of the Commander-in-Chief and the President because issues of armed forces have a historical perspective and background on why some decisions are taken the way they are taken. However, I think it is high time the police and prisons got representatives in this House. (Applause)

The reason being that when it comes to increasing your constituencies - you are always fighting that we increase - a colleague came and said, “Honourable, I think if it is armed forces, then the other ones are also armed forces. How come they are not considered?”

We said these are issues we shall escalate to the Executive; the Commander-in-Chief usually has to guide deeply on these issues of armed forces because of the historical background they have. 

Colleagues, with that, I have matters of national importance. Lt Gen. Elwelu, do you have something to say in response to my communication? Let me allow Lt Gen. Elwelu first.

2.28
LT GEN. PETER ELWELU (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to react to your communication.

First of all, I want to thank the Almighty Father in Heaven and I give glory to Him for lifting you to that very important position. I know He has a mission for you and I have no doubt that you will complete it successfully.

On this very unfortunate incident, which happened on the 9th of May, where one of our members was filmed grabbing a traffic police officer, on behalf of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), I want to sincerely apologise to the Police, to this House, and to the people of Uganda for whatever happened.

I know some of those incidences have been happening and they are regrettable. There was no reason at all for one of us to interfere with the duties of the police.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, go on, you have my protection.

LT GEN. ELWELU: There was no reason at all and it is unacceptable and unforgivable.

Mr Speaker, that soldier, Private Derrick Tumwine, has been arrested and is facing the court. The UPDF is a disciplined force. We believe in the rule of law and we shall always promote the rule of law in this country. (Applause) 
We have some errant elements but we shall always deal with them and there is no question about that.

So, I want to assure this House that we shall do what it takes to bring this officer to account for whatever happened. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Lt Gen. Elwelu. Colleagues, these are not mere words of a Member of Parliament; they are words of a deputy CDF. So, we take them seriously. (Applause)

Honourable members, in the gallery –(Interjections)- when the Speaker is speaking, you have to sit. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Anglican Dioceses of Greater Ankole, where I come from. They said I should thank you for remembering their son because they have been praying hard for this.

Greater Ankole Anglican Diocese - the five of them on behalf of the province - will animate the Namugongo Anglican side on Martyrs Day.

The team is led by the Rt Rev. Sheldon Mwesigwa, Bishop of Ankole Diocese. (Applause) That is the area of greater Mbarara, colleagues. We have the Rt Rev. Stephen Namanya, Bishop of north Ankole Diocese. That is a greater Kiruhura area and he happens to be a father to one of us who used to capture us on several moments, our very own sister, Sheila Nduhukire. It is good you know all these colleagues.

Then we have the Rt Rev. Nathan Ahimbisibwe, Bishop of South Ankole. That is Ntungamo. We have the Rt Rev. Johnson Twinomujuni, Bishop of West Ankole Diocese. (Applause) In that diocese, the main district is Mitooma and there is also Greater Bushenyi (Laughter). We have Rev. Can Jackson Katungi, the Diocesan Secretary of North West Ankole Diocese – that is Ibanda area and Mr Dan Natukunda, the Diocesan Treasurer of West Ankole Diocese. (Applause)

They are led by someone we have now called “associate bishop” – Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu –(Laughter)- who has been part of us for long and he is the chairperson of the organising committee. 

Colleagues from Ankole, Hon. Nathan Itungo is mobilising us, Hon. Rukaari, Hon. Jocelyn Kamateneti and group; they will be reaching out to you for contributions so that we can have a successful function. That is why the bishops are here but they also want to witness proceedings of this House. They said it is the first time that they are here. 

2.34
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: On which matter do you rise?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, from your communication and Gen. Moses Ali’s. Allow me, on behalf of the Opposition, to welcome back Gen. Moses Ali. He knows that when we are out there, I salute him. 

Secondly, for the time I have been in this Parliament, Gen. Moses Ali is one of those Prime Ministers who come to the Floor and you enjoy debate with him. We have been missing him terribly –(Interjection) – I was vaccinated and I have been tested. (Laughter) 

General, we pray for you. We want you here. In most cases, your deliberations give us good answers. Whenever we ask questions, you respond to us the way we want and where you cannot answer, you still make the debate interesting. You are a lucky man. You have been in all regimes. (Laughter) You should thank God for that. 

That aside, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the communication you have made about the UPDF officers. Honourable members, I am one of the lucky Members in this House, who got the chance to teach in the army for about 10 years. The school I in which I taught - Military Police, Makindye – we started that school. 

Military police is a unit of the army that is supposed to discipline other units – the infantry. Before 1990, you could never see the army or military police coming on the street to cause mayhem or attack people. That is why people who live in Makindye are in harmony with these people. 

What is happening here now is impunity, growing day by day. The military police is supposed to arrest Gen. Elwelu and those categories of people. I am now speaking from the perspective of the army – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just clarification from you; why should they arrest Gen. Elwelu? 

MR SSEWUNGU: In case he misconducts himself. In that case, he is supposed to be arrested. In case anybody in the infantry – the military police unit disciplines the other units of the army. 

However, what is happening is that there is a lot of impunity in this country. All vehicles that have army number plates – others have put sirens in their vehicles and are using the army to move around. We have civilians being guarded by the army. That is wrong; it is not allowed. 

I would like to thank Gen. Elwelu but I would like to send a question to you, through the Speaker: You are the Deputy Chief of Defence Forces; can you arrest Gen. Muhoozi who is masquerading now? He is a serving soldier, but is campaigning, yet his father first retired from the army to stand as a presidential candidate. (Laughter) You are supposed to do all that. 

The issue of bringing police here – we want to remove the army from Parliament. What do they talk about here? We are the ones fighting for the army. Let us fight, honourable members. You might hit your seats thanking everybody. Even Gen. Elwelu has answers to give this House on Kasese matters. 

Impunity is growing day by day –(Interruption)

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, there are people who do not have the privilege of being in this august House and for my colleague - a man I respect very much - to come and ask the Deputy CDF to arrest a person who is just celebrating his birthday – I do not know when birthday celebrations became matters that warrant arrest. Mr Speaker, is the Member in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us respect the integrity of the House. We cannot reduce this House to debating birthdays. This House has serious business it is conducting. 

Hon. Ssewungu, kindly take your seat. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, you are ruling and sincerely, let us – 

THE SPEAKER: The Speaker’s ruling is final. You do not have to defend yourself. Colleagues, you know what it takes to challenge the ruling of the Speaker. I have already ruled. We have senior colleagues here; if you want to challenge my ruling, just refer to the rules. You have an avenue on how to challenge it. 

2.39
MS JOAN NAMUTAAWE (Independent, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance concerning the fate of over 600 people who were, in 2020, evicted from land measuring 324 acres on which they have lived since 1972. 

The land in question is located in Kyesiiga Subcounty, Masaka District, covering the villages of Kasanje, Lwemodde, Kalingoma and others. The land in question is public land. Before 1972, it was leased to an Indian, who at the time, owned a coffee factory and offered employment opportunities to the people from the surrounding areas. 

Following the expulsion of Asians in 1972, factory workers started living and working on the land until 2019 when Joseph Bukenya came out claiming that he is the rightful owner of that land and ordered them to vacate. 

The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Judith Nabakooba, visited the area and stopped Mr Bukenya from evicting the people until investigations were done. 

Two weeks after the minister’s visit, Mr Bukenya went ahead and evicted the people, caused the arrest of and attacked those who resisted the eviction. All this happened during the lockdown yet Government had ordered stopping of land evictions. Coffee and banana plantations and houses were destroyed. To date, people are homeless with no income. 

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development visits the area and investigates the circumstances under which Mr Joseph Bukenya got the land in question. This is because the sitting tenants claim that the land still belongs to the Departed Asians’ Property Custodian Board. This is so that our people are helped. Thank you.

2.43
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member for raising this serious matter. We have taken note. I am going to inform the appropriate minister to report to the House about it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. They should report back in one week’s time. Hon. David Sserukenya? Colleagues who are rising on matters of national importance recorded them in my office; so, you do not need to stand up. I will be reading your names. We made a principle that you must go to the Office of either the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker to record those matters.

2.44
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, on 9 May 2022 at 2.00 a.m., land grabbers stormed Busabala playground with tractors, and bouncers holding pangas and graded the playground. No police officer appeared at the scene to stop or even question them.

This is the only playground in Masajja Division that has over 200,000 people, where we promote talent and organise big occasions - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member tripped over the steps; so, we should always move cautiously. Otherwise, these steps are not good.

MR SSERUKENYA: Such acts have been going on for some time and many have lost their lives. For example, the late Mrs Muwonge got a heart attack after hearing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the Member on the Floor. 

MR SSERUKENYA: The late Mrs Muwonge got a heart attack and passed on after hearing the news that they had grabbed her land. They are afraid of no one. Even Kibiri Church of Uganda is a victim. 

My humble prayer is the intervention of this august House and the Government, at large, to investigate the matter. If it means compensating that one person, that is, if she or he genuinely bought the playground, let them be compensated for the sake of saving talent in the country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim, I know you are not the Minister of Lands but you have taken note. On those other matters, we want the ministers to go on the ground, together with the complainant -the area MP who has raised the matter and report back to this House on Wednesday next week. The MP will tell us whether you went on the ground or not. 

2.46
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We are aware that the UPDF is undertaking fisheries operations on the lake. 

Mr Speaker, the matter I am raising is the way the operation is done. The UDPF is undertaking house to house operations in the night. People are collected, bundled up together and sorting is done in the morning. As a result, some people have taken advantage of this.

On 4 May 2022, a lady called Achola Mary of Katuba Village, was raped during the exercise by two men. One of them is believed to be a civilian, who assists the UPDF operatives in executing their mandate. In the month of January, another lady by the name Namubiru from Kasari Village was removed from her bed and paraded outside, totally naked. 

My prayer is that the nightly house to house operations must stop. I am very clear because other people are taking advantage of this. I am not saying the UPDF should get off the lake. 

The other prayer is that all the suspects who are arrested in the fisheries activities, whether from Kyoga, Kalangala or Buvuma, should be taken to one court - the Buganda Road Chief Magistrates Court. Otherwise, it is becoming very difficult for their relatives to follow-up these matters.

I am aware we have courts in Mukono and Jinja but the Minister of Justice should explain to this House why all suspects from the different parts of the country are brought to Buganda Road Chief Magistrates Court, when it comes to fisheries suspects.

Mr Speaker, I will be very happy, if these are responded to in the shortest time possible. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silas, our chief auditor, if you were to audit our rules, where would you have anything called “additional prayer”, on matters of national importance? Anyway, let me just allow you but be specific on the prayer.

2.50
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): That the Government compensates a one Achola, who has been mentioned for the inhumane act, which was conducted upon her. You cannot do that to a mother. Otherwise, that act might have happened before her children, brothers and sisters. That is unbecoming of a nation like Uganda, which is orderly.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I receive the information with a heavy heart and I want to assure this House and country that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces is a force for the people of Uganda, by Ugandans and for Ugandans.

The matters raised by Hon. Robert from Buvuma require further investigations but for the record, he said that the person alleged to have raped one of the ladies works with the UPDF. The laws governing civilians and criminality in this country are very clear; there is no way of going about it. So, it is my conviction that the long arm of the law must be stretched towards that direction since the person is known.

Regarding the UPDF’s operations at night, it is a matter we are going to raise with the commanders - why in the night since some other wrong people are taking advantage of this. We are going to get back here in the earliest possible time and report about the actions we will have taken –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In one week?

MR OBOTH: In one week – that should be okay – (Mr Ssewungu rose_) - Have you allowed musomesa? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, clarification and information are for the Member holding fort – but be cautious of my time. I do not have much time.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for giving way. That is the kind of discipline we need on the Front Bench when we seek clarification. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister and counsel is whether it would not be prudent that in normal practice, when the UPDF is carrying out operations at night, it should work with the local councils (LCs) in those particular areas because they know the citizens more than them. If you could put it in practice that whenever going for any operation, they have to inform the LCs so that they give them a hand, as they move. That is why we have LCs.

Thank you for accepting the clarification.

MR OBOTH: You are my very good friend. You know when you came here as a teacher, I inspired you to do law. You are now a lawyer and an advocate. So, let us keep the friendship. (Laughter)

At this point, we do not even know whether this civilian is not the LC1 leader, when there is such an operation. Therefore, this is a matter that we need to investigate because the Member who raised the matter has not given us better and further particulars. In one week’s time, we shall come back to know whether it was a civilian or LC1 civilian. 

On the issue of the Buganda Road Chief Magistrates Court, I think that should be directed to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. From what I know, it is the only utility court we have designated to handle such matters in the whole country. However, that is beyond my domain. I am also just a court user –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, on that matter, it also inconveniences you – arresting someone in Buvuma and you have to transport them to this side. Since you work together as Government – you do not work in silos – also raise it you’re your colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and say, “Honourable, why don’t we look into this matter?” Don’t you think it would be better?

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. We shall report on the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR OBOTH: What should be on record here about the very generous additional amendment from Hon. Silas on the compensation – honourable colleagues, it sounds good but rape can never be compensated. Rape is a crime against humanity. If we turn this House into a place where we can easily apportion and provide remedies of compensation for those criminal matters - 

I am afraid that if there will be a crime that will be identified in this matter, let us allow – if compensation is awarded by court, I ask kindly you, my easterner, that this matter be handled by a competent court. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Mr Migadde rose_) Thank you. Hon. Migadde, since the minister has said he is returning here – Gen. Elwelu, do you want to add something to that? It seems you are being coerced into – no, Gen. Elwelu has not raised his hand and the minister has spoken. His boss has spoken, so, it is very important - (Laughter)
 
Honourable minister, kindly, link up with Hon. Migadde for additional information. I know he will give you invaluable support in that regard. Ensure you report back in one week.

Hon. Atkins, you had a procedural matter. I hope it is not a matter of national importance. So, help me refer to the rule which shows that we are not moving well in the House.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, I really want to thank you for your generosity. This is something that pertains to the lives of our fellow citizens and I draw that right from your communication, focusing on a better country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. We have moved from that. We are on matters of national importance and you have risen on procedure.

MR KATUSABE: Yes, Sir. 

MR DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, my communication is done.

MR KATUSABE: This is tied into the procedural matter, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, each passing day, Kampala Capital City Authority reports 20 unclaimed bodies of fellow citizens. We have 365 days in a year. That means that every year, we lose 7,300 fellow citizens. Go to any city mortuary; dead bodies are piled up. 

Mr Speaker, my procedural issue is: how long is it going to take this Parliament to hold to account or to call the attention of Government to take keen interest in the demise of our citizens, who are now populating city cemeteries. 

This is because, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, kindly take your seat. 

Colleagues, let us not abuse the point of procedure. The issue you are raising can be raised under rule 41, to the Prime Minister. When talking of procedure, procedure should be about proceedings in this House. Okay – we are not proceeding properly because we are violating a certain rule. It is not for raising issues that require clear and structured answers.

That is why, sometimes, you make it difficult for us. We are going to mark some of you as suspects for smuggling matters under procedure, when you stand up, which is not good. It would be unfair to you because one day you may want to raise - 

So, honourable, I guide that you look at our rules. From rule 41 to 45, you will have an opportunity to raise that matter. You can even raise it as a petition under our rules and we discuss it and the ministers will be required to come here and give clear explanations.

Hon. Peter Ocen? 

3.01
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. 

As we talk, there is a heavy downpour in almost all the regions of Uganda. As a result, many of the roads and culverts have been washed away. To some extent, some of the roads are impassable for the children to go to school. 

Mr Speaker, on 15 April 2022, the Uganda Road Fund released funds to districts, town councils and subcounties. When I peruse through this release, many of the town councils and subcounties are not included and have been allocated this fund, against their approved budgets. These units are administrative units with fully fledged political leaders and are operational.

Now that all these roads in these units are spoilt, bad and unmotorable, I want to know from the line ministries, especially the ministries of Works and Transport, and Local Government, how these people are going to operate. How are they going to manage the situation now that all the roads in these units are very poor, bad and some of them are impassable? (Interruption) –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! On matters of national importance, no information, please. Honourable member, please, go on and conclude.

MR OCEN: My prayer –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall agree either to have an orderly House where we do business in a structured manner or we remain a laughing stock outside – people laughing at what we are doing here. So, we have to be orderly and structured in the way we do our business here. In the end, it is you who will benefit. Conclude, honourable member.

MR OCEN: Mr Speaker, my prayers are that the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is concerned with the management of the Uganda Road Fund, should endeavour to include all these administrative units, especially the newly created town councils and subcounties. Almost all of them are not on the list – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Being a representative of the people, I am entitled to my voice and entitled to speak. It is always very important that we back up Members with information and I am happy you have always allowed that.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to bring my matter via the point of information but now that I cannot – (Interjection) - I am raising a matter here - when I rose on the matter of the Kumi-Ngora Road, I did not get any good answer at all; there was no clear directive to that effect.

Is it procedurally in order for us to continue talking about these issues, before a proper answer to my question, which I raised last week, is provided? (Laughter) You are aware that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a proper point of procedure, honourable member. You are right; it is a proper point of procedure.

MR AOGON: Yes, because money - over Shs 160 billion - for contractors in the road sector has not been released. They have not been paid and that is why we are suffering like this. If I want to prepare and have my birthday in Ngora and I cannot travel, what happens then? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if you remember, on Thursday, we agreed with the Minister of Works that tomorrow, he comes here to respond to the issues of money for roads and financing. Also, the motion for the operationalisation of the Road Fund was deferred to tomorrow; all these issues are for tomorrow.

The Minister of Finance has assured me that he will be here. So, ensure that you are here because we are going to ensure we discuss them extensively, honourable member. We cannot suffocate you. The only issue I talked about is that instead of you doing it via smuggling – you even had a good point but because we were suspicious of the usual smuggling, one cannot even be sure that you are right. (Laughter)

So, we are trying to be orderly in a certain way. [Hon. Okupa rose_] What is the issue, Hon. Okupa?

3.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, just to beef up what you are saying - you are saying the Minister of Works and Transport is coming here tomorrow. I am on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we have been meeting with this team. The problem is with the Ministry of Finance.

The Ministry of Finance must come and explain to Parliament and to the people of Uganda why they are not releasing money because contractors have laid down their tools. We need to have the Minister of Works and Transport here; we have met them. We have already met Hon. Musa Ecweru there. We have met Hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala. We have met Madam Kagina. The problem is with finance; finance should tell us why they have not released money. Contractors have laid down their tools.

Last week, we went for the commissioning of construction of the ferry for the Bukungu-Kasilo-Kaberamaido route. The contractors that are building the landing parts for these ferries are not on site because the finance ministry has not released money to UNRA; they are not working.

So, the Ministry of Finance should be the one to be summoned here to explain these issues to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, honourable member, it was a slip of the tongue. It should have been the finance ministry because they are the ones we had here on Thursday and the Minister promised to be here tomorrow. So, it is the Minister of Finance. 

Clerk, after this session, please extract these issues and forward them to the finance minister so that tomorrow, he comes ready to respond to all of them. Now let the honourable member complete his submission.

MR OCEN: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I want to pray that the Ministry of Works and Transport, and the Ministry of Local Government make a follow-up on some of these administrative units, especially the newly created town councils and subcounties.

Secondly, these administrative units should be coded in the Government system so that whatever little the other administrative units get, they also get it. As leaders, we feel this is important. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of works? I was in Buhweju over the weekend; I could not get where to pass.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, this morning, arising from the directive this Parliament gave the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to interface with my ministry, the Uganda National Roads Authority and the Uganda Road Fund, and the representatives of contractors in the country, I am happy to report to the House that we had a very useful interface during most of the morning, today. 

We have agreed, arising from what we observed as a ministry, it is true that because of the budget cuts that the sectors were subjected to as a consequence of COVID-19, a lot of paralysis was brought, particularly to my ministry.

Discussions at Cabinet level are at very advanced stages to see how best we could unfreeze particularly critical resources for maintaining the very critical roads that are now impassable in the country.

Unfortunately, while that is happening, the heavy downpour that has rocked the country has compounded the problem. So, what we agreed on this morning, Mr Speaker, is that after our interface this morning, the committee is supposed to meet the finance ministry tomorrow. Like you have correctly observed, the burden is really on the ministry – my colleagues from finance – to be quick in unfreezing the resources that are meant to facilitate the contractors to do their work.

What is happening now – for example, on the road that my brother, Hon. Aogon has indicated, there is what we call ‘framework contracts’ that are given to contractors to just, at all times, be on standby to intervene whenever there is a problem. However, a good number of them have not been paid and for that reason, they cannot make any intervention. Unfortunately, it is across the country. 

So, we have recognised the paralysis it can bring to even our very critical interventions like the Parish Development Model. Mr Speaker, the discussions between the committee and the finance ministry were supposed to be tomorrow but I now see that you have directed that they come here. My fear is that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We agreed on Thursday. It is not that I have directed.

MR ECWERU: So, they are supposed to come here? They are supposed to conclude tomorrow. Then, we wanted to come to this House when we have concluded the discussions and present to you what works, other than appearing like we are lamenting.

However, Mr Speaker, we understand the challenges and colleagues, just bear with us. We will do whatever it takes to make sure – because I am aware, for example, that in Kapelebyong District, the Uganda Road Fund only sent them Shs 14 million and yet it is in very bad shape. Therefore, we are aware of the problem and we are going to do whatever it takes to ensure that we fix it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, tomorrow, we must sort out the issue of operationalising the Uganda Road Fund. We want to know whether your Government is going to operationalise it or not because Article 153 of the Constitution is very straightforward. I told the minister here that hiding under section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act, and saying that they will consolidate it will not help. But he said he needed the opinion of the Attorney-General.

Now, even here, your Deputy Speaker is in exile. I cannot go home because of the road from Kizinda to Mitooma; people are rotating around it like they are going to Rukungiri. I have to do an extra 40 kilometres. You have cut us off completely. 

Honourable minister, you see, I cannot raise a matter of national importance here; maybe, one day, I should raise it. When I call, I do not even get any help. What about you, colleagues? It is really bad. 

Colleagues, let us save this for tomorrow when we shall discuss the Uganda Road Fund in full. Come ready to do that. Clerk, it should be Item No. 3 on the Order Paper. After the communication, we should do it when it is still early - in broad daylight - and discuss this issue properly. We shall also discuss the issue of seedlings; both for coffee and peas. We shall discuss all that tomorrow. Let us be quick and take only two minutes. 

3.15 
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to raise an urgent matter of national importance under rule 49 of our Rules of Procedure, over the poor state of Bbale - Kayunga Road to Galilaaya. 

This road was cut off by the rapidly increasing volume of water from River Nile, Lake Kyoga and River Sezibwa by early 2018, which rendered it inaccessible, hence cutting off Timba Parish, which included about seven villages; that is Kawongo A and B, Kikota, Kitwe, and Kalenge among others, and about 8,000 residents were cut off. 

We hosted the Prime Minister when the water levels were high and she had promised some boats but she has not come to our rescue. Right now, the water volumes have drastically decreased and the road is now characterised by muddy soils and low volumes of water that have made it impassable. Ships and boats cannot sail. Vehicles, bicycles, motorcycles and pedestrians cannot move. 

The same situation has damaged the only available school in the whole parish, Timba Primary School. The floors of the building and structures have been destroyed, including the only health centre in the parish. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. The Ministry of Works and Transport visits, assesses, suggests and forges an immediate, practical and observable remedy to recover the road for use and rescue of our people. 

    2. The ministries of Education and Health - having visited this place in early August 2021 and observed the poor state of schools and health units - revisit the place and act accordingly to help our people. 

Mr Speaker, the point is that on Bbale–Kayunga Road, it is only four kilometres that needs immediate attention and the Government cannot fail on this. 

I further pray – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we have to conclude. 

MR TEBANDEKE: I have one more prayer, Mr Speaker. I pray that the Minister for Privatisation and Investment together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development visit this place and benchmark it for the establishment of a model city, given its geographical location and good scenery. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First get a road. 

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, it is true that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister visited this place. It is also true that she gave directives to our ministry. However, it really comes back to what we have been sharing. The challenge that we had on resources and the teams that maintain these roads were factors that undermined our ability to make interventions in time. 

Nonetheless, I would like to commit that after today, I will ask my technical people to come to the place as quickly as possible so that they first get a technical understanding of the problem. If it is okay, and if time allows, I can also pass by because I consider that place very critical for very many reasons. Therefore, we shall do the needful and be able to communicate to this House what we have done in the country, and specifically, in Bbale–Kayunga–Galiraaya. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You are seated on a potential city so you better unlock its potential, honourable minister. 

Colleagues, if you will recall - I will ask the Clerk to reload the report - the Minister of Works and Transport presented the general report on the road sector and we debated it here around six months ago. Clerk, extract it and upload it again on Alfresco so that Members can see it. We need to read it to prepare for tomorrow's debate. I want us to have an extensive debate, generally on the road sector, beyond the road fund. Let us look at financing of the roads sector tomorrow. If we limit ourselves to the road fund, then other colleagues who have issues with the road sector will be suffocated. 

3.21
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern regarding the non-payment of salaries of teachers and other civil servants in the cities of Lira and Arua. I am told it is not only those cities but at least, those are the ones who have approached me. 

The category of these noble workers has, for the last eight months, not received salary and yet the account is currently bogged down with the rising cost of prices. They also have other family responsibilities, like taking their children to school. They are going to teach other people's children but theirs remain at home. 

There is also a category of workers in the above-mentioned cities who have missed the February, March and April salaries and there is no hope that they will get the May and June salaries. Nothing has been communicated as to why they are not getting their salaries. 

Then there is another group of teachers who have been deleted from the payroll of those two cities and right now, we know the prevailing situation of skyrocketing prices of goods. These people have families, they must pay school fees, they must pay for health services in many cases, and they must eat like any other citizen. So, one wonders how these workers and their families are coping. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that these people should be paid their salaries without much delay. Also, I am praying that these civil servants should be put as priority and the minister concerned should come to this august House and explain why these people have been alienated from the rest of the civil servants. 

In addition, the concerned minister should provide to this august House the strategies that they have to pay these people, including their arrears. I submit. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service? (Hon. Nabukenya rose_) Point of procedure.

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter in regard to teachers’ pay. Right now, we have industrial action by the science teachers. Last year – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that cannot be a procedural matter. 

MS NABUKENYA: It is a matter of procedure because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it cannot be. 

MS NABUKENYA: Okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a substantive matter but since they are connected, let me allow you to raise it but it is a substantive matter.

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 24 August 2021, the President made a directive that they would increase the salaries of science teachers to Shs 4 million from what they were being paid. This directive has been on and there has been no pay in regard to that specific directive. 

Right now, there is industrial action and the science teachers are saying they cannot work and the students have just reported back to school. This includes all science teachers in vocational schools, at diploma level, primary and secondary schools. All learners are being affected because teachers are not teaching. You know, it has been hard for parents to raise money. 

We have not got any statement on this Floor in regard to that matter and it is two days now. I am the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports and we are receiving a lot of abuses in our inboxes, including the members of the Committee on Education and Sports - because since the President directed, that seems like an assurance that this is going to be catered for. 

However, the Ministry of Public Service has not come out even to explain. Also, there is no allotted or appropriated money in the budget for that increment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister is here. Since you smuggled the matter – 

MS NABUKENYA: My prayer is that the minister should make a statement on this issue in regard to what the honourable member has raised for those who have not been paid, but also on the industrial action and what Government is planning to do because students are missing out. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, make a statement on that.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Mary Mugasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable members for the very good points they have put across. 

First of all, an honourable member talked about people who have not been paid salaries. I will establish those who have not been paid and why they have not yet been paid. Tomorrow, I will come here with a statement from the technical persons - those who handle the payroll. 

About the enhancement of salaries for science professionals, the debate is still ongoing. Even this afternoon, we had a meeting with the Office of the Prime Minister and we promised that this directive is going to be handled. Soon, a statement will be issued. 

However, my senior minister is handling those who are conducting industrial action and they have discussed and they will go back to work because their money will be in the budget of the coming financial year. We are planning a pay plan across Government for all Government workers, including the scientists and the non-scientists.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us wait for your statement. Hon. John Paul Ninkusiima? (Members rose_) No, colleagues, let us finish this matter. Colleagues, I know the issues we are going into and I may not finish my – Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I will guide you. Do not mind.

3.29
DR JOHN PAUL NINKUSIIMA (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining the health of diabetic and hypertensive patients in Ibanda South, Ibanda District and Uganda at large. 

Many patients suffering from diabetes and hypertension are not greatly catered for in the Ministry of Health setup now. You cannot find anti-diabetic drugs, especially in health centres III, where most of our patients can easily access them in Ibanda South and across the country. 

Our people in Ibanda South and Ibanda District came up with a method of mobilising themselves; they raise over Shs 70,000 per month and it is given to a colleague, who is chosen to go and buy for them drugs. Besides the failure to access drugs, there are also routine checkups that are also supposed to be done to follow up those patients properly. So, the cost of getting health services, especially for patients who are suffering from diabetes, can go to about Shs 100,000 per month. 

For those who have both diseases - diabetes and hypertension - the cost can go to about Shs 150,000 and most of our people are subsistence farmers; they cannot raise that money. Due to lifestyle, the number of diabetes and hypertension patients is increasing and subsequently, death. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health comes to the rescue of the people of Ibanda South by supplying drugs for hypertension and diabetes to health centres III since we even have clinical officers who can administer those drugs. 

The Ministry of Health should also work with the National Medical Stores to have those drugs included on the list of drugs that are supplied to health centres III so that our people can survive. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Minister of Health, in one week, come back here and give us a statement in regard to the issue raised by the honourable. Hon. Aisha Kabanda, procedure? 

MS KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, I think last year, one of us moved a motion here on the Floor of Parliament urging Government to provide free drugs to non-communicable disease patients. The motion was passed by this Parliament in light of the honourable colleague’s prayers; it is actually the same thing. 

Isn’t it procedurally right that Government updates us on how far they went with Parliament’s advice in light of the fact that we are in the budgeting process? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure requires the Government to give an action-taken report. I need to first of all refer to the debate of that day, to know the timeline that was given and whether we are still in the timeline or not. Then tomorrow, I will give feedback on that. I might say you are late and yet we said three or six months. 

Kindly give me up to tomorrow. Clerk, remind me tomorrow to ensure I respond to the procedural matter raised by Hon. Aisha. Next time. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3(A) REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30th JUNE 2021 FOR THE FOLLOWING:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, what is the issue? We want to move forward. 

3.34
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sitting in the LOP’s seat is very important because you are responding to the Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see you are enjoying it. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking is that the Shadow Minister of Education and the Minister of Public Service in the Opposition responded to the issue of science teachers. We would like to know whether the communication of the President was done officially. 

What is happening currently is that there is a battle between the sciences and the arts teachers, plus primary school teachers. If the science teachers are to get the increment that is being talked about, will the arts teachers also get it? I am personally in support of the strike as long as all teachers come out to strike for their rights. The moment you talk about catering for one side, the other side will not be happy and we shall again get another battle. What we want to know from the Ministry of Public Service is: as they think about giving the other side Shs 4 or 5 million per month, are they going to do the same for arts teachers? 

When a child sits senior four examinations, if he or she passes mathematics, biology and physics but fails geography and English language, he has failed. These members are saying “Give us our thing, the arts teachers will look after themselves.” 

I am a lawyer and a teacher; so, am I useless in this country? We are getting a lot of insults and I am entertaining all manner of insults from science teachers. Mr Speaker, we must fight for all teachers because we had that battle here. (Applause) I was here, when Hon. Amama Mbabazi was the Prime Minister and we fought for the teachers and the Government accepted to increase teachers’ pay in a phased manner and it was done.

We are saying, recruit more science teachers on the payroll but nothing is happening. Teachers are saying, “We are striking because you promised us money” but there is no official communication from the President. 

There is a case in court on the same matter filed by Hon. Kwizera about the President pledging to pay people salaries, yet it is not the mandate of the President; it is the mandate of Parliament. Can we hear from public service whether they are thinking of giving science teachers a salary increment and when they will pay the arts teachers the same amount? 

We might sit here and tell ourselves lies. Teachers are refusing to teach – and you have been deceiving them since 2018. When they come to Hon. Ssewungu, because he is a member of the Committee on Education and Sports - they are abusing me terribly, which I accept 100 per cent. The fact is that teachers must have the same remuneration. 

As I conclude, it is the Committee on Education and Sports that gave science teachers an extra pay over the others; we gave them Shs 200,000 above the rest. Teachers accepted it and that is fair. So, if there is any increment, let it take place but let us not kill humanities as we watch. 

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, both science and arts teachers are not working. Nobody should mislead you. Both of them are not teaching. The arts teachers are quiet because there is a battle between the new union of science teachers against those who are under the Uganda National Teachers’ Union. These are things we should look at. 

I cannot be a legislator who comes here to tell lies that I am interested in science teachers being paid better than others. I have asked the science teachers to come to my constituency and de-campaign me. I will give them transport to come and fight Ssewungu in Kalungu, as I fight for all other teachers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, you should make a directive that anyone who abuses a Member of Parliament on phone commits an offence. They think my brain will be pumped with their rubbish but I cannot. 

I am a primary school teacher and I will not deny that. I can teach English in secondary school. I am a lawyer by profession now but I love teaching more than anything. We must fight for all teachers to have equitable salaries. Public service should update us on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Sometimes we want to make good submissions but you tie my hands. You have spoken and finished but you have continued speaking from that side. (Laughter) You need to listen to the presiding officer. You stood up on a point of guidance and your guidance is noted.

Minister of Public Service, Hon. Ssewungu cannot call you on the Floor and you rush there. No; it is the presiding officer who should allow you to come on the Floor. Otherwise, Members will be calling you and you will rush and you will end up knocking someone for no reason. 

The House has noted your submission, Hon. Ssewungu, and I believe it has enriched the thinking of the minister. She is going to bring a statement and we shall debate that statement. Your submission is going to enrich her statement because she has taken more issues. 

Colleagues, as the commissioner comes, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the following: Mr Joseph Andama and Mr Ronald Dradria. Please stand up for recognition. They are represented in the House by Hon. John Lematia and Hon. Mourine Osoru. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. 

3.39
MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me lay reports of the Auditor-General for Financial Year ended 30 June 2021 for the following:

    1. Kabarole District Local Government 
    2. Bundibuyo District Local Government
    3. Ntoroko District Local Government
    4. Fort-Portal Municipal Council 
    5. Kamwenge District Local Government.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to read the statement to be sure it is the one. Otherwise, when you read from the Order Paper, it might mislead you. 

MS AFOYOCHAN: Mr Speaker, they are arranged in that manner. This is for the period ending 30 June 2021. I think I mentioned that. 

    6. Kyenjojo District Local Government 
    7. Kitagwenda District Local Government 
    8. Kasese District Local Government
    9. Kyegegwa District Local Government
    10. Bunyangabu District Local Government 
    11. Kasese Municipal Council 
    12. Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital 
    13. Uganda Institute of Communication Technology. 

I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable commissioner. Items under 3(A)(i-xi) are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). Reports from (xii-xiii) are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). 

Commissioner, you can lay those under 3(B). She is laying papers. There is nothing wrong with the procedure of laying papers.

3(B)	REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2021 FOR THE FOLLOWING:

3.41
MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman representative, Zombo: Allow me lay reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 31 December 2021 for the following:

i) 	Post Bank Uganda Limited.
ii) 	Pride Microfinance Limited.
iii) 	Uganda Development Bank Limited.
iv) 	Housing Finance Bank Limited.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The reports are referred to COSASE for processing. As per rule 181(5), the committees – Local Government Accounts, PAC Central and COSASE – need to report back within six months. 

Hon. Kaaya, did you have a procedural matter?

MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, I stand on a procedural matter relating to rule 25 (7), which states, “An item of business standing on the Order Paper on any particular day, which has not been completed or reached on the interruption of business under relevant provisions of the rules, shall be placed on the Order Paper for the next sitting in such order as the Speaker may decide.”

Mr Speaker, there are items that appeared on the Order Paper last week and, as advised by the late Jacob Oulanyah that Members need to research and prepare to submit, we have been researching on certain items. However, as we expect, for example, to proceed the next week, they completely get lost from the Order Paper.

A case in point is the resolution of Parliament to operationalise the Tree Fund. We thought we would utilise the rainy seasons for planting trees and even the incorporation of such an item in the budget. The same applies to the coffee report. 

Mr Speaker, you have been reading, as promised – and we are also wondering why you should read such a report for the whole week without placing it on the Order Paper. So, I am just wondering whether we are proceeding rightly to come up with completely new items on the Order Paper. We are stuck with the researched information about some of these items on the Order Paper and we are not promised any future date to discuss these issues. 

That is the exact procedure that I wanted to inquire from you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I can see that your head is boiling, indeed, with research. (Laughter) I pray you cover it well and it does not steam away. I am happy you have read the rule properly: it is at the discretion of the Speaker. We consider very many issues when making the Order Paper. We do consult widely. We do not just make an Order Paper for the sake of it.

Now, for the item you have talked about – which you said disappeared – if you check on the business to follow on the Order Paper, there is item No. 7. If you were here on Thursday, that was part of the motion, which we said the minister requested – because it is a fund like the Uganda Road Fund. The minister requested to first go and get the opinion of the Attorney-General in the operationalisation of the various funds. 

This is because whereas he was proceeding under Section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act, we were saying, “You need to proceed under Article 153 of the Constitution”. We agreed that tomorrow, he is coming back here. Tomorrow, we are discussing the Tree Fund and the Uganda Road Fund. 

So, honourable, if you had come here by 2.00 p.m., you would not have asked that question. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION ON COVID-19 RELATED RESEARCH FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson? 

3.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION ON COVID-19 RELATED RESEARCH FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022 (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to present a report of the Select Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on Covid-19 Related Research for Financial Year 2019/2020 to Financial Year 2021/2022.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the committee. In the same vein, I want to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee’s meetings. I also beg to lay on the Table the documents submitted by Hon. Dr Musenero – they are quite a number, Mr Speaker. As well, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the documents submitted by other witnesses – they are also quite a number, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you do not need to read the entire report; go to the observations and the recommendations. However, Clerk, do capture the whole report on the Hansard so that whoever will be reading the Hansard in future gets the report in full.

MR KYOOMA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Perhaps, let me go through the introduction. 

Mandate of the select committee
Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 190 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Anita Annet Among, on 10 November 2021 constituted a Select Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation to investigate allegations of irregularities reported on the receipt and utilisation of funds for COVID-19 vaccine development by the Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics (PRESIDE), under the supervision of Hon. Dr Monica Musenero Masanza (then Senior Presidential Advisor on Epidemics).

Parliament mandated the committee to carry out investigations with the following terms of Reference:

1. 	To establish the progress in development of a locally manufactured COVID-19 vaccine; 

2. 	To establish the amount of funds so far released to the research, innovation and COVID-19 vaccine development; 

3. 	To establish how effectively such funds had been utilised; 

4. 	To establish the challenges faced in the development of COVID-19 vaccines and medicines; 

5. 	To inquire into any other matters incidental to the above; 

6. 	To recommend a way forward to Parliament, and; 

7. 	To report back to Parliament within two weeks.

Mr Speaker, when the committee began its investigation, it became apparent that funds had been released towards COVID-19 research, of which manufacture of vaccines was only a component. This committee investigation, therefore, covered COVID-19 research in its entirety.

At the expiry of the two weeks, Mr Speaker, the committee appreciated the complexity of the assignment and sought for an extension of the reporting time, which was granted.

Mr Speaker, the members of the select committee included:

    i. Hon. Kyooma Xavier, MP Ibanda North;

    ii. Hon. Awany Tony, MP Nwoya County;

    iii. Hon. Aisha Kabanda Nalule, Woman MP, Butambala;

    iv. Hon. Omara Paul, MP Otuke County; and

    v. Hon Silwany Solomon, MP Bukooli County Central.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, since the methodology is well set out, I beg your indulgence that I go to the background, so that the Members can get to understand the whole matter, which is on page 3 – 3.1 now.

Background to the investigation

During the plenary sitting on 4 November 2021, while responding to Hon. Dr Jane Ruth Aceng’s update on COVID-19 vaccination in the country, Hon. Yona Musinguzi raised concerns regarding irregularities in the use of public funds that had been released to produce a local vaccine for COVID-19.

In his statement, Hon. Yona Musinguzi indicated that up to Shs 20 billion had been drawn from the Consolidated Fund for scientists under PRESIDE to manufacture a COVID-19 vaccine and an additional Shs 50 billion was drawn in 2021 for PRESIDE, yet the supervising ministry – that is Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation or call it MoSTI - had been disbanded. 

He further questioned the legality of the Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics (PRESIDE), queried its staffing, operations and whether its premises in Ntinda that had no laboratories would be able to produce a vaccine. 

On 9 November 2021, Hon. Musinguzi Yona supported his allegations with documentary evidence laid on the Table, including financial and appropriation documents, as well as correspondences among Government agencies, regarding the financing of PRESIDE. The documents laid on the Table are indicated under Appendix 1. 

Consequently, the Rt Hon. Speaker constituted a select committee to investigate the allegations and report back. 

The Coronavirus Outbreak 

Perhaps, let me go to summary –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you will not finish, please. You have 10 more minutes to finish this.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, with 10 minutes, I think let me concentrate on observations and recommendations, in line with the terms of reference.

Term of reference 1 was to establish the progress of development of a locally manufactured COVID-19 vaccine. The issues are there.

Observations

The committee observed that the diversity in the selection of projects was necessary and timely to ensure that the country developed local solutions to address challenges in diagnosis, treatment and vaccine development for COVID-19.

About the projects - 1 to 5 – this is PCR and anti-body diagnostic kits, the PCR-based diagnostic essays and the Salva Diagnostic kit. None had advantage – therapeutic vaccine and developing an anti-body for COVID-19. So, about the progress of those ones I have mentioned, these are the observations.

The committee observed that in as much as project 1 had plans to set up a production facility, there was no evidence that they had been cleared by CPHL – that is the Central Public Health Laboratories - to commercially produce diagnostic kits. Failure to approve the National Health Laboratories Services Bill left a lacuna in licensing products from medical research.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker, the Committee recommends as follows: 

    i. That the construction of a production facility for anti-body diagnostic tools should be preceded with the acquisition of the necessary approvals from the National Drug Authority; and

    ii. Parliament should re-table and pass the National Health Services Bill as a means of strengthening the regulation of health laboratory services. Alternatively, the National Drug Authority Act may be amended to include provisions on regulating laboratory services and products. 

Vaccine development (Projects 6 to 9) 

The committee observes that although a candidate vaccine was identified, there was no indication that it had been patented or that patenting was in the pipeline, which cast doubt on its identification. 

Further, although the Hon. Dr Musenero indicated that preclinical trials in ordinary mice had been completed and in the final stages of data analysis, her conclusion that the vaccine was safe and had elicited a strong immune response was premature, since data analysis was still ongoing. 

The committee further observed that the transgenic mice are used in the preclinical trials relating to COVID-19. This is because ordinary laboratory mice do not have the ACE2 receptor, which is infected by SARS-CoV2 in humans and therefore, have to be genetically modified to express the desired characteristics. The K18-hACE2 mice are one of the transgenic mice that expresses the human ACE2. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends as follows:

    • Candidate vaccines should expeditiously be patented; and

    • Preclinical studies should be concluded, so as to ascertain the efficacy of candidate vaccines.

Progress of the Inactivated COVID-19 Vaccine Development Project

We observed that although a candidate vaccine was identified, there was no indication that it had been patented or that patenting was in the pipeline. Further, results of the preclinical trials had not been finalised, like for the other case. 

The committee further observed that the category of vaccine had not completed clinical trials and consequently, not been approved by NDA. This implied that it had consequently not been submitted to World Health Organisation for prequalification. 

The construction of a GMP facility was thus premature, since the candidate vaccine had not progressed to warrant production. 

Recommendations

    i) Preclinical and clinical studies for this vaccine should be expeditiously concluded;

    ii) At the conclusion of the preclinical studies, approvals from the National Drug Authority should be acquired and pre-qualification exercise with WHO be fast-tracked; and

    iii) Funding of the GMP facility should be stayed until quality assurance clearance is obtained from NDA and WHO.

Progress of Self-Amplifying RNA Vaccine

The committee observed that the nine-day duration between which funds were released and a request for reallocation sought was not only too short, but also suspicious for one to have predicted the stalling of the project. It is, therefore, the committee's submission that this project stalled because of poor planning, inadequate due diligence, coupled with lax vetting criteria.

The above observation was in line with the Auditor-General's report on COVID-19 funds, who advised management to review its vetting process to ensure that thorough due diligence be always undertaken, before funds are allocated to projects to avoid stalling challenges, especially at the commencement stage.

We recommend that: 

    a) The Ministry of Health, UNHRO in collaboration with the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should develop a research plan to guide medical research in the country, according to the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act. 

    b) A transparent vetting process should be put in place to ensure that only projects with technical capabilities are funded. Further still, project proposals should be vetted and selected in line with the national research agenda/plan.

Progress of the Novel Adenovector COVID-19 Vaccine 

Observations

We observed that Uganda is predisposed by virtue of its geography to contain a plethora of pathogens, which favour identification of viruses that can be modified to foster vaccine development. 

The committee could not ascertain from the information given whether indeed a candidate vaccine had indeed been developed. Although the minister indicated that a vaccine had been identified, the scientist's presentation was non-committal on that issue and only showed the cloning strategy (how they plan to manipulate the viral vector) involved in the process. Further, there was mention of a patenting process, but this had also not been concluded or verified.

Recommendations

    a) The Auditor-General or an independent body should assess whether the candidate vaccine has indeed been isolated. 

    b) If ascertained, further funding support be given to UVRI to enable the process to progress to preclinical and clinical trials or otherwise the project is exited.

    c) Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we actually established that those preclinical and clinical trials are so expensive. 

Therapeutics (Project 10-18)

We observed therapeutic interventions with high colostrum, immunoglobulin and Vitamin D. Then, projects whose progress is unclear; Matooke Starch as a Pharmaceutical Excipient in Selected Medicinal Formulations for use in the treatment of COVID- 19. That is specifically Project 19. 

We recommend that: 

    i. The projects that have progressed to pre-clinical trials should be expedited to clinical trials as they are a stop-gap measure in the treatment of COVID-19 in the event of other strains/ waves. 

    ii. The stalled projects should be reassessed and if not technically sound, exited and funds returned to the Consolidated Fund.

Central support for the development of Vaccines, Diagnostics & Therapeutics (Projects 19-23)

We did observe that the lab animal house project had advanced although there was no specialised equipment to enable continuous isolation and manipulation of genes that is characteristic of transgenic animal technology. The equipment that was procured was generic in nature to support the performance of routine laboratory analyses. 

The committee further observed that the failure to locally clone, map and sequence DNA would imply that there would be a continuous need to procure transgenic mice, which is not only expensive, but also not reliable since there was no local capacity to breed them. A transgenic mouse is one that almost behaves like a human being or has characteristics close to those of a human being. The transgenic mouse was reportedly valued at Shs 8 million per pair as opposed to the Swiss mice valued at Shs 20,000 presently used at the Makerere University Animal Lab House.

Recommendations 

We recommend:

    iv. The completion of the animal lab project should be expedited; the one at Makerere, as it is a support project for development of vaccines and therapeutics. 

    v. The project should be adequately equipped to ensure that Uganda has the capacity to follow projects through up to its completion.

Unapproved projects

We also established that there were projects that were being undertaken but not approved by the relevant organs. 

The committee observed that failure to subject the project to in-vitro studies to requisite vetting at inception demonstrated inadequacies in planning and coordination between research institutions.

We, therefore, recommend that: 

    i) Transparent vetting processes should be put in place to ensure that only projects with technical capabilities are funded. 

    ii) The Ministry of Health, the Uganda National Health Research Organisation in collaboration with the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should develop a research plan to guide medical research in the country, according to the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act. 

    iii) Project proposals should be vetted and selected in line with the national research agenda, as already cited. 

    iv) No funds should be allocated to projects that have not been vetted.

Overall number of projects

In our findings, we established that there were other projects which were not mentioned anywhere but had been funded. 

Observations 

The committee observed that although this research was to initially generate emergency solutions and should have been completed within a limited timeframe, it is still on-going. Failure to provide results within agreed timelines and budgets defeated the purpose for emergency interventions. 

The committee noted that the current research funding framework under PRESIDE has no governance mechanism since the Memorandum of Understanding expired. This implies, therefore, that the ongoing research is not governed by the requisite legal framework. 

Without the requisite reporting documentation, it was an arduous task to establish the progress of the projects; nonetheless, a quantitative analysis was done.

Recommendations 

PRESIDE should task projects that were to be completed within the Financial Year 2020/2021 to provide results in order to exit them. 

The responsible government entities should ensure that an MoU is entered to govern the on-going research. 

PRESIDE, which is now under the Office of the President, should ensure that all projects are routinely supervised and clearance certificates produced to track the achieved milestones to enable projects adhere to established budgets and timelines.

COVID-19 Research under NRIP

Observation

A total of eight projects were funded under the National Research and Innovation Programme (NRIP) under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MoSTI). These projects received a total of Shs 2.74 billion as operational funds. However, no funds were availed for purchase for equipment - and this is where Government needs to be more serious, where you provide operational funds without providing for equipment.

It should, however, be noted that with the exception of project 7 whose products were undergoing preclinical studies, the progress of the rest was unclear as indicated in Table 2. Of course, it was expected given that the equipment was not provided.

The committee recommends that: 

MoSTI, which is now under the Office of the President, should assess the progress of projects under NRIP and the status of the preclinical studies of five herbal products should consequently be ascertained. 

Projects with the potential to progress should be budgeted for in the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Funds should only be released after verification of clearance certificates. The verification process should be well-planned to avoid undue delays.

TOR 2: To establish the amount of funds so far released for the research, innovation and COVID-19 vaccine development 

The overall allocation and releases to COVID-19 related research 

Observation 

The committee noted that the projects received this equipment well before the project proposals were approved. Of course this is irregular. 

All the five projects were later approved for funding under PRESIDE and also received additional equipment in the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

The committee further noted that the purchase of equipment before approval of projects was irregular. 
We recommend that that going forward, work plans and budgets have to be presented for approval before procurements are undertaken.

Research and innovation-related funds and operational expenses of the PRESIDE, among others.

Observations

Operational funds included development items as per IFMS classification (Shs 577.7 million): The committee noted that much as the Shs 3.35 billion was meant to cater for operational expenses (recurrent expenditure), most of the funds were used for development expenses. These items included purchase of vehicles, taxes on vehicles, capital purchases like furniture etc. 

We also observed double funding of items already covered under selected projects amounting to Shs 274.6 million - the PCR and anti-body diagnostic kits project (Mulago Biomedical Research Centre) and the Production and Clinical Evaluation of Herbal Medicine project (Natural Chemotherapeutics Research Institute) are among the projects fully funded under PRESIDE. However, they received further funding from the operational funds of PRESIDE.

Other irregular payments of Shs 611.8 million. There were also other payments – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have five minutes. You have already taken 30 minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Are you sure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KYOOMA: I think the report is a bit compressing, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These reports are uploaded early so that we read. That is why I told you that the Hansard should capture the report in full so that in future, it can be referred to. Otherwise, we will sleep here.

MR KYOOMA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

Other irregular payments of Shs 611.8 million

There were also other payments that were not classified as operational but were irregularly spent as such i.e. UBV 10N clinical trials, Mulago Lung Institute, and facilitation of students in Japan. 

    i. Salaries

Although the State House comptroller indicated that Shs 1.4 billion was spent on salaries of the seven staff of PRESIDE, the committee could not verify the expenditure because it was unable to obtain the payroll despite several requests for the same from the State House comptroller, the PRESIDE chairperson and the PRESIDE Secretariat.

Basing on the analysis of the consolidated salaries contained in the appointment letters received, the committee established that salaries for PRESIDE staff totalled to Shs 444 million and not the reported Shs 1.4 billion. The committee, therefore, noted a discrepancy of Shs 956 million and observed that given the discrepancy above, 

        a) There could have been either more people on the payroll than disclosed; 
        b) Staff were paid more money than indicated on the appointment letters; or 
        c) Money could have been out-rightly swindled.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that: 

    i) State House should ensure that funds appropriated as operational funds should not be used for development expenses. 

    ii) The Auditor-General should include the aspect of the operational funds to the PRESIDE secretariat in the forensic audit scope. The Auditor-General is already undertaking some forensic audits.

    iii) Monies spent as salaries should be commensurate with the terms of employment of staff to avoid wastage. 

    iv) Projects that are funded should only receive funds as appropriated by Parliament.

A total of Shs 31.03 billion supplementary appropriation funds, Mr Speaker, given all those tables because of time, I will rush to the observations.

    i) 10 projects received more funds than they had budgeted for, as approved by Parliament. For instance, project 1 (the PCR and anti-body diagnostic kits) received 198 per cent of its budget. The approved project budget was Shs 1.58 billion as operational funds only. However, it received Shs 3.12 billion, including Shs 693 million in equipment that had not been budgeted for. The over-performance of some projects in terms of received resources implies that some projects’ budgets were suppressed in favour of other projects, since there were no additional funds provided by Government. 

    ii) Five projects received less than 50 per cent of the funds and this can be explained by what I have already read.

    iii) One project received money without approval of Parliament despite these funds being supplementary - and the Auditor-General reported on this. 

    iv) Further, there were virements across projects without requisite approvals. For example, Shs 377.49 million was moved from project 11 (Stem Cell Research) and 12 (Therapeutic Intervention for COVID-19 using Anti-virals, to project 2 (PCR based Diagnostic assays). These virements are contrary to Section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended. The committee further observes that there was suppression of other projects that had been approved by Parliament as already indicated. 

Recommendations:

    i. The Auditor-General should pick interest in the shortfall of Shs 2.024 billion unaccounted for funds. 

    ii. Management should strengthen internal controls to monitor and follow up on utilisation and accountability of funds disbursed as per Section 22 of the PFMA 2015 as amended. 

COVID-19 Research and Innovation-Related Funds for the FY2021/2022

Observations
 
i. 	A total of 17 projects was presented before Parliament with a total budget of Shs 25 billion for implementation in Financial Year 202l/2022 with additional funds of Shs 27 billion became available through a supplementary budget, the total number of projects raised to 27, where 10 new projects (Projects 18-27) were introduced and two of the already approved projects were dropped at that point yet it had been passed by Parliament. 

The committee found that the two projects should have been given funds for implementation whether there was a supplementary or not, since their budgets had already been approved by Parliament in the ministerial policy statement. No reasons were given for their exclusion. 

Projects nine and 10 had their budgets increased by 103 per cent and 164 per cent in the same financial year from what was approved by Parliament. Maybe there is another Parliament that was doing that. The committee was not privy to the revised proposals that necessitated this increment. 

Sixteen of the projects funded in Financial Year 2020/2021 were again on the list of projects funded in Financial Year 2021/2022. The remaining seven projects from Financial Year 2020/2021 were not receiving additional funding. These projects are in table seven. 

COVID-19 research funded under the National Research Innovation Programme (NRIP) did not receive funding in the Financial Year 2021/2022. The committee noted that there was no indication as to whether these projects had reached their conclusion since no reports on final outcomes were received. In the event that this research is still on-going, there is a danger of the country losing out on the initially accomplished milestones since the projects now hang in balance. 

The biggest overall beneficiaries of the COVID-l9 research funding measured by the total amount of funds received this far for the past three years are given in the table.

The committee recommends that: 

    1. Periodical progress of projects should be tracked and reported on in order to inform budgeting, release of funds and exit of projects. 

    2. Research proposals and funding should not be revised without due process as this goes against the principles of good financial management. 

    3. Project proposals should clearly indicate financing and timeline details. 

    4. Clear guidelines should be put in place to guide exit of projects. 

    5. Letters of no objection and clearance certificates should be provided before further funding for each phase. 

TOR 3: To establish how effectively the funds were used

6.3.1 Delays in disbursement of operational funds

Now, I have resorted to reading only subheadings because of time. The committee observed that delays in the release of funds affected the timely implementation of the intended activities under the various projects. 

We recommend that release of funds for emergency projects should be timely and where possible, front-loaded, so as to enable quick acquisition of research results or products. 

6.3.2 Scientists participating in multiple projects

This was quite irregular also, where you would find many people on this project are the same people on the other one as long as they just change the principal investigator. Since this research was to obtain emergency solutions, it was not necessary to overload the scientists with several projects. The scientists were too ambitious taking on several projects, which scattered human and financial resources. 

The vetting mechanism was not transparent and could have led to dissatisfaction of the unsuccessful scientists yet others had multiple projects. 

Recommendations 

    1. Scientists should not participate in more than one study to enable efficiency. In accordance with the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act in collaboration with Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MoSTI), the Ministry of Health, and the Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UNHRO) should develop a research plan to guide medical research in the country. 

    2. Project proposals should be vetted and selected in line with the national research agenda as already emphasised.

6.3.3 Lack of accountability by the Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics (PRESIDE)

The committee observed that PRESIDE did not fulfil its obligation of facilitating proper accountability for funding provided for research projects as stipulated in its role under section 5.7 of the memorandum of understanding. Lack of guidelines on reporting resulted into non-uniform and late reporting on projects. 

The committee also observed that there was flouting of provisions in respect to release of funds. 

We recommend that:

    1. Accountability for projects should be given in the prescribed format containing such details so as to facilitate decision-making.
 
    2. Funds should not be provided to projects without verification of clearance certificates.

6.3.4 Accountability for project operational funds 

The committee observed that poor financial management resulted into up to at least Shs 2.06 billion not being accounted for under operational funds. Lack of guidelines on reporting resulted into discrepancies in reporting and allowances paid to scientists. Further, failure to harmonise allowance rates also led to wastage. 

The committee recommends that:

    i. MoSTI, under the office of the President, should put in place guidelines for reporting and allowances for scientists. 

    ii. The accounting officers should be held liable for unaccounted for funds. 

    iii. Additionally, salaries of scientists should be competitive to prevent brain drain from the country.

6.3.5 Unauthorised reallocation of project funds/diversions 

Observations

    i. The Chairperson PRESIDE, Dr Monica Musenero, acted irregularly by authorising the virement, which was solely the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

    ii. The amount that was varied exceeded the amounts provided for by the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), which holds that the amount allocated for an item should not exceed 10 per cent.

    iii. The committee further observed that lack of proper authorisation defeats the ministry's oversight and accounting role over the projects. 

    iv. Projects that stalled continuously received money to be channelled to unauthorised projects, which was irregular. 

Recommendations

    i. All virements between projects should be made in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. 

    ii. PRESIDE should not reallocate funds without authorisation from MoSTI. 

    iii. The Minister responsible for Science Technology and Innovation should be relieved of her role as Chairperson PRESIDE to avoid conflict of interest and to align this funding to principles of good governance.

    iv. PRESIDE's or responsible entity accounting officer should institute a robust monitoring system to monitor the implementation and utilisation of funds to avoid such re-allocations without the ministry's involvement.

    v. Management should adopt a transparent vetting process to ensure only projects with technical capacities are funded. 

6.3.6 Procured equipment for research projects

Recommendations

    i. All future equipment procurements should be preceded by a needs assessment, verified research proposals clearly indicating equipment needs and verification of laboratory space for their installation. 

    ii. Procurement and delivery of equipment should be planned to avoid delays in installation. Also, installation and training of personnel to use the equipment should be well planned. 

    iii. Host institutions should be given funds for maintenance of equipment. Actually, all our equipment that were imported are at a risk of getting spoilt because there is no maintenance plan.

    iv. All equipment should be engraved and asset registers maintained at both host institutions and MoSTI. 

    v. Guidelines should be put in place for sharing equipment across institutions and reverting equipment to MoSTI. 

    vi. Emergency purchases should take into account already available equipment and only purchase the necessary. We would find that an institution has equipment but another one was also purchased, which leads to misappropriation of resources.

6.3.7 Consumables

The committee observed that the PPDA Act and regulations were not adhered to. The committee further observed that there was no competitive bidding and therefore, the Government was unable to carry out comparative analysis on pricing. 

It is the committee's view that there was poor planning in procurements and no due diligence exercised in procurement of consumables, which posed a danger of wastage. Mr Speaker, at the time of our visit, some of the consumables were still stored, meaning that there is a risk of them becoming stale or expired.

We recommend that:

    iv. Provisions of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (PPDA) Act should always be adhered to while procuring items necessary for projects.

    v. Procurements should be planned to avoid wastage due to delays.

    vi. For future emergency procurements, the opportunity for waivers for certain requirements in the procurement cycle should be fully utilised because there are those provisions in the PPDA law.

    vii. New MoSTI and PRESIDE should prevail over the host institutions to ensure participating institutions follow the procurement laws, regulations, procedures and guidelines.

Monitoring and evaluation

Recommendations

i) 	The role of PRESIDE chairperson and minister responsible for science, technology and innovation should be separated. That is a requirement for good governance. 

    v)  The National Research and Innovation Programme Framework should be evoked to guide the governance of funding under the science, technology and innovation (STI) sector.

    vi)  Completion certificates should be issued at completion of every phase of the research and should be the basis for release of additional funds.

    vii) Proposals should be well costed and clear on milestones to be achieved at the various phases to enable proper planning.

    viii) Funds should be provided to MoSTI under the Office of the President for monitoring and evaluation of the projects.

Capacity of PRESIDE to carry out their supervisory mandate – it is PRESIDE that was supposed to be supervising all those professors and doctors.

The committee observed that:

    i) MoSTI released funds without the required certificates of clearance.

    ii) There was lack of planning on the part of Government as it failed to avail funds to MoSTI to give oversight to PRESIDE projects and a transition plan for MoSTI’s abolition because the ministry was disbanded. 

    iii) The selection criteria for the projects by the chairperson PRESIDE seemed to have been at personal level with the scientists who never expected serious monitoring and evaluation of their projects.

    iv) Lack of strategic evaluation and monitoring mechanisms from MoSTI affected the project’s performance.

    v) The PRESIDE secretariat lacked capacity to supervise the financial and technical aspects of the projects because they lacked the prerequisite qualifications.

When you find that someone with a bachelor’s degree is supposed to supervise a professor, it is indeed questionable.

Recommendations

    i. The National Research Innovation Programme (NRIP) framework should be used to guide selection of projects, their monitoring, evaluation and exit.

    ii. The role of PRESIDE, its secretariat and research associates should be absorbed within the structures of the NRIP framework, which is already in existence.

    iii. The committees within the NRIP framework should be constituted with the relevant skills.

    iv. Consequently, MoSTI should urgently be staffed.

TOR 4: To establish the challenges faced in development of the COVID-19 vaccines and medicines
Mr Speaker, very many observations were given.

On the other term of reference to inquire into any matters incidental to COVID-19 research, there were also very many observations about the legal status of PRESIDE, which is very unclear.

Maybe I need to read this observation. Although a project write-up on PRESIDE was provided to the committee, it was void of any specific terms of reference, mandate and strategic plan. These limitations not only make dealing with PRESIDE risky, but also complicate accountability and enforceability of the objectives.

Given that the initiative was to handle large sums of public funds, it was prudent that all legalities were established to guide implementation. 
 
Following H.E the President’s directive, the Prime Minister needed to be advised on the implementation. 

H.E the President, as the Fountain of Honour and as Head of State, directed that a scientific initiative be established to do research on vaccine development for Uganda, following drug hoarding in the developed world. This was in exercise of his constitutional powers, according to Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. 

The committee, however, noted that even when the President issues a directive on a specific matter, such executive directives have to be implemented and executed in accordance with the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. 

The minIsters should listen to this carefully. I repeat: The committee, however, noted that even when the President issues a directive on a specific matter, such executive directives have to be implemented and executed in accordance with the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. (Applause) 

There is an interesting ruling – colleagues, you can read it. I am time-barred. 

Recommendations

    i) The Government should regularise the establishment of PRESIDE under the laws of Uganda, if it is to stay. Subsequently, we are ordering for its disbandment, but here we are saying that, if it is to stay, then it should be regularised.

    ii) Government should ensure that presidential programmes, initiatives and directives are implemented in accordance with the legal framework of Uganda.

I think this is now being done for the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) and those other initiatives. So, it equally needs to apply to PRESIDE. 

The PRESIDE Think Tank and Secretariat: staffing 

    i. We recommend that the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation should be different from the chairperson PRESIDE and the Senior Presidential Advisor on Epidemics.

In the current situation, the minister for science, technology and technology is the chairperson PRESIDE and also Senior Presidential Advisor on Epidemics. All those roles should be separated so as to cope with good governance principles.

ii. The recruitment of PRESIDE staff should be informed by the Public Service recruitment – because we did not find any form of interviews that were given.

PRESIDE premises

We visited PRESIDE premises but we recommend that in the spirit of transparency and accountability, the premises should be clearly marked and accessible because there was nothing like a signpost to show that this is where to find PRESIDE.

Memorandum of understanding and tripartite agreements

The memorandum of understanding, in clause 6.2.3, exempted subsequent subsidiary agreements relating to the subject matter.

Although the bilateral MoU does not affect the validity of the subsequent agreements – 	Members can read that.

Recommendations

i. 	Government should ensure that presidential programmes, initiatives and directives be implemented in accordance with the legal framework, as we have already said.

ii. 	In the spirit of rationalisation, which is a Cabinet position, PRESIDE should be disbanded. The role of PRESIDE, its secretariat and research associates should be absorbed within the already existing structures of the NRIP framework. Consequently, projects funded under the science, technology and innovation sector should be governed under the NRIP framework. 

iii. 	The structure of MoSTI should be expeditiously completed and the ministry urgently staffed to perform its duties – I am happy the Minister of Public Service is around.

Breach of the memorandum of understanding

Observations 

The committee observed that despite the commitment by PRESIDE in the memorandum of understanding to account for all monies advanced by MoSTI and progress reports both financial and technical, PRESIDE did not account to MoSTI for funds advanced to projects.

Several reminders were sent by the Permanent Secretary MoSTI to the chairperson PRESIDE to provide the accountability for funds disbursed, but all in vain. 

The individual scientists eventually accounted for the funds disbursed but not all funds were accounted for, as was observed in the Auditor-General’s report on the COVID-19 funds. The Auditor-General noted that Shs 491 million was not accounted for. Further, there were no clearance certificates issued for funding, prior to completion. It was just word of mouth, “I have reached this level. Give me money” and it would be given.

The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation also released funds without receiving proof of supporting documents, as required under Section 4.3 of the Memorandum of Understanding. Release of funds was to be tagged to a project implementation schedule, clearly showing milestones, a clearance certificate for each stage and project reports. 

We recommend that MoSTI, which is now under the Office of the President, puts in place a new Memorandum of Understanding, whose conditions should be adhered to, in respect to all research projects. 

Selection and Vetting Process for Research Projects

From what I have already presented, I am sure colleagues have already gotten the irregularities. So, let me just go to observations and recommendations.

The committee observed that the selection of projects was rushed without detailed analysis of their feasibility. The selection process was also not transparent, as there was no external call for proposals but rather, a handpicking of some projects. Not all projects selected were vetted. The selection process of the projects was, therefore, irregular. 

Recommendations

    i) Management should review its vetting process to ensure that a thorough and due diligence process is undertaken before funds are allocated to projects; 

    ii) Vetting processes should be aligned with the NRIP framework; 

    iii) In accordance with the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act, in collaboration with Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, MoSTI, the Ministry of Health and UNHRO should develop a research plan to guide medical research in the country. 

    iv) The research agenda should be linked to university curricula and should be informed by the industry needs of the country.

    v) Project proposals should be vetted and selected, in line with the national research agenda, as already indicated. 

    vi) Detailed feasibility studies should be carried out to inform the selection of projects that are commercially viable. This can be achieved by putting in place a unit within the structure of MoSTI to study the model of such projects for commercial viability before they are rolled out; and

    vii) A research and professionals database should be established and be made publicly available to identify on-going research and available skills and expertise. This will facilitate the easy identification of researchers and projects in future, as well as establishing synergies between institutions, as well as guard against duplications. 

Disregard of Established Institutions and Frameworks

All those are given, Mr Speaker. The observations are quite many; let me go to the recommendations, Mr Speaker, with your permission.

    i) In accordance with the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act, in collaboration with –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kyooma, I think I am going to order that the report be captured on the Hansard because really – you have to conclude, honourable member. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, let me just concentrate on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope, Members, you are just not reading from what he is saying. You have IPads; Members need to debate. They are seated here boiling with information.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Much obliged.

In accordance with the Uganda National – I have already hinted on these ones, colleagues. 

The Innovation Fund (National Research and Innovation Programme)

We recommend as follows: 

    i) Government enhances annual funding to the NRIP by an additional Shs 35 billion to address the current funding gap, which will enhance research development and innovation; and

    ii) All COVID-related project proposals should be vetted and selected, in line with the national research agenda plan.

On-going Research and Underfunding of Research in Host Institutions

I will just go to the recommendations.

    i) Government should ensure that Presidential programmes, initiatives and directives are implemented – I have already mentioned that; and

    ii) The Public Universities are already catered for – (Interjections) - I thought I was given the three minutes and I am within them.  

Closure of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

Maybe some recommendations on page 75 – 

    i) Government should ensure concrete transitional plans in place, in the event that it has to shift its Ministries, Departments and Agencies to another. This, in turn, will enable a seamless or smooth transfer. 

    ii) The Ministry of Public Service should develop guidelines on how matters of transfer of MDAs should be carried out. We found an issue where some of those staff who were employed under the disbanded agencies, up to now, do not know their fate.

Lack of Staff Structure for MoSTI 

    i) The Ministry of Public Service should expedite the completion of the structure of MoSTI. Maybe, those ones can be given a ray of hope – those who have not been deployed; and

    ii) Government should not transfer its Ministries, Departments and Agencies without transitional plans. That already catered for too.

Mr Speaker, as I go to the conclusion, I want to thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament and staff, who really were very committed – (Interjection) - this is the conclusion. (Laughter)

Although PRESIDE was established with a visionary mandate, to be a vehicle to spear the pathogen economy, it has been mired with mismanagement, poor accountability practices and overall poor planning. (Applause)

At its inception, Government failed to define its legality, failed to analyse and optimise the structures that were already in place and build on these, as a way of driving the pathogen economy forward. This went against the current Government policy on rationalisation and the improvement of efficiency within MDAs.

The role of UNHRO, MoSTI and UNCST as regulators was usurped and replaced with PRESIDE, which had a temporary supervisory framework in the form of a Memorandum of Understanding. 
With the expiry of the MoU, PRESIDE, as a project, remained operational yet not supervised because its chairperson is the Minister responsible for the docket of Science, Technology and Innovation and also the Special Presidential Advisor on Epidemics. 

The need to develop a pathogen economy is still viable, both in the short and long term, so as to protect against current epidemics and safeguard or prepare for the next disease epidemics. However, for this to be achieved, a well-thought out, planned and an adequately financed strategy should be put in place. This strategy should have input from all relevant stakeholders and should be implemented within the confines of the laws of Uganda.

The roles of PRESIDE can adequately be covered under the National Research and Innovation Programme Framework, supported by UNHRO Act and UNCST Act. With research institutions already part of UNHRO, they only required funding to drive their strategic plans forward. 

PRESIDE, therefore, is a duplication of the already existing structures but without funding. 

Given that the chairperson PRESIDE is the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation and the Senior Presidential Advisor on Epidemics – it is the same person and one can say that PRESIDE is currently reporting to itself. (Laughter)

For reasons already given in the report, Mr Speaker, the committee strongly recommends that PRESIDE be disbanded and its funding channeled through NRIP, with a vetting committee reporting, monitoring and evaluation mechanism already in place under the NRIP’s framework. The operation of the innovation fund can perhaps be better managed. Research and innovation has over the years been inadequately financed. The advent of COVID-19 demonstrated the need for the country to increase its funding towards research development and innovation. 

Consequently, Mr Speaker, where research is already on going at the research institutions, the projects should be funded directly through budget appropriation to the host institution. Mr Speaker and the honourable members, I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Xavier Kyooma and honourable colleagues for an extensive report. There were very wide observations and strong recommendations made. 

I think it would be prudent, before we go any further, to first allow the petitioner, Hon. Yona, to speak. It would be fair. Hon. Yona, I am giving you a few minutes. Are you satisfied with the findings of the committee?

4.52
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker and Members, today, I would like us to really raise our voices in thanking God, who gave us such a charismatic – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we do not raise voices here. You know our rules. 

MR MUSINGUZI: In our own way – who gave us such charismatic leaders - the group of five men and one woman - whom the Speaker selected to lead this committee to investigate the allegations. I really want to thank them for the work well done. (Applause)

I would also like to thank the Speaker for humbly giving him enough time because I think they had given him 30 minutes to present, but the findings were enormous. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving them more time. 

I have nothing much I can add to the report because it has even unearthed more than I thought. A whistle-blower - it was an oversight of this committee to leave me in the hands of the world to be devoured amidst intimidation, witch hunt, and threats, which I have here. There were even press threats that you saw on TV saying, “I will sue him.” You saw all that. 

All that would have been curbed for a future whistle-blower, if the minister had stepped aside for Parliament investigations. That not done, as the investigation went on, for her to know that more would be unearthed, she went ahead and convinced whoever so that the ministry that was giving evidence was disbanded. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report, and the Members. They reported very well and were very clear and specific - The Ministry of Science and Technology –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, do not respond to a Member that is not on record.

MR MUSINGUZI: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. My former guild president is misleading me. I beg to be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not on record.  

MR MUSINGUZI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to take Members’ time to deliberate more but when I look at all this - we have all heard and I want to thank Members for listening attentively - I know the minister may also want to come and clarify many things, which she should have done in the committee. 

If you love this country, why would one really be given such a big responsibility and you misuse it against us, the NRM people, who are always looking for the votes in the village? I had thought it was only Shs 70 billion but we have found out that it is more than Shs 126 billion, according to this report. 

As we talk today, we have a supplementary budget of Shs 50 billion, which we have again extended to PRESIDE. I want to stand before this Parliament to say that what is gone is gone - if they cannot refund it, but for what has not yet gone, let us recall that Shs 50 billion. We are looking for the teachers’ money and money for roads. As we deliberate tomorrow on the roads in our villages, let us withdraw our Shs 50 billion, which we had allocated to PRESIDE that has no framework and is a bonanza of a few individuals using us as rubber stamps. This mafia group should be curtailed. 

I would like to thank every Member here; that you are going to be counted and history has judged you right by even cheering to fight corruption in this country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Yona.  

MR MUSINGUZI: As I conclude, I would like to add two recommendations to the report. Mr Speaker, I may be emotional, but you will forgive me. In Luganda, there is what we call “Ssente Z’akameeza.” It is money you leave at the table for your wife to buy things such as tomatoes and onions. 

This Shs 126 billion was shared like ssente z’akameeza. You can see how the President was very specific; go and manufacture a vaccine for the emergency that was there. What did they do? They created very many entities; very small micro units, such that they can confuse everyone and share the money. 

I would like to share with this Parliament that the minister we have here - she has the right of hearing - should tell the committee when she bought the three schools that she has. There is one in Bulindo, Mukono, and Kapchorwa. 

I recommend that we replace where they are saying, “The Auditor-General should proceed with investigations” with “The IGG should proceed with investigations.” 

The second and last one is that as we talk of corruption and the President, as he has said – Do you remember when he said, “You people who have been bypassing me, I am bringing a saviour who is going to fight corruption in this country?” I want to stand here and add my voice to what my President, the one I treasure most, is fighting against. 

Members, let us stand to be counted. If it is one of us, he is shaming all of us and we should not accept this. I know, according to the Rules of Procedure, if we are to censure a minister, we need signatures. I have already drafted papers. I pray that you all append your signatures and we censure this minister today and not tomorrow. The time is today. Let her be censured so that this country can regain its glory. 

We have lost a lot – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yona, I think there is no where you have gone – you are going beyond what is required. I have given you enough time. 

MR MUSINGUZI: I thank the Speaker for the time he has given me. Members, let me prepare your papers. As we get out, we should censure the woman and she goes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues let us sober up and listen to one another. I am going to give an opportunity to the minister and I want her to be listened to attentively, the same way we have listened to others attentively. Let us listen to the minister in silence. (Interjection) No, I want her because she was accused. 

Hon. Yona has even already printed papers. It would be fair for us to give her an opportunity to clarify a few things, which might have come out of the report. 

Honourable minister, the Floor is yours. I had just two quick questions, which can also help me understand the report very well: One, are you still the Chairperson of PRESIDE? 
Two, are you still the Presidential Advisor on Epidemics? Are you still holding those two positions? It would help me to understand really how we are moving.

5.02
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION) (Dr Monicah Musenero): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we shall debate. I want to know if the minister has comments she wants to make on the report.

DR MUSENERO: Mr Speaker, I would like to start with your questions. PRESIDE was merged into Science, Technology and Innovation. So, there is no need for a chairperson of PRESIDE and once the new structure was approved by the Ministry of Public Service, PRESIDE was merged and so, there is no chairperson of PRESIDE. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in short, we no longer have PRESIDE.

DR MUSENERO: No, we do not have PRESIDE.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

DR MUSENERO: Secondly, although some people still refer to PRESIDE in terms of pathogen economy - there is pathogen economy, which we are planning for. ‘Presidential Advisor’ is an appointed position and once you are given another appointment in Public Service, you relinquish the previous one.
So, I am not a presidential advisor. However, due to my expertise, the President may, from time to time, consult me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a minister?

DR MUSENERO: I am a minister, so, in that capacity, he may consult me. Mr Speaker, I want to start by appreciating the committee for the work that they have done. I did not have the privilege of reading the report earlier. I am going to study it but I noticed it was 163 pages, which have a lot of good information. 

I must commend the committee because they gave a lot of time and dedication, and every time they called me, I was there - sometimes spending a full day or two to three days - responding to their needs. 

Honourable members, research is a complex subject, and the areas, which we started under PRESIDE were areas which this country had failed to break through. However, the PRESIDE initiative, which came amidst an emergency, has given the country a strong foundation. Honourable members, you will appreciate that we have built a lot of capacity and what we now need is to work and support this work in the institutions, where it is and STI will continue to provide the strong leadership. 

I am greatly relieved, despite the allegation by Hon. Yona, the committee’s report does not say anything about the Shs 79 billion that he presented here, or any such monies that have been misappropriated. So, the Auditor-General is the competent authority in this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to the honourable minister; you will have time. Colleagues, where you believe that the minister is not being factual, you are going to have time during the debate. However, I wanted us to give her time, the way we have given the rest time. It is only fair. 

DR MUSENERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Auditor-General received accounts for PRESIDE three times. The first two  - those reports are out - these accountabilities were passed to the then Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and they were audited and reports were issued. These audit reports are available to the public to look at. 

I also wish the House to note that the committee was looking into work of Financial Year 2020/2021. So, many things have since changed and I beg that at an appropriate time, the Speaker gives me an opportunity to one, respond to some of the issues and two, to update the House on where we are. 

I would like to categorically state here that I do not own a single school in Bulindo or Mukono or any other place in the central region. The schools I own were established in the year 2000 in Butebo and Budaka District long before I was in Government and they have been operating at the same level. I do not own any such schools neither am I a board member or in any way associated with a school in Bulindo or Mukono. (Interjection)- No, there are records in the Ministry of Education and Sports and there are records in the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I request once again that at an appropriate time, I am given an opportunity to respond to some of these issues. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues you received this report just five hours ago and I think, also the person who is being accused of things here and there, is not in position to explain some of these issues. And yet she is saying that once given time, she will be able to, which is very important for fairness in this House. 

We should not be seen to have passed unfair reports. Many Members of Parliament have been coming here and telling me, “This is very short notice; we are not able to debate this report and finish.” I, therefore, defer debate of the report to Tuesday, next week. Next item.

Colleagues, this is in your own interest. Go and read the report and understand it. On Tuesday next week, we will come here without anyone claiming they were ambushed with the report. I think that is fair. (Interjection)
 
No, Leader of the Opposition, you were among the first people to tell me that. So, if you are in support, then there is no need to add on anything. We have issues to handle. Let us first handle items under No. 7. We have not stopped any debate; we are saying go, read and prepare and then on Tuesday, come and debate. 

I want to first deal with Item No. 7.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT TO URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PATRICK ISINGOMA-MWESIGWA ON THE UNCERTAINTY REGARDING THE SUPPLY OF FUEL THROUGH KENYA ARISING FROM THE DECISION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA TO RESTRICT THE ALLOCATION OF SHARES OF FUEL TO NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES SO AS TO ADDRESS FUEL OUTAGES IN THEIR OWN LOCAL MARKET 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I sincerely thank you, for allowing me to raise a point of procedure. The rule of justice – you are the people that went to the school of law; we studied economics. Whereas the rule of justice provides for fair hearing, this report is overdue. 

Honourable minister, at the beginning of your submission, you said we should listen attentively and note whatever we are going to put forward. The practice of this Parliament is that if there are contentious issues arising after debate, they are deferred. 

I have lived long enough in this country called Uganda to know what goes on but, Mr Speaker, you are deferring this debate to protect the person and a minister - because several calls are going to come through tonight until Tuesday, threatening and telling people this and the other. You heard Hon. Musinguzi telling you that he has –(Interjections) – there is no point of order and procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not start ruling. You are not the presiding officer of this House. You are now making rulings. (Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Musinguzi, the whistle-blower, told you he received threats and intimidation. We are lucky he is thick-skinned. People’s objectivity here is going to be compromised by the calls that are going to happen between now and Tuesday. 

Mr Speaker, isn’t it procedurally right that we debate this report so that some information goes on the Hansard, as the minister studies and gets to know whatever is there and whatever will happen next? Let us have some information on the Hansard so that by the time we come on Tuesday to continue with the debate - even if you allow five or 10 people to debate, it will add to what has been presented since you heard the minister. Otherwise, you would have equally asked the minister to come on Tuesday to defend her report. On Tuesday, we only call -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to add on something, honourable Leader of the Opposition?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let us agree that this report was tabled seven hours ago but out of these seven hours, we have been here for more than two hours. What we should agree upon is that this, now, is a document of Parliament. And the Speaker ruled very well; that everything should be put on the Hansard. It can only be withdrawn under other procedures. 

Whether we give 10 Members to debate now or not, you need to read this report. There is nothing that can be changed in this report. We need to take keen interest as Members of Parliament. When they talk about patent rights – I do not want to debate the report but you must know what is meant by patentability. We have had similar problems with the Banana project, where Dr Florence Muranga took the patents of the Banana project. 

Like the Speaker has said, I pray that we go back, honourable members. Our strength is in reading and getting more information. I am interested in my good friend, Hon. Yona Musinguzi, tabling the names of those schools and how they were run and got. There is a lot of money in this report. You cannot mislead me, Mr Speaker, in this House that we have read this report properly and debate it thoroughly.

Once the Rt Hon. Speaker commits - he is the presiding officer. We shall demand for this report. The Speaker has committed next Tuesday. Within this time, let us go back and look at this report, get additional documents and then we censure the minister thoroughly. She might even resign before Tuesday. 

Honourable members, you heard the minister, in her submission, defending the amounts but the facts are given. I am very happy with the report and the Speaker's ruling is final. Let us meet on Tuesday and debate this matter extensively and make stronger recommendations. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wonder why we are continuing with the debate. If we are to stick to the rules, the Speaker's ruling can only be challenged by a motion. Since the Speaker ruled on this matter - Rule 87, which is on the Decision of the Speaker or the Chairperson, specifically (2) states, “The decision of the Speaker or the Chairperson on any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice”. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know why you are entertaining debate on this matter when the rule is very clear. Before you made this ruling, I was of the same view, like Hon. Kibalya, that we debate but after you made a ruling, I read this rule and I found myself unable to do that, unless I rise under rule 87(2).
 
Honourable colleagues, now that the Rt Hon. Speaker has made a ruling, I would like to appeal that we adhere to the rules. Mr Speaker, let Tuesday be Tuesday. Let us go and prepare, read these things, read the 163 pages of the report. That is why I agree with the honourable minister, who is being accused. There are very grave allegations. 

Now that the report has brought us more information, I think we are more armed, like Hon. Musinguzi has told us. It has even brought out things which did not – no one is going to change this. Let us go and prepare. Those who can get more information on what the honourable minister is denying, let us come with those facts on that day and lay them to this House. Basing on this rule, I think we should go to the next item. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just wait. Honourable members, of course, I know my powers here and when I make a ruling - Hon. Kibalya made a very grave allegation. Colleagues, we need to be cautious of the words we use. In literature, there is what we call “diction”, which means the choice of words. For an honourable member to say that I am postponing debate to protect a minister - that was very unfortunate. Honourable member, I ask you to either substantiate your point or withdraw it.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I withdraw. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I request you to go and prepare. I will ensure this item is given sufficient time on the Order Paper on Tuesday, so that we give it the justice it deserves on both sides.
I have concluded the matter, Hon. Bahati; there is nothing to add because I have already ruled on that. 

The person being accused is here, our honourable colleague. We shall give her time on Tuesday so that she can clarify on these matters. I will first go to item No. 6. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. This is a very important report, which touches corruption. It also touches the minister. I sit on the Committee on Appointments and I feel bad when I read this kind of report on a minister, whose approval I was part of. 

Mr Speaker, I want to know from you - now that you have given the minister time to read and respond to some of these -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am giving Members time. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Whether on Tuesday, it will not be procedurally right to give Hon. Yona opportunity to present a write up so that we go through these documents and we debate from an informed point of view from both sides. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yona is not being accused of anything. He has given additional information and he was clear on the record that he had nothing to add; he only added two points. He even said, “We raise our voices”, which is against our rules here (Laughter). So you can see how happy he was. 

As presiding officers, anytime he feels he has something to add, we shall allow him at that time. We have to conclude this matter. 

5.21
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report but also add my voice to support the ruling of the Speaker.

Like others have already said –(Interjection)- I do not know the cause of the confusion since I am the one presenting. The importance of having this discussion next Tuesday is because we also need a written communication and response from the minister.

I would also like to add that this is now a matter of Members of Parliament; it is no longer Hon. Yona’s matter. He raised it the other time to the attention of Government and, therefore, it will not be right to have him again given another task of making a presentation. It is now our duty to go on with the debate and come up with final resolutions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati - there is a matter he wanted to clarify; he felt it was also strong. You know when Hon. Maurice comes, he uses strong language.

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, indeed, Hon. Maurice used very strong words: one, about you, and second, about Members when he said that he knows that between now and Tuesday, some Members are going to be compromised.

I think it is important that we do not undermine Members. When I look around the House, I do not see any Member who can be compromised about this issue –(Interjection)- so, I think it is not good to undermine Members that they can be compromised over this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, in this House, each one of us deserves respect and we are usually judged as a team. Outside, when they are abusing us, they do not remove this group: they just say, “Parliament”.

Where does it come from? It is when we start accusing each other without even substantiating the accusations - because of my political lineage, you judge me yet you find that even the side that you are judging, sometimes, is the one which is supporting you most on some of these things.

Hon. Yona – which side does he come from? It is from a side which some people can say they want to call and compromise. Therefore, it is very unfair. Let us always be kind to each other. Let us always respect and not look at each other as suspects.

So, Hon. Maurice, kindly, sort out that one. These Members cannot be compromised. Maybe you can say: “Honourable Members, I know some people might try to compromise or intimidate you but do not accept.”

Hon. Mapenduzi, do you have a procedural matter? Is it on the same?

MR MAPENDUZI: Mr Speaker, I am not in any way trying to undermine your powers. I respect the ruling. However, the honourable member raised a concern, alleging that he received threats, intimidation and all sort of things during the process of the execution of this assignment by the committee.

Now that the report is out, and basing on what the chairperson presented, would it not be prudent for this Parliament to ensure that the safety and security of the honourable member is guaranteed as we wait for the discussion next Tuesday? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue is now beyond Hon. Yona. Even if you meet Hon. Yona outside and shoot him, there is nothing you gain because he is already on record.

I know we have discussed before and security and safety is an issue we take seriously as a House and as your leaders in the House. If Hon. Yona feels threatened in anyway, he will link up with us and we will ensure that we raise it with the most important authorities. Colleagues, let us move.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE EMPLOYMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL”

5.26
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill”. This is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic and rules 56, l2l and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rules l2l and 122 of the Rules of Procedure recognise the right and the procedure for a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill; 

AWARE that pursuant to Article 40 of the Constitution, Parliament enacted the Employment Act, 2006 to provide for the right of persons to work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions; to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination; and to ensure that every worker is accorded rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay as well as remuneration for public holidays;

ACKNOWLDEGING that there is rising local and international demand for semi-skilled labour in the form of domestic, migrant and casual workers, which categories of workers require special and sufficient recognition and protection, which is not adequately addressed in the current Employment Act,2006;

FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGING that the rising local and international demand for semi-skilled labour has led to the mushrooming of recruiting agencies whose operations are not adequately regulated under the current Employment Act,2006;

NOTING that inadequacies in the Employment Act, 2006 in regards to the regulations of employment agencies, recognition and protection of domestic, migrant and casual workers has led to severe exploitation, especially of women, to the extent of deprivation of their workers’ rights including wages, labour conscription, working under unhealthy conditions and protection against sexual exploitation, among others;

APPRECIATING that amending the current law to specifically provide for the regulations of recruitment agencies, recognition and protection of domestic, migrant and casual workers will guarantee the labour rights and protection guaranteed under the Constitution of Uganda and international labour laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament gives you powers to move Private Member’s Bills. However, Rule 122 requires you to first seek leave or get permission of Parliament to bring these kinds of Bills and that is what the Member is requesting; to exercise her authority as a Member to be granted leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. Is the motion seconded? 

Okay, the motion is seconded by Members from Oyam, Kalangala, Bukooli County Central and may other Members. Honourable member, in just five minutes, speak to your motion. After her and the seconders have spoken to the motion, I will allow the Minister of Gender; it seems he wants to say something in regard to this.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for this opportunity, once again. This Bill was passed in the last session of the 10th Parliament and it is among the business that lapsed, as per the ruling of the Speaker, then. 

The key areas include, as I have mentioned in the motion, migrant workers, casual employment, issues of harassment and violence at workplaces, among others. We followed it by then. Unfortunately, we were not issued with the Certificate of Financial Implication because the Minister of Gender, in 2019, had said that they were ready with other principles and that they were going to table this Bill. 

So, we went through the committee. The Bill delayed because we were waiting for the ministry to harmonise, which did not happen until that Bill lapsed. 

I now, therefore, humbly appeal to Members to grant us leave to re-table this Bill, once again. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconders? I will have Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija. 

5.33
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the amendment of the Employment Act and I want to say that I support that the mover, who is none other than the workers’ representative, Hon. Agnes Kunihira, be granted leave by the House. If the Bill lapsed, it is important that after three years and nothing has taken place - she should be able to represent the workers effectively.

Why am I saying this? From 2019 to date – and now we are talking about 2022 and we are even halfway. So, it means that for all that time, the workers that I also represent, have been suffering. So, we need the law amended so that the people can be saved. 

She mentioned casualisation; it is important. Many of our workers, including graduates - I will give an example of the people employed by private schools - the teachers - are casual workers today, yet they are white-collar people who deserve to be treated better. They do not get appointment letters. They do not get letters of termination. It is just by word of mouth. It is really through this Bill that these workers will be effectively represented. 

We also have other issues. We have the law – the International Labour Organisation Convention - that talks about the rights of domestic workers. It does not talk about house girls and house boys only; it also talks about even those who work in people’s homes, like bakers and those who are making wine; it must be able to protect them. We have not been having a law that puts them in the category of protection. 

You also have mothers who are breastfeeding. They have been struggling with their children, the babies and the future leaders of this country yet they are paid peanuts and the children may die along the way. So, it is important that we get someone who is a mother; someone who knows what they go through to help us write a law that is applicable at this point in time. 

Mr Speaker, there is a lot of sexual harassment. The ILO Convention 190 talks about harassment at the place of work. We need a law that will protect the women and men who are suffering out there because they do not even know the law yet if all these are put in the Employment Act, we will be able to save those workers who are suffering. 

So, in a nutshell, I strongly support that Hon. Kunihira, the mover, be granted leave of Parliament and we save the workers of Uganda. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Patrick Nsanja?

5.35
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand, under Rule 61 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to second the motion for Hon. Agnes Kunihira to be granted leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, in regard to our Employment Act. A lot has been said but I have prepared a brief here. I just want to bring out two issues. 

First, as we head closer to the year 2030 and cognisant of the fact that Uganda has committed to the attainment of SDGs, especially SDG 8 on the employment, decent work for all and social protection and the other international conventions on the protection of workers, the intended Employment (Amendment) Bill is evidence of Parliament’s commitment towards protecting the labour force. 

The other one, Mr Speaker - because we are talking about local migrant workers but what is important to note here is Uganda’s journey for gender equality. This Bill, among other things, seeks to recognise the rights of domestic workers in the workplace, majority of who are women and the youth who are more prone to exploitation and violation by employers and recruitment agencies. 

In addition, the Bill seeks to reinforce the breastfeeding rights by legalizing the introduction of breastfeeding facilities in the workplaces, to enable nursing mothers attend to their children while at work.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the objective of the intended Employment (Amendment) Bill, once leave of Parliament is granted, is to amend the Employment Act, 2006 to –

    i) provide better protection of employers and workers;

    ii) increase employment opportunities for Ugandan citizens;

    iii) promote competitiveness of Ugandan workers;

    iv) enhance affirmative action;

    v) establish a Labour and Employment body;

    vi) streamline licensing and activities of recruitment companies;

    vii) protect Ugandans who are exported to work outside Uganda;

    viii) establish breastfeeding facilities in all workplaces;

    ix) strengthen the oversight role of Parliament in all employment related matters; and 

    x) provide work mechanisms in situations of pandemics in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, once leave is granted, well aware of the procedures when a Private Member’s Bill is presented, we will do whatever it takes to have all the stakeholders here. We shall ensure that whichever provision is looked into, enough research is done, and for which the country as well as the Ministry of Labour is streamlined, where issues are not right. I beg to move. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.40 
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support that Hon. Agnes Kunihira be given leave to introduce a private Member's Bill; the Employment (Amendment) Bill. 

This Bill is the most gender-sensitive Bill. When you look at the issues regarding migrant workers, the majority of them are women; and domestic workers. When you look at the violence of sexual harassment, the issues of many of these people - the human rights abuses - I stand to support that Hon. Agnes Kunihira be given leave to come back with a private Member's Bill. 

When you look at the issues surrounding migrant workers - we have seen some of them on social media. When you look at them, you want to shed tears. This Bill elapsed with the last Parliament and it is only good for this country and our children who are out that a private member is given an opportunity to liaise with the Ministry of Gender, and work it out at that level and come before this Parliament to address the problem that the people of Uganda are facing. I beg to support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These are seconders. Now that we have finished with the seconders, it seems the minister wanted to say something. Let him say it; it might be good guidance. Leader of the Opposition, you are not a seconder. You will come in among the people to conclude.

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Col. (Rtd) Charles Engola): Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to say something on this Bill. First and foremost, I wish to note that we welcome the idea of a private member seeking leave to introduce the Employment (Amendment) Bill. 

I wish to inform the House that in 2016, the Law Reform Commission undertook a study on the reform of the Employment Act, 2006 and the Labour, Dispute Arbitration and Settlement Act, 2006. Accordingly, the ministry, in consultation with the stakeholders, including the National Organisation of Trade Unions, the centre of the private member, Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions and the Federation of Uganda Employers, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Law Reform Commission undertook a process of reviewing the Employment Act, 2006 on 30 May 2018 and 15 August 2018. 

The above process resulted in the preparation of a Cabinet memorandum on principles for amendment of the Employment Act, 2006, which principles were approved by the Cabinet in the meeting held in Entebbe, on 30 August 2022. 

Consequently, the Ministry of Justice drafted a comprehensive Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022, which Bill has already been subjected to two consultative meetings during the months of April and May 2022. These meetings were also attended by the social partners. The Bill will be returned to Cabinet for approval before the same is published and returned to Parliament for discussion and consideration during the month of June 2022. 

The same Bill has clauses that address critical gaps in the Employment Act, 2006. In the circumstances, Parliament will have to take a decision on whether to deal with two parallel Bills aimed at amending the same Act separately or have the two Bills consolidated into one. 

Accordingly, we beg that the ministry takes over the responsibility of sponsoring the process of amending the Employment Act, 2006. If this proposal is agreeable, then we shall definitely accord the private mover our maximum cooperation in the process of integrating provisions in this Bill into a Government-sponsored Bill. 

In conclusion, therefore, I would like to thank you for giving me an audience to formally present the ministry position on the Employment (Amendment) Bill. I, therefore, pray that Parliament concurs with our proposal. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable minister, we appreciate the efforts you have taken but I think the route we are going to take is that whoever brings theirs first, is the one we shall go with. If the Member brings her Bill first, you will go and support her. If you bring yours first - that is if the Members grant her leave - because you have not yet granted her leave. If you come first, before hers is ready, then she will collapse hers into yours and then we move. 

Otherwise, now there is no justification we can give a Member, for whom you promised that you are going to bring a Bill, and you never brought it. We, again, cannot tell her not to proceed because the minister has already finished a,b,c,d. 

Let me open debate for 15 minutes and then we conclude. Let us use two minutes. This is very direct. Leader of the Opposition, you will be among the people to conclude and to crown it all. 

5.48
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I highly support the mover of the private Member's Bill on the Employment (Amendment) Bill. 

This law should be able to come out with stringent and deterrent measures in order to protect the girl child and the boy child. More often than not, these two categories of people are being abused; the teenage girls and boys. They have been given work which is very oppressive, suppressive, exploitative, segregative as well as discriminative, especially the girls. Instead of taking them back to school, in the rural areas, they are being made to collect firewood for domestic use. Instead of letting the boy child go to school, they make him go and graze cattle in the bushes. The girls are being made to work at home and look after the younger ones, among other duties.

Therefore, the mover of this amendment Bill should go ahead. I have given you my blessings; let us protect the girl child and the boy child so that they remain in school. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aza, your blessings alone are not sufficient. 

5.50
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion seeking leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill amending the Employment Act, 2006. 

As Members of Parliament, we shoulder a lot in addressing the challenges faced by the victims of sexual harassment, and torture, among others, when it comes to work places. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with your guidance on the prayer that the Minister in charge of Gender, Labour and Social Development - I remember in the Seventh Parliament when it came to the amendment of the Children’s Act, Government in the Seventh Parliament blocked committing to bring amendments to the Children’s Act.

When it came to the Eighth Parliament, it was the same arrangement. It was not until in the Ninth Parliament when we became aggressive, as private Members, to bring a motion that ended up carrying the day. It is then that Government woke up and came up with a parallel amendment Bill vis-a-vis the Private Member’s Bill. 

Finally, they joined the private members and we harmonised but at least, the amendment Act saw the light of the day and it is the Act that is working as of now. 

Honourable minister, I wanted to allay your fears. This is not a vote of no confidence but we are trying to push you. If you delay, the private Members are serious; we want to see things happen. So, kindly take it in good faith. We are serving the same Government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oseku, on procedure.

MR OSEKU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising perturbs me because I wonder the purpose of the debate we are undertaking right now. 

It is expressed under Article 94 of the Constitution that to bring a Private Member’s Bill is a right and Hon. Agnes Kunihira has presented the Bill and you have seconded it. 

So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to recognise that to bring a Bill is a right and that she has fulfilled the necessary steps to do so and, therefore, Mr Speaker, I would beg that you rule on whether she should proceed with the Bill because what the honourable minister has said does not deter - there is nowhere it is provided that the minister, on his presentation, may stop the private Member from proceeding. So, I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. The rules require us to also give leave and how do you do it? You do it by allowing Members to express their opinions. I think what you could have done, if you had felt that we are all agreeing with a certain mood, would have been to move under rule 81 of our Rules of Procedure - since we have already started the debate - so that we close the debate.

MR OSEKU: Mr Speaker, it is on record in this House that such a situation has ever come up previously and the ruling of the Chair was that there was no need for such a debate as to whether a private member should actually be allowed to bring a Bill. It was a ruling of this very House, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am doing this under rule 122, where he or she must get leave and it is very important. So, I guided you on what you can do. If you felt that indeed – I have seen situations where Members have been denied leave by Members. The House has powers to either grant you leave or not. And how do I determine that? By allowing you to express your opinions as colleagues. Hon. Aisha Kabanda?

5.55
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg for your pardon about the statement I have just made. 

First of all, I thank you for the wise ruling that the colleague’s request to be offered leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill be upheld. And we agree that the current employment law is kind of getting outdated: things in Uganda are moving quite faster. Previously, Government was the major employer. Today, the informal sector is actually becoming the major employer with the industries growing. 

We suffered a lot of consequences here under COVID-19, when many of our people were laid off; they were calling us, Members of Parliament, desperately and we did not have what to tell them because they lacked employment letters and they did not have a right to claim because they had no locus. 

So, it is really important that this Bill comes up and it is regrettable that the ministry had not thought of this and it would be very wrong of them to shoot the efforts of the honourable member, who wants to move progressively. I support her and moving together, hopefully, we shall be able to bring a good law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion? Kyegegwa.

5.57
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): I rise to move a motion that the debate be closed and we allow the private Member to take leave and come up with the Bill to amend the Employment Act. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Leader of the Opposition, when the motion is on the Table, my hands are tied. Is the motion seconded? Okay, really on closure of debate - which amendment do you want to bring? Colleagues, let us be serious.

I think let us just put the question that this Parliament grants leave to Hon. Agnes Kunihira, Member of Parliament for Workers, to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to say something on that? 

5.58
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for supporting this motion. 

First of all, I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling you made. The reason such amendments come from backbenchers, first of all, is because there are a number of court cases in relation to such Acts, where courts give rulings or judgments and they give suggestions against what is happening in the Act that need some bit of clearance.

Secondly, the Front bench has continuously refused to bring Bills here and what happens is that backbenchers bring in Bills. When we bring our Bills, the Frontbench starts fighting us. Gen. Okello, serious as you were, you were just reading a statement from your technocrats. It was not from your spirit. I can tell that. 

However, if it was within your spirit, you would have come before. Mr Speaker, we have clashed many times here on the Floor of Parliament because Members demand for these Bills and they do not come. When they do not come, Members continue bringing theirs. For example, we have what we want to call the Minimum Wage Bill; it has failed to come on this Floor of Parliament. 

Workers’ Members of Parliament, I want to commend you and thank you very much. Hon. Agnes Kunihira and Hon. Rwabushaija, you have done some good work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition.

MR SSEWUNGU: The Leader of the Opposition was concluding. So, let us beseech and pray hard for the Front Bench to bring these Bills. When you go to other countries, it is your work to bring these Bills other than coming in to defend, saying “We are going to bring ours”. That alone will hold our work back and we fail to get solutions of what comes out of courts of law. 

These Acts are used in the courts of law and they are made to control people; to basically bring sanity in society. The moment you sit and wait for your technocrats – now you are not going to appear for another month after this Bill has been tabled. This person got a certificate of financial implications. You had time to know that there was a certificate of financial implication and they are actually going to bring this Bill. Then you come with a written statement. We should just ask you to take back your Bill and we move as the Speaker has ruled. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. Let us do item number five.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NUMBER ONE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please.  Procedure? I don't know whether these people are planning for me –(Laughter)

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, it is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I called finance. Do you have an issue you want to raise, honourable minister? Our senior colleague might be having a procedural issue. Honourable minister of defence, did you want to raise something? There is a procedural matter. Now, minister of defence, if you do not have any procedural matter – 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is procedure on this motion. As Government, we could remind ourselves that this similar motion came and we had a procedural challenge which we needed to cure under rule 16, read together with rule 222(2) where we were seeking for the suspension of the specific rule to enable Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government move this motion. The procedural issue was that to move for the suspension of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you moving a motion? 

MR OBOTH: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your motion under rule 16?

MR OBOTH: This motion is supposed to amend the motion of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because this Parliament guided that we needed to formally put that. 

Whereas – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we did not guide you on that. It is within your rights as a Member. You are allowed to move a motion for suspension of a rule. Parliament did not tell you to move a motion to suspend a rule. It cannot tell you to do that. It is within your power.

MR OBOTH: Parliament guided, Mr Speaker, because we thought this was a matter that even Parliament, on its own motion and volition, could have made the correction.

But when Hon. Sseggona, my former classmate, came and you rightly guided that we come back, we have come back as Government to move, under Rule 16, to amend the substantive motion which is going to be moved – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Honourable member – 

MR OBOTH: - to suspend rule 222. And we are moving that under rule 16. We would want to know that the rule 222 is not one of the entrenched procedures. Colleagues, this was a matter that has been decided by this House. 

We found out that at the implementation stage, the amount of money –(Interjections)– I am speaking to the motion for the suspension – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go on, honourable. He is not on record.

MR OBOTH: I really want to seek for the indulgence of this House that we harmonise this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Colleagues, what Hon. Oboth Oboth has put here is that he is exercising his right as a Member of this House and is moving under rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure, which allows us to suspend any rule that is not entrenched, as per our rules. 

Rule 222 required Government to give the mover of the motion – if you are going to revise the decision of the House, you need to give a notice of at least 14 days. 

Now he is saying the issue is urgent, they are stuck. So, they would want the motion considered by us suspending the rules. Is the motion on the Table seconded?

The motion is seconded by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Hon. Silwany, and Hon. Okasaai. 

Please colleagues, a Member has his or her rights here, and you must allow a Member to exercise that right. Yes. What they are saying is very simple, whether in 14 days or now, the issue is addressing an emergency they have on a decision you had already taken. That is what they are saying. Very simple. 

If it is seconded, I put the question that rule 222 be suspended to allow the minister present the motion for a resolution of Parliament, under rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure. Yes, read rule 16. It allows you to suspend any rule apart from those which are entrenched, and that is your right as a Member and the right of this House. 

The motion is to allow the minister to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament on supplementary expenditure schedule number one for the Financial Year 2021/2022. This does not mean we have granted the minister's request. No, we are going to debate the motion after being presented. Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, present your motion.

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend a resolution of Parliament on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule Number One for the Financial Year 2021/2022:

“WHEREAS on 18 November 2021, under Supplementary Expenditure Schedule Number One for Financial Year 2021/2022, Parliament approved Shs 2,018,942,989,703, our recurrent supplementary expenditure as recurrent –“ 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow him to read the motion and then you will have time. 

MR MUSASIZI: “- and Shs 1,758,645,054,089 as development supplementary;

NOTING, however, that Shs 146,000,000,000 was appropriated to the Ministry of Defence “-(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order because I see the minister reading a motion, which was a subject of a motion that was passed – and as rightly stated so – on 18 November 2021.

I would like to refer the minister, who is very conversant with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which clearly states circumstances under which a supplementary can be raised on the Floor of Parliament; you must show the source of funding, it must be that it cannot be avoided, cannot be delayed and so forth.

Mr Speaker, there were two sources that were identified – I remember it very clearly. One was Shs 400 billion from external source and the two point something trillion shillings from domestic borrowing. Now, I want the House to be properly guided and that is why I am standing on order. Parliament has already debated this matter. Parliament has to operate within the law and the law is very clear and the minister for finance is the custodian of the Act I have quoted.

The law that I have quoted states clearly that before the supplementary can be brought, the minister must show the source of funding. I know that the external source has been done and, either yesterday or the day before, Parliament decided that domestic borrowing was not possible.

Therefore, I do not want to be associated with somebody trying to enter through the back door to trick Parliament to shoot its own foot on a matter, which is so important.

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the minister to deliberately confuse us on a matter of the law? Is it in order to malign the image of this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, when I read the motion of the minister it says, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament....” I have not seen anywhere where they are saying “motion for a resolution of Parliament to introduce a new supplementary”.

I request that you listen to the content of his submission – you know, listening is very important - the moment you get the information - because I have read this document.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as you read, check for me where the minister is introducing new money beyond what this House approved. If the minister is introducing a new request for new money, then that means he is requesting for a supplementary.

However, if you read the document, the minister says, “You gave me, for example, Shs 100 billion. Within my Shs 100 billion, I had allocated it this way. Now, I want, within my Shs 100 billion which you approved, to change some of the money from here to here.” He is not saying that out of the Shs 100 billion, add me Shs 10 million. 

We read this with the Speaker before we allowed this on the Order Paper.

So, allow the minister to present. That is the problem. You people block each other from speaking – (Member rose_) - Please, don’t test my patience. Allow your colleague to present and then after he has presented, you will come and respond. Now, what are you responding to before he can present? Let us leave games here.

Honourable minister present and thereafter, Members are going to raise their procedural matters and they will be given a chance. No decision will be made before you can raise your issues.

MR MUSAZISI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to go to bullet number two, which states, 

“NOTING, however, that Shs  146,000,000,000 was appropriated to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs of which Shs 131,000,000,000 was for recurrent expenditure and Shs 15,000,000,000 was for classified expenditure, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs seeks to transfer Shs 48,267,292,826 from recurrent expenditure category to development expenditure category to acquire UPDF machinery and equipment, construction of National Defence College and compensation for National Housing Corporation land;

REALISING, therefore, that there is urgent need to make the adjustments in the appropriation to enable the ministry implement the above priorities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I pray that this Parliament resolves to amend its resolution dated 18 November 2021, to disaggregate the Shs 146,000,000,000 supplementary expenditure appropriated to Vote 004: Ministry of Deference and Veteran Affairs as summarised below and detailed in Annex 1 attached;

Mr Speaker, I now present the budget category:
Recurrent expenditure, in the current resolution, has Shs 131,000,00,000. We are now proposing to reduce this to Shs 43,000,000,000;

Under development expenditure, we propose to move Shs 88,000,000,000 from recurrent to development expenditure;

Under classified expenditure, we propose that the Shs 15 billion remains under development expenditure.”

Mr Speaker, with this explanation, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. So, the supplementary that we passed was Shs 146 billion and, after the adjustments being requested, we shall remain within Shs 146 billion. Nothing is being added and that is what I want colleagues to get properly.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are not changing the bottom line. What we are changing is the classification from non-wage recurrent to development expenditure to enable us implement the activities, which I have identified above. Therefore, the net effect is zero.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you had issues.

6.20
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, that is where I come from. I am aware that the Minister of State for Finance would not successfully defend this supplementary if presented to the Budget Committee. However, God forbid, there are several ways of acquiring this.

Mr Speaker, my greatest concern is the qualification for a supplementary. To move now from recurrent – “recurrent” means there could have been, for example, some recruitment in the course of the period and, therefore, you would need to pay salaries, as a matter of urgency – maybe some bills and so on. 

However, to say that you need this money, not actually for those unavoidable emergency issues but to acquire equipment and build 700 units of houses, we would just humbly request you - if we are working under a normal environment - to put it in the next budget, which starts in July. (Applause) That is one month from now.

Otherwise, you cannot definitely trick – Mr Speaker, this is where I am coming from. Please, for heaven’s sake - please, I am old; I did not do law but the little I know is enough to make me survive. (Laughter) I am, therefore, instructing you that please, do not push us backward. No! You have this money for –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you are exceeding your powers - (Laughter) - as a Member of Parliament. You do not have powers to instruct a minister on what he should do. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had already exceeded your time; I gave you more time.

MR KIRUMIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the minister came for approval and I believe the basis of the motion was to amend the resolution that was premised on another parliamentary approval to borrow Shs 2.049 trillion to secure the financing.

Now, that was recommended to the Committee on National Economy. When the committee, together with the minister, discussed this matter, we produced a report and I believe it is ready for submission on the Floor of Parliament. What is happening now – seemingly – is that the minister is trying to smuggle something on the Floor of Parliament or maybe, he is trying to be very smart and bypassing – (Interjection) - I am on procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, even on procedure, you can be wrong. Colleagues, I think the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah – may his soul rest in eternal peace – made a very clear ruling here, that even on procedure, a Member can go out of order. I remember here. Even when a Member is on a point of procedure, they can be out of order. So, when a point of order comes, please allow it. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the subject matter we are considering arose and when it did, I officially wrote to the Office of the Speaker, explaining why we needed to move a motion to enable us make the adjustments I have now just proposed.

You went ahead, you evaluated and considered the matter to be put on the Order Paper and the subject matter I have presented is on the Order Paper. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable colleague to say that I have smuggled this motion into the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, sometimes I do not want to dramatise things. The two issues, honourable members, are totally different. Domestic borrowing, which they raised here, is totally different from this matter. You cannot borrow until you have been allowed to have the money.

Now, this money is already with Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs. Some of these entities have absorption challenges. So, if you are lucky, you have an entity that wants to absorb money, I think it should be very easy and they made it very clear. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, please, I have allowed Hon. Betty Aol. I do not want this to be an exchange between the two. This is from non-wage recurrent to development. So, the House can only either allow this or not. 

I do not have much time. I now put the question to the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to amend the Resolution of Parliament on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule I for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me clarify to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The borrowing is for financing. Okay? You supplied and it is within what you supplied. The borrowing is to finance what you supplied. And so, the borrowing does not have anything to do with this because this is not new money - please, honourable member, do not access the microphone before I allow you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am proceeding under rule 24 on quorum of Parliament. Rule 24(3) states, “At any time when a vote is to be taken, the Speaker shall ascertain whether the Members present in the House form a quorum for the vote to be taken, and if he or she finds that the number is less, the Speaker shall suspend the proceedings of the House for an interval of fifteen minutes and the bell shall be rung.”

So, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well to go for a vote, where you have not ascertained the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, colleagues; please sit. Let Hon. Ssewungu speak.

MR SSEWUNGU: It is because they are worried. Why are you worried, Mr Commissioner? So, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well, under Rule 24(1), (2) and (3), by taking a vote on this contentious matter before establishing the number of Members of Parliament that are voting on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. First, it is very clear; you should raise that before a vote is taken. Secondly, honourable member, the matter we are going to is item No. 7 and it does not require any voting. 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Energy and Mineral Development? People, do you want to sleep here? I did not come with a mattress. (Laughter)

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to answer a question asked by Hon. Patrick Isingoma. The issue that was raised is on uncertainty of supply of petroleum products to Uganda due to the recent directives issued by the Government of Kenya to the oil marketing companies to ration the fuel 60 to 40 per cent in favour of the Kenyan internal use; Kenya internal use 60 per cent and then the transit, petroleum products, 40 per cent. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is aware of the directives that were issued by the Government of Kenya to that effect. This is a very important matter to the two brotherly states of Kenya and Uganda. This matter is being handled bilaterally at the highest level of the two brotherly countries. We are hopeful that the matter will be resolved amicably. 

I wish to request honourable members to allow the high-level negotiations to proceed and we shall keep the honourable House updated on the outcome. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Isingoma who raised the matter is not here so go to the next. The member who raised the matter is the one to respond. I will allow you to speak, Hon. Silas. Do not mind.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. STELLA ATYANG ON THE INVASION OF THE ARMYWORM, THE SUBSEQUENT DESTRUCTION OF CROPS AND THE NEED FOR URGENT INTERVENTION OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to an urgent question raised by Hon. Stella Atyang, Moroto District Woman Representative. The question was on the invasion of the African Armyworm, the subsequent destruction of crops and the need for urgent intervention of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable summarise. 

MR BWINO: Mr Speaker, I will summarise. The African Armyworm outbreak was first reported in Uganda in Busia District and Luweero District on 25 March 2022. The pest spread very fast to several districts. Within 30 days, the pest had been confirmed in more than 50 districts. 

The pest called the African Armyworm attacks cereals that include maize, rice, sorghum, and sometimes pasture grasses. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries embarked on interventions to curb the problem. The interventions included the following: 

    v) The Government distributed chemicals that are used to combat the pest and the chemicals that were distributed amounted to 22,947 litres of a chemical called cypermethrin. 

    vi) On top of the distribution of the chemical, spray pumps were also distributed and protective gear in all the districts that were affected. 

As a result of that intervention, out of the 50 districts that were affected, in 46 of them the effect got managed, and only remained with only four districts that include: the district of Napak, Nabilatuk, Kotido and Yumbe. 

However, recently, there have been fresh attacks in some other new districts. These include Agago, Koboko, Moroto, Karenga, Kabong, Obongi, Adjumani, and Kween.  

My ministry has accordingly come in to curb the pests in these newly reported districts by again distributing chemicals, spray pumps and protective gear to the districts through the district production officers. 

On top of that, I would like to mention that, apart from spraying, this pest is also caused by natural occurrence of rain. Therefore, whenever it rains, it is naturally curbed. In these areas, where the problem is still occurring, it is where rain is not as substantial as in parts of the central region, eastern region and the western region. As we may notice, these are mainly areas of Karamoja, parts of the north and parts of the West Nile. 

We shall continue monitoring and wherever we get fresh reports, we shall come in to curb the problem. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see Hon. Stella Atyang here. With that, colleagues, congratulations - the rules are very clear, colleagues. It is the Member who raised the issue that can give supplementary information on it. 

Colleagues, with that, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.  

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 May 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)





