Wednesday, 12 May 2010

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. In the public gallery, we have students from Star Fox University in Boston who have been meeting with our Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda on the study of reintegrating child soldiers and other affected children into society. They have come with Prof. Jude Dusff. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

We also have some young people from schools in Northern Uganda, but I do not know where they are seated – they were brought by – are they here? They were brought by hon. Obua. If they come in, we shall inform you.

Hon. Members, I have just received the report of the Public Accounts Committee on CHOGM. Later today I will allow the chair to lay the report on the Table. So, we shall make an amendment later.

However, I have the following communication to make. Colleagues, you were present yesterday in the House, some in the morning and some in the afternoon. Yesterday, the acting Leader of the Opposition came to me to request for permission to speak on the ongoing voter registration exercise. I agreed with him and said I would give him an opportunity after my communication. He also mentioned a motion that he claimed to have discussed with the Rt Hon. Speaker, which he wanted to be placed on the Order Paper. 

I informed him that I had not seen any motion and that I could not place what I had not seen on the Order Paper. The Member also wanted to know whether the CHOGM report would be on the Order Paper. I similarly informed him that as of yesterday morning, I had not received the CHOGM report. And as I have indicated to you, it just came to me today.

I further informed him that my priority yesterday was to complete the Bills related to the elections, which were due for a second reading, as well as the reports of the Committee on Commissions and Statutory Authorities, which had been presented, but not debated.

As we were sitting there, the Government Chief Whip also came with his additional requests. I declined both their requests and indicated that I would accommodate both of them later in the week.

Hon. Members, the rules of this House are clear. When a Member wishes to move a Private Members’ Bill to amend an existing law, he or she must give notice of at least three days. He or she must also present the motion together with a draft Bill. As we speak, I have not received the draft Bill from the Shadow Attorney-General.

After the Leader of the Opposition had indicated that he wished to speak on the issue of the voters’ register update, I agreed that he would speak after my communication. Colleagues, you were here yesterday, the acting Leader of the Opposition was not in the plenary yesterday morning.

In order to assist the Members raise the issue in my communication, I raised it myself and said that the voters’ registration exercise was not moving on well. And in response to my communication, hon. Betty Aol reported on the problems in Pece and Acholi Inn-B. Hon. Reagan Okumu reported on the non-payment of the registration officers, which was leading to their desertion of stations. And hon. Banyenzaki raised the issue of the failure by the Electoral Commission to organise a by-election to replace the Chairperson of LC V of Kabale District.

I informed them that I had spoken to the Electoral Commission and raised this concern including those from my constituency and that today at 10 a.m. officials from the Electoral Commission would be in the conference hall to discuss with Members what was happening in their constituencies and chart a way forward. This meeting took place today.

You will also recall that we handled the second and third readings of the Women’s Council Bill and together we proceeded to the report of Committee on Agriculture.

Hon. Members, this morning at about 11 a.m. while I was sitting in my boardroom together with the acting Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wadri with hon. Alaso, hon. Balikuddembe, hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Beti Kamya, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts, came and threw the report on the table. If I am lying, those Members will stand up and say, “No”, but I was with you – the report was delivered – it was thrown on my desk at 11 O’clock this morning.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was accompanied by hon. Mutuluuza and hon. Tom Kazibwe. Therefore, I want to make it clear to this House and to the country that the report from the Public Accounts Committee came to my hands today at 11 O’clock. I also want to emphasise that the report of the Public Accounts Committee is as important as other reports from the other committees of this House. PAC does not take precedence over the others; therefore it will be handled in due course. 

I also would like to remind the Members of this House of rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure, which states thus: “The report of the committee shall be signed by at least one-third of the Members and shall be laid on the Table ….” 

Rule 177 (1) states: “Debate on a report shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table.” 

That report has not yet been laid on the Table. Therefore, the question of it being debated immediately does not arise – that is according to rule 177 (1) – those are the Rules of Procedure of this House.

Hon. Members, I again wish to restate the policy on the use of the Speaker’s lounge. The Speaker’s lounge is only to be utilised by the Speaker’s invited guests – yes, the Speaker’s lounge is a Speaker’s lounge. That is why it is called the Speaker’s lounge, not the Members’ lounge.

Hon. Members, yesterday while all this was going on, the Opposition in this House and outside had a premeditated plan to disrupt the proceedings of this House and I will give a few examples.

During the morning session, one lady was arrested attempting to enter this Parliament with stones in her bag. On being asked where she was going, she said she had come to attend the proceedings. Why did a member of the public opt to come to Parliament with stones? This lady is brown, old, limps a bit and has been part of the IPC Women’s team. Investigations are going on to establish her name before she can be charged. I want to table the stones. 

Hon. Members, in my view, the stones were intended to attack the Speaker and the Members of Parliament from the public gallery. The additional information that we received indicates that even the persons who were in the public gallery had carried with them several coins in what the police considers suspicious quantities. Again these were to be used to hit the Speaker and the Members of Parliament while in session yesterday. The other information from the police is that these attacks on the Speaker and Members in session were to take place simultaneously so as to disrupt the work of the plenary. 

This brings me to my next point - that of the disorderly conduct of certain Members of the House.

What constitutes this disorderly conduct? It is the persistent and willful obstructing of the House using objectionable words; persistently refusing to conform to the rules of the House; and persistently and willfully denying the authority of the Chair.

Yesterday, a number of Members disrupted the proceedings despite the Speaker’s instructions. They breached rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure, which requires that the Speaker shall be heard in silence. Rule 73 enjoins the Speaker to ensure the observance of the rules of order in the House. 

If the Speaker considers that a Member’s conduct requires stronger sanctions than a caution, he or she may name the Member. Hon. Members, the grabbing of microphones, the breaking of the doors of Parliament, the repeated insults, the attempt to grab the Mace and the over-disruption of proceedings is a matter of grave concern.

I, therefore, invoke my powers to name the following Members: I name the Member for Tororo County; I name the Member for Aruu; I name the Member for Kitgum District; I name the Member for Kilak County; and I name the Member for Arua District. Those Members stand suspended from the service of this House.

Under rule 75(8) of our Rules of Procedure, a Member who is suspended from the House is excluded from the committee on which he or she serves. The suspension also bars him or her from questions or notices of motion. Under rule 76, withdrawal from the precincts of Parliament until the end of the suspension requires that the Member will not have access to the plenary; to the committee rooms; the Parliamentary Chamber; the Members lobby, the Members’ lounge; the Parliamentary Library, the car park, all the offices of Parliament, both at the main Parliament and at Bauman House.

Hon. Members, I now suspend the House for 15 minutes to enable those Members named remove themselves from the precincts. House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.10 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier this afternoon, I suspended the following Members: Hon. Geofrey Ekanya, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Beatrice Anywar, hon. Christine Abia and hon. Nyeko Ocula.

I note that despite my suspension, they are still in this House. I now direct the Sergeant-At-Arms to effect their removal from this Chamber -(Interjections)

Hon. Members, I have instructed the Sergeant-At-Arms to eject those Members. I am reaffirming my instruction that we eject and restrain them from returning to this House until their suspension has been completed. 

The House adjourned to tomorrow, Thursday at 10 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 May 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)

