



Thursday, 14 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to say that we should work expeditiously to reduce the number of items on the Order Paper. We have a number of Bills that we need to get out of the way as quickly as possible. In the meantime, there are just two matters of national concern. HOn. Khainza, two minutes.

2.29
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the power project at sub-county level. This Parliament approved a loan of US$ 212,609,840.8. This work was supposed to be carried out by TBEA Company Limited and financed by EXIM Bank. This project was supposed to cover 270 sub-counties countrywide. 

Madam Speaker, of late, the print media has been awash with allegations of financial loss under the Rural Electrification Agency and in particular pertaining to this sub-county project. Of course, there are also management issues in the Rural Electrification Agency.

I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, as such a project concerns many Ugandans in our different constituencies – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Khainza for giving way. The information I would like to give this House, with pain, is that when we passed this loan, the Government, where I belong, promised people that all sub-counties will be lit by the 2021 elections. 

According to the programme, they promised to come in March to Butaleja but nothing has taken place. Therefore, since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, he should tell the country whether they ate the money so that the people know. It is terrible that we have no electricity. 

The worst thing is that instead of the dams that the Government is building, taking power to the West Nile, its mains are again transmitting to Kampala. We do not know whether this Government is only mindful of Kampala. That is the information I wanted to give. It is a critical issue – (Interjection) – and since hon. Kibalya comes from a place near Isimba Dam - (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving is beneficial to the House and whoever will pick interest as in why we do not have power up to now. After my submission, I wish to lay on the Table the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that could be causing issues as to why these sub-counties do not have power. 

We have information that there is a misunderstanding between the Executive Director (ED) and the technical person and this misunderstanding came about when they signed the MOU. The ED signed the MOU but when the technical person went to negotiate with the contractors, he got more mileage. The scope was bigger for the technical person than the ED. 

When the ED realised that the technical person had negotiated for a bigger load - For example, Madam Speaker, regarding the low voltage scope in kilometres, the ED had discussed with the contractor and got 1,827 kilometres to be covered. When the technical person- Mr John Turyagyenda - went, he discussed with the contractor and he managed to get 5,921 kilometres, which is different from the load the ED had.

On the transformers, the technical person got 3,401 pieces of transformers to be supplied but the ED had negotiated for 609 transformers. 

For the sub-counties to be covered, the ED had negotiated for 287 sub-counties but the technical person negotiated for 610. Madam Speaker, that variance caused a lot of infighting and eventually, the MoU could not be effected. We, as the beneficiaries, found ourselves losing out because of infighting between these people. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the information containing the MoU, what the ED had signed and what the technical person, after varying, had signed separately; which one could be better and where the value for money is. That is the information I wanted to submit. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The misappropriation of the US$ 8 million that was meant for the sub-county rural electrification project is an issue of grave concern. It has been a subject of many parallel investigations. The IGG has investigated this case and the report is out. 

The findings are as clear as day follows night. The report reveals a lot of witch-hunt and harassment within the Office of the Executive Director. He is left with two months to retire but diabolically, he is instigating even the Board to sack his deputy, Engineer Werikhe. 

Secondly, after the ED demoted his deputy, the board, after going through the allegations, reinstated Engineer Werikhe. This has not gone down well with the Executive Director. He has gone further to allege that even the US$ 5 million that was meant to be a boost for the same project, which project has never even taken off – By the way, not even a pre-feasibility study has been conducted and neither has a penny been spent and yet it is claimed that all the money has been spent. That makes you wonder about the supply of air and where this money is lying. 

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can see that the matter is generating so many issues. Therefore, we seek your guidance pertaining to the progress of the project and the administrative issues in REA. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I sit in this Chair and we do something really big for the population, it can be very exciting. The TBEA loan was very exciting to all of us because we thought that many of our sub counties were going to be covered. Therefore, if it is not moving well, it is a matter of grave concern and some allegations have been made by the members.

I would like the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and give us an explanation next week on Thursday about all these issues. Oh! The Minister for Energy and Mineral Development is here.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that the TBEA project was supposed to have moved faster and benefited several our sub counties that do not have power. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to state that around October, the implementation started. However, there were challenges - slowness, sluggishness - and we have had a series of meetings both with the contractor and the technical teams. 
Madam Speaker, let us come to this Floor with a detailed report to update Members on the new date that we have agreed with both the contractor and the technical team and how this project is supposed to be implemented. 

Secondly, it is true that there have been challenges, allegations and counter allegations by the Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director and these conflicts are not good for any institution. Such a service organisation should not have conflicts and when there are conflicts, definitely that slows down the pace of the work. 

It is true that the IGG investigated; we even looked at some of the reports and it is quite surprising that for a report issued by the IGG in 2018, action had not been taken. Another report issued in 2020, action was immediately taken against the Deputy Executive Director and the other officials. However, as a ministry, we sat with the board and we are handling these issues. The Executive Director’s term is coming to an end and sometimes it is the politicians that confuse these institutions. 

We have had people even in this House coming to confront me saying that this person should not leave REA; yes, this happens. Therefore, it is the politicians coming in to confuse REA. If somebody’s term has ended, please let us not go on and try to lobby and so on. 

Madam Speaker, we will come on Tuesday and give this House detailed information. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay; bring a statement next week and it is urgent so that the people can know whether we are giving them power or byooya bya nswa. 

2.40
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula South County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself to a matter of national concern regarding human rights. For those who watched NBS Television last evening on a programme called “Uncut,” there was a lady who was crying but we have been hearing of this for so long. 

The lady, by the name Nandawula Stella, said that she has been taken hostage in the home of a one Bryan Kirumira also known as Bryan White. She said that there are also other ladies there and they are being sexually abused, tortured and that every evil is done to them. They cannot run away due to the lockdown but they are tortured every day and night yet they cannot do anything. 

Madam Speaker, at a time when we are fighting modern day slavery and such things are happening - we have been receiving such videos from outside Uganda but now, this is something that is happening within Uganda. The lady revealed that there are people who are in the business of getting girls; they sell them to rich men who sexually abuse them and take advantage of them. This is an abuse of human rights and we feel that as Parliament, we must pronounce ourselves on this.  

Madam Speaker, our prayers are;
1. The Committee on Human Rights picks interest in this issue and immediately investigates so that we can have the culprits brought to book.

2. We have the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police, we have the Minister in charge Children Affairs; I normally see hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi here; I wonder whether the ministry of Internal affairs cannot discover this. These people were investigating and were even interviewing some other people who were giving answers in their own way as they wished, lavishly and without any sympathy. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request this Parliament, with your office that has championed the cause for women - fighting for the rights of women and every human being - that you take it up and we see justice prevail for these people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Committee on Human Rights of this House is directed to take an interest in that issue, go and visit the place and get information and come back and give us a report. If we could have it before the close of the session, we would be very happy. 

2.43
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise a matter of national importance. It is extremely urgent. On 5 May 2020, a series of rivers in Kasese District namely; Rubiriha, Tako, Nyamwamba, Mobuku, Sebwe, Remi, Nyamigasani, Kitakena and Maliba burst their banks destroying and devastating communities including Kilembe Mines Hospital, schools, sweeping away bridges and displacing citizens in Kasese District. 

Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank Government for its quick response particularly the Prime Minister and hon. Ecweru and hon. Mary Karoro. However, despite the quick response, the effect or the devastating effect of these floods are beyond description. We thank Government for the two consignments of food but that only handled about five per cent of the population. Homes and households have been destroyed and devastated. People are starving to death. 

This tragedy this year was not the first one; 1 May 2013, 8 May 2014, 7 May 2015, 1 July 2015 and now 5 May 2020.

My prayers are;
1. The Government gives this the urgency and the need it deserves because people are in a situation where they are facing death and are afraid. Madam Speaker, you are aware this has occurred when we are under a lockdown; people are starving to death and nobody can imagine what the people of Kasese are going through - a lockdown now compounded by the floods. People are sleeping in schools and churches but with nothing in terms of blankets, food and other essential items.

2. Government sets a Budget specifically focusing on the people of Kasese and the affected communities, the same way we did with Bududa and our brothers and sisters in other affected communities. Madam Speaker, the people of Kasese are taxpayers. If we do not have money, this Parliament has got the capacity to process a loan. It is the citizens of Kasese together with the rest of the country that will pay this loan. 

I would appreciate a specific intervention from Government that is felt aligned to the need on the ground; in the short term, inter-medium term and the long term. I would really like to appreciate you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is hon. Ecweru here? Please give us a solution.  

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I would like to certainly say, with a very heavy heart, that the country is being ravaged by numerous hydrological disasters. 

The case particularly that has been raised by my colleague from Kasese is devastating, to say the least. However, I would like to thank the leadership in Government for directing my humble self to quickly move in to personally get an on-the-spot understanding of the magnitude and attempt to prescribe a solution. 

Madam Speaker, after visiting Kasese, particularly Kilembe and Mobuku, I do confirm that all the rivers that have been named by my colleague burst their banks and huge populations displaced. We made a number of commitments: 
That my ministry would quickly deploy some first line relief intervention to the district and on top of that, leave a senior officer at the level of a Brigadier General, who replaced the late Gen. Oketa, managing the National Emergency Coordination and Operations Centre in the Office of the Prime Minister (NECOC). 

Brig. Oluka is going to be based in Kasese, working with the Red Cross and the local government to coordinate other interventions.  

I also did request the Prime Minister to ask my colleague, the senior Minister of Works and Transport, to deploy engineers from the centre here to go and reinforce the capacity of the local government, which had suffered and had been overwhelmed. 

I also requested the Prime Minister to request the Ministry of Health to deploy doctors from the centre to support the local government to first of all assess the problem that is afflicting Kilembe Hospital, with the view of seeing what to do to the patients who were relocated. Then, in the medium and long term, possibly consider a complete relocation of the hospital. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report to you that all that is being done. Yes, we may not have met the expectations of the people 100 per cent but a lot of work has been done. I just did not know that my colleague was coming to raise it here; I would have brought the letter - which I received this morning - that has been signed by the district chairperson and the RDC, where they are very grateful for the intervention. They do raise the gaps that are still there but are grateful for the intervention. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg this House that next week, with your permission, I be allowed to come back on Tuesday to give a comprehensive report happening across the country elaborating where we have intervened, indicate why we have intervened there as a first line intervention and problem priority and what we intend to do in the next few days. 

I am sure there is something going to come about Bundibudgyo. I do not know whether you could also allow me to comment on that –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, actually, I had contacted the Prime Minister on Friday, last week about Bundibudgyo. 

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, on Bundibudgyo, the same happened. When I reached Kasese, I had limited time given the fact that the army was kind to support me with their chopper and the weather was fairly hostile. So, I could not go around all the areas.  

However, the prescription that we gave for Kasese is the same that we gave for Bundibudgyo. I am happy to report that Bundibudgyo has equally received first line intervention. We are aware of the magnitude of their disaster. 

I would also like to indicate to this House that the problem of Bundibudgyo added a lot of injury to the already devastated community because last year, as you all remember in December, the rivers in Bundibudgyo again burst their banks and many lives (18) were lost. 

We did go to Bundibudgyo and I made a commitment that the Central Government will do whatever it takes, among other interventions, to give some financial support to the families that lost their dear ones. It is unfortunate that it took a bit of time to process. My technical people were a little slow but I am happy to report to you, Madam Speaker, that this morning, we sent the money that is meant to take care of the 18 families that lost their dear ones. 

I am sure by tomorrow, the district leadership will be able to summon those survivors and support them accordingly. That is not to say that that intervention is enough. There are so many things to be done. 

I would like to thank, in a very special way, the local government and the political leaders of Kasese. They buried their apparent political differences and confronted this challenge as a team. I went with hon. Centenary, who is the Member of Parliament for Kasese Municipality, and we were able to see what had happened. 

Before I sit, Madam Speaker, there is a feeling that since 2013-2014, the Government saw the devastation and may not have done anything to attempt to prevent this. Let me make it abundantly clear to this House that over Shs 10 billion was expended specifically for fixing River Nyamwamba. There was work done on the gabions. It was only overwhelmed – but I will be happy to bring a detailed statement in the next few days and then I will seek advice and guidance from colleagues. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, we will be happy to see you back next week but come back also with the issues for Kagugu, Kisuba, Bundingoma and Busunga Town Council as well as River Lamia. There are two issues on the Order Paper and I think you should incorporate them in your answer. Thank you very much. 




2.55
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding a very bad eviction taking place in Opiro Village Andara in Amuru District. 

This eviction is being done by the National Forestry Authority officials. As I speak, the people have nowhere to sleep and there is no food. The officials that go there are interested in taking away their homes. They are destroying cassava gardens and beans which have been planted, personal property such as National IDs have been burnt down. The children are stranded since it is a rainy season; there is nowhere for them to sleep. 

Madam Speaker, my humble request - now that the honourable minister in charge of “food”; let me just put it that way; honourable minister, I plead with you to come to the rescue of our people, who are now stranded. When I watched the video, one of the people - an old man whom I believe must be about 90 years - was practically crying when he was speaking. In the African culture, we know what it means for an old man to cry; it is very painful. 

I do not know what is happening. The other time, my colleague, hon. Olanya, brought the issue of eviction in one of the places; we are again faced with another eviction in another place. I thought we had a very good directive from the President that there should be no movement. How come these people are moving and doing all the havoc on people and yet they have nowhere to go? 

I beg the ministry in charge of forestry to come and clear this up because the people are stranded; and the Office of the Prime Minister to come to the rescue of the people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will invite the Minister for the Environment but we want to know - I thought we are under lockdown; how are these activities taking place? I thought the National Forestry Authority (NFA) offices are closed.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Atim): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me, first, to add to what my colleague, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, responded on the issue of Kasese and the subsequent incidents.

Madam Speaker, the issue of Kasese, Bundibugyo, Bududa and other subsequent areas affected, as Government, we shall have immediate intervention. However, I think this has become a perennial problem. We are going to have inter-ministerial interventions at different levels. 

I want to be on record that we have to address the issue of environmental management. I saw the victims lamenting and it was a sad sight. Hon. Centenary reached me last Thursday about it. We dispersed a team from NEMA to make assessment for mid-term and long-term intervention so that we address this issue in totality. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Lucy Akello, early morning today, hon. Anthony Akol sent me a message about this incident. I had also seen it from some people in the diaspora, who had forwarded it to me saying, “Look at what your Government is doing.” I crosschecked this information with the Executive Director of NEMA and this was the response:

He said that the area we are talking about - it is not the NFA evicting people in this area. The area under contention is an area already designated to be in Adjumani in East Madi Wildlife Reserve. My Executive Director told me that apart from our concern, which is Zoka Forest where people are trying to get trees; this is under the Uganda Wildlife Authority; they are the sector directly concerned. 

Madam Speaker, what I saw was not something good to see. We want to compare notes with the Minister of Wildlife - if you can allow - so that we get proper information next Tuesday and we bring a report rather than this response which will leave our colleague unsatisfied. This is the position. We cannot be evicting people when we are in a lockdown. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. However, whether it is Wildlife or what, if it is a Government agency, evicting people in a lockdown is wrong - whichever agency it is.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, whereas I am impressed with the performance of hon. Beatrice Anywar, I am concerned that during this lockdown, the same Government has frozen all other activities including access to justice. The people who are being evicted, have no way of accessing court, for example, to defend themselves or even injunct activities. Now Government agencies have turned themselves into judges and concluded that these people are encroachers. 

Would it not be procedurally right, therefore, that we require the responsible ministers to stop these evictions until this matter is fully addressed and the lockdown is lifted so that people can be free? Because if you evict somebody, where are you asking them to go? Guide me, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, we asked the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs to tell us how the judicial systems are operating under the lockdown because the issue of access to justice was raised yesterday. However, really, there should be no eviction. Can I ask the Prime Minister to ensure that these evictions are not taking place at all?

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to correct what my sister hon. Beatrice Anywar said. I want to give you the number plate of the vehicle that went there; it is UG 1763S. The person who was leading the eviction is a lady called Grace, who is based in Gulu NFA. This is what the people said. 

Madam Speaker, it is actually painful because the people are saying, “We are helpless but they came with guns to do all these things to us.” This is something I wanted to correct and it was in Opiro village, Andara which is in Pabbo. It has nothing to do with Adjumani. 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the onset of the lockdown, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development issued a circular consistent with the directives of the President that no land transactions will take place in this period of the lockdown. Therefore, anybody trying to do anything that relates to land is doing so in contravention of these directives. 

Secondly, there is a procedure; there are eviction guidelines. There is a procedure which is supposed to make evictions as humane and as reasonable as possible. These guidelines are in place. If there is any Government department that must evict, they must comply with those guidelines. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have done our part and we are prepared to make this available to everybody. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister undertake to establish what is really going on in Pabbo? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, it is our duty and responsibility to establish what is happening and we are going to do so and advise the relevant parties accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: And report to this House.

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, and report to this House, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.06
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the women and mothers’ situations, both in quarantine centres and in the camps all over the country, especially areas that were recently hit by floods. 

I received complaints that whereas most of these women are in quarantine centres, they provide for them mattresses and other basics but when they raise issues in regard to their menstrual cycle because they spend 14 days plus in the isolation centre, no one wants to attend to them.  

Tomorrow is International Menstruation Hygiene Day, Madam Speaker. In that regard, I would like to pray, on behalf of those women in the quarantine centres all over the country - we who represent them also undergo menstruation – can the Ministry of Health make it mandatory and write to the different local governments telling them that menstrual pads should be one of the essential items to be provided in the quarantine centres?  

You cannot postpone menstruation and the same happens even when women are in the camps in – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, my prayer is very clear: let every quarantine centre – because every district has a quarantine centre - have sanitary pads as part of the essential items being provided because the women in there cannot go out to buy sanitary pads. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amongin. As you can see, the Members agree with you. I now direct the Minister of Health to ensure all quarantine centres in the country are equipped with the necessary menstrual hygiene items to enable the women living therein to live a hygienic life. Thank you. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE INFLUX OF NOMADIC HERDSMEN IN GULU, AMURU AND NWOYA DISTRICTS

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt. Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you. Madam Speaker, the minister received reports of illegal and irregular movement of cattle from Nakaseke District to Gulu District, on 11 May 2020. The minister investigated the matter and the following have been revealed:

1. Two trucks ferrying 57 heads of cattle from Nakaseke, were intercepted at Awach Sub County and taken to Gulu Central Police Station. It was further established that the cattle were being ferried to Paibona village, where the owners claimed to have bought land for grazing. The cattle in question belongs to Mr James Nkurunziza of Kapeeka, Nakaseke District. 

2. The livestock movement permit issued by Dr Joseph Musisi, the Veterinary Officer of Nakaseke District, to the transporters, revealed that the cattle were destined for slaughter in Abattoir in Gulu. However, they ended up in Awach, Aswa Sub County, Gulu District. 

On further probing, the officer revealed that the owner informed him that the cattle were meant for slaughter and he was surprised that the owner had turned around to keep the animals for purposes of breeding. That meant the livestock movement permit was null and void.

3. Upon inspection of the cattle while at Gulu Central Police Station by Mr Alfred Opio, the District Veterinary Officer of Gulu, it was established that only 55 heads of cattle and not 57 as had been indicated in the livestock movement permit issued from Nakaseke. It was, however, revealed that the two heads of cattle had died on the way, although this could not be verified.

Under the advice of the DVO, Gulu, the 55 heads of cattle were transported back to Nakaseke District to follow the right procedure for moving animals meant for breeding. For example, the Office of the District Veterinary Officer, Nakaseke, has to seek for a Letter of No Objection from the District Veterinary Officer, Gulu, the basis on which the District Veterinary Officer would either allow or object to the movement of cattle into or through Gulu District. It also based on that reply that Nakaseke would either allow or object to the movement of cattle into or through the districts before a livestock movement permit can be issued. 

There is alleged movement of cattle to Northern Uganda by herdsmen referred to as Balaaro at night with the help of some security officers. This requires further investigations because it is illegal to move livestock and livestock products at night. The ministry shall take appropriate action once proved. 

It is also reported that some herdsmen from the South and Central regions have intermarried with the communities and this has allowed them to acquire land from the local communities for rearing their cattle. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the cattle were taken to Gulu District illegally since the livestock permit presented indicated that the cattle were meant for slaughter and not for breeding. This irregularity requires further investigation to understand the motive of the owner, which may be detrimental to the communities there. 

I would like to inform the House that the ministry has not issued permits for breeding cows - by the Commissioner Animal Health - during this period. So, the alleged movements are illegal and we have asked the security officers and the local governments, to apply the law.  

There are claims that some nomadic herdsmen acquired land in Amuru, Gulu and Nwoya districts. The ministry has undertaken further investigations in collaboration with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to establish facts about this migratory behaviour of the herdsmen and the illegality of ownership of these pieces of land they claim. 

Any movement of cattle or any other animal and animal products at night is illegal. The police have been asked to investigate and make those people allowed movement culpable. That is what I got from the investigation we carried out on the movement of herdsmen in Northern Uganda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. Supplementary question from hon. Okumu.

3.15
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for being frank although limited, in what he has given us. The truth is, there is massive movement of Balaalo. Even on Monday when I was driving back to Kampala, I met four trucks entering Gulu. Therefore, this is a daily movement and I know where they are stationed. 

There is an enclave in my constituency – in Paibona – which is isolated, near River Aswa. They are hiding there illegally. There is another place in Palaro. They pretend to be going to Sudan but when they reach Atiak, they cross to the other road and come back to Palaro. They are being aided by very senior military officers in Kampala that sometimes, even when the local military officers intercept them, they are ordered to leave them. 

This is a racket and it must broken, Mr Minister. Otherwise, we are going to enter another series of instability because we are not going to close our eyes and look at people taking advantage like this to first of all, grab our land and go and graze there illegally. Most painfully, they have become thieves. The trucks that transport these animals steal our cows. We are also cattle keepers; we have animals. When they take these trucks, they are escorted throughout the night. 

Hon. Minister, apart from making this general statement, I think we need to establish a mechanism to work together so that we can access some of those places and be able to expose those people.  

I would like to thank the Fourth Division Commander because I have interacted with him over this matter for the last five months but his hands are tied. There are powerful people in Government who are abusing this opportunity. I would like to inform the minister that we can settle this matter if we frankly work together because the President gave a directive that all these balaalos must leave and they left – (Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, when a Member raises such a matter, usually the investigation starts with the responsible minister getting in touch with the Member who has raised the issue so that further and better particulars can be availed. 

However, I listened to the minister and he only reported one incident of cattle movement from Nakaseke to Paibona. He omitted all these details, yet the question is on the influx of herdsmen. It cannot be one. 

Honourable minister, you may recall that last year, it took the intervention of the President to order the Balaalos to leave these places. So, for the minister to come and feign ignorance and say that you do not know any other details, when it was your President who issued orders and indeed, we all read in the papers that it was a fully-fledged operation. 

The Member’s issue is, why are some Ugandans taking advantage of this COVID-19 lockdown to get back to these areas from where they were flushed out? It requires a sincere response without you skirting the facts and taking it as an isolated case, yet the Member is saying that this is an influx of herdsmen. They are known, their movements are known and their places are known. Without you giving this House half-baked information, can you please shape up and give us better answers once such questions are raised rather than hiding your head under the sand?

THE SPEAKER: I encourage hon. Okumu to interact with the minister and give him as much detail as possible about this so that he can get us a solution.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, just one thing. I think this matter is very big; it is not just in Gulu. 

The other day when I raised it, hon. Okupa raised a similar issue in Teso. This problem is in Lango and West Nile. Sometimes you wonder how the Balaalo move in such an organised manner; with so many trucks and guns in all these areas. I think the problem is bigger than what we see now. It is even going to cause conflict in this country because we are not just going to sit by and watch these people continue to do this. I thank you.

LT COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Reagan Okumu for being honest. We investigated particular cases but now it seems the problem is bigger and I am ready to go to Gulu to work with the MPs, make a diagnosis and find a lasting solution. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, please follow up also in Lango and Teso. They have the same complaints. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, my prayer is, let the Government restore the presidential orders for the Balaalo to be evicted immediately. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DUBIOUS ACTIONS OF UNSCRUPULOUS SURVEYORS, UNDER THE FACILITATION AND PROTECTION OF PERSONNEL FROM THE UGANDA PEOPLE’S DEFENCE FORCES, WHO ARE PLANTING MARK STONES ACROSS THREE VILLAGES IN AMURU DISTRICT AND THREATENING THE OVER 500 HOUSEHOLDS WITH EVICTION

(Text expunged)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, actually you have not assisted us to handle this issue. I direct that your statement be expunged and you come back and tell us who the soldiers are, who the surveyors are and what actions you are going to take. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY MASAKA REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL AND UGANDA VIRUS RESEARCH INSTITUTE TO ATTAIN THE MINIMUM 50 PER CENT PASS MARK ON THE CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY COMPLIANCE IN RESPECT OF THEIR POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, in response to a report on failure by Masaka Regional Referral Hospital and Uganda Virus Research Institute (URI) to attain minimum pass mark of 50 per cent during the assessment of Gender and Equity Budgeting as a strategy to redress imbalances and promote the equal opportunities to all Ugandans, the Ministry of Health would like to state as follows:
    1. The Ministry of Health acknowledges that the above-mentioned facilities initially scored below the minimum pass mark.
    2. Following this result, the Equal Opportunities Commission conducted a reassessment of Masaka Regional Referral Hospital and Uganda Virus Research Institute. Both facilities scored 68.7 per cent and 54.1 per cent respectively.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the facilities are committed to comply with the gender and equity requirements in order to promote equal opportunities for all in the country.

Attached is the score sheet from the Equal Opportunities Commission for your reference. I already uploaded the same information on the members’ iPads for reference. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for complying with Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DIRECTIVE BY THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT HALTING LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCIL SITTINGS DUE TO THE THREAT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC, THEREBY IMPEDING THE OFFSETTING OF PENDING BUSINESS IN THE COUNCILS

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the 46th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 4th Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on 07 May 2020, hon. Noah Mutebi, Member of Parliament for Nakasongola County, raised concerns on my ministry’s directives halting local government councils sitting due to the threat of COVID-19 pandemic, thereby impeding the offsetting of pending business in local government councils.

Arising from the above concern, Madam Speaker, you directed me to clarify on the matter on Wednesday, 13 May 2020. Allow me to apologise that we were not able to make this statement yesterday due to situations beyond us. I now wish to respond to the above concerns as follows:

Following the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic in the country, and the subsequent presidential directives on preventive measures, the Ministry of Local Government on 19 March 2020 issued a circular to all local governments halting several activities whose implementation involve bringing together more than ten people including the local government council meetings.

This was an interim measure intended to enable the sector take the lead at the district and lower level, in implementing the presidential directives and the standard operating procedures provided by the Ministry of Health and other sectors. 

As adopted by the national taskforce for COVID-19 during this period of the lockdown, nonetheless the ministry guided that the respective business committees of councils could handle the laying of the budgets and detailed scrutiny, but leave approval of the budgets to the councils. 

Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, Uganda has so far registered commendable progress in managing COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, in his address to the nation on Monday, 04 May 2020, His Excellency the President announced measures to ease some aspects of the lockdown. The President commended the work done by the local councils who are led by the respective district COVID-19 taskforces in surveillance, tracking and reporting of suspected COVID-19 cases, and also establishment of quarantine centres and implementing the preventive measures at the community level.

Cognisant of the need to adhere to the legal requirement for the Local Government Budget Cycle as provided for under the Public Finance Management Act, and the Local Government Act, Section 77(7), and guided by the Cabinet’s decision on this matter, my ministry on 07 May 2020 issued a circular to all local governments, lifting the halting of the local council sittings and guiding them to observe the COVID-19 measures as they convene the council meetings. 

It is expected that by 31 May 2020, all councils will have approved their budgets for the Financial Year 2020/2021 as provided for by the law. Councils may also handle any other urgent business that requires their attention.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the circular that was sent to the respective districts. I thank you for the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope hon. Noah Mutebi is happy. Is there any supplementary question? 

3.43 
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Ministers of Local Government: hon. Magyezi and hon. Namuyangu for the response.

When you look at how local governments operate in Uganda, of course, there is what they are supposed to follow, as the minister stated clearly, under the Local Government Act and the Public Finance Management Act. 

Allowing the district councils to sit and look at the budget within four hours according to the guidelines might not benefit Ugandans. I would like the Ministry of Local Government to guide – procedurally, the budget has to go to the standing committees, and after they have done perusal and scrutiny, the budget will then go to council for its discussion and approval.

I see a scenario where the committees have not sat, and you are bringing the budget to them. There might be some issues. I would like to be guided on that, Madam Speaker. 

Secondly, there are districts in Uganda, I think the minister might know of, that had put their councillors on their payroll. The councillors have been getting monthly allowances instead of sitting allowances. In such a scenario where these councils are not sitting, what will happen to such districts?

Lastly, I want the minister to also guide –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the supplementary question is supposed to arise from the answer by the minister. You are now raising new issues. 

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, let me conclude with this one; that they have given them from 11th to 30th to sit and pass the budget. How about other coming councils, what will happen to them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mutebi again. We were informed as a ministry that the chief administrative officers sent copies to all councillors and councillors made their input to all these budget papers through the chairpersons of their committees. 

Therefore, when they come, they do not again need to start new discussions because they have already had these budget papers with them; they have read, comprehended and have shared with their chairpersons.

Then the second issue, which is about districts that put allowances as a monthly package, it was again guided that this was meant to be sitting allowance. Since they have not been sitting, there is no point in them continuing to get this money. So, we have asked districts that have been doing so not to pay out the money. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UNSCRUPULOUSNESS OF PLATINUM MICROFINANCE COMPANY THAT HAS SWINDLED TEACHERS EARNINGS AND SAVINGS THROUGH REGISTERING THEM AND DEPOSITING MONEY ON THEIR ACCOUNTS, WITHOUT THE TEACHERS’ CONSENT AND LATER INFORMING THEM THAT THEY HAVE CONTRACTED LOANS AND SUBSEQUENTLY CAUSING DEDUCTIONS FROM THEIR EMOLUMENTS

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on 7 May 2020, hon. Lyandro Komakech raised a concern over the issue of Platinum Credit Limited that has allegedly swindled teachers’ earnings and savings through registering them and depositing money on their accounts without their consent. 

Madam speaker, Platinum Credit Limited is licensed as a non-deposit taking microfinance institution with operations countrywide by the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority established by the Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act, 2016. Furthermore, this company is a non-deposit taking microfinance institution, largely dealing in payroll lending.

Madam Speaker, we directed Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority to investigate the allegations and the authority’s investigations discovered that in 2016, a group of 16 teachers in Gulu applied for loan facilities in this company and these are Achil Christine, Ayelo Agnes, Achayo Agnes, Ajok Beatrice, Okot John, Acha Cissy, Grace Obua, Lajjara Esther, Lajjura Atim, Achayo Joyce, Azamo, Oyet Achayo, Chinyera Maris, Anek Agnes, Olanya Santo Felix and Tabu Deo.

The applicants provided the company with details of their respective bank accounts, payroll numbers and duly signed letters of undertaking confirming that applicants were employees of respective institutions. The company subsequently dispersed money to the individual accounts and as a consequence, the employer coded and subjected the salaries of the affected teachers to monthly deductions. 

However, the affected teachers complained that the monies were deposited to their accounts without their consent and subsequently filed a civil suit No.58/2019, through their lawyer M/s Barenzi against Platinum Credit Limited, to recover the interest payments deducted from their salaries and permanently stop deductions on their accounts.

The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority has found that the outcome of the court proceedings is that the parties agreed to settle the matter amicably through a consent order with the following terms:
    1. Platinum Credit Company limited to retain Shs 48.6 million being the principal amount dispersed to the teachers.
    2. Platinum Credit Company Limited to refund Shs 31.2 million being reimbursement for the interest payment collected from the 16 teachers.
    3. The company to pay Shs 5 million, as legal costs for the teachers’ lawyers.
    4. And the company to permanently stop further monthly deductions on the teachers’ banks accounts.

To that end, we have found that this company deposited a total sum of Shs 36.2 million on account No.4128203402 at NC Bank belonging to the lawyers of the teachers on 27 September 2019.

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority decided to update members - we made a statement to update this House representing key findings on 27 August 2019, by the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority on the operations on payroll lenders after a concern was raised again by hon. Judith Akello of a potentially fraudulent loan disbursement to and recoveries from civil servants by money lenders.

In that statement, we also committed Government taking permanent actions to address the gaps identified and therefore, wish to update this House as follows:
    1. That we have carried out workshops and sensitisation activities in all regions, especially in Busoga, Bugisu and Bunyoro to make people aware on how these companies operate.
    2. We have also put in place a complaint-handling mechanism to receive complaints from the public and conduct investigations or inquiries into the operations of the licensees. A complaint desk at Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority can be reached at 0417799700 and more information can be accessed at our website - umra.go.ug.
    3. Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority has also continued to engage all licensees to put in place applicable internal complaint-handling measures to address such complaints.
    4. The authority has also made it a requirement for a payroll lender to obtain certification of letters of undertaking by the employers prior to issuing a loan.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, progress has been made in terms of following up this issue but also, we would like to again caution the people who borrow money from these micro lenders that please you have your rights, do not let them be abused by these institutions. Report these cases and our ministry will take action like we have done in this matter. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.53
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for responding very fast in terms of what we raised here. However, I would like to add that the matter still continues and that is why it is a big challenge.

Therefore, at this moment I will get back to the lawyers of these teachers and see why these clients are still complaining and yet, based on what you have raised, it appears that all matters were resolved. I will still get back to the lawyers and then get back to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Prime Minister told me that he will be coming to give a comprehensive statement next week on the weekly COVID-19 updates. Then on item 3(IX), the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness will come to give us a comprehensive statement on the management of the floods in different parts of the country. Can we go to item 3 (VIII) from the Minister of Works and Transport on the Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe-Butaleja Road? 

Honourable members, I asked the Prime Minister to give us a chart because I now do not know who the other ministers are. Welcome, Minister of Works and Transport. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO REHABILITATE THE NAMUTUMBA-BUDUMBA-BUSOLWE-BUTALEJA ROAD

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Namutumba-Budumba Road, under the Jinja Station has just received emergency funding and the work is going to start.   

The Budumba-Busolwe-Butaleja Road, under the Tororo Station will be maintained under the Force Account and funding was received this week. The senior minister is working out a full report on this and will report next week. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, apparently, some money has been released. I hope members can follow up to check on what is actually going on. 

On item 3 (X), the Minister of State for Education and Sports told me he is still searching for information on the education materials. I do not know whether he is here. Let us move to item 3 (XI). Yes, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON OPERATIONS OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN THE COUNTRY ESPECIALLY IN NON-OBSERVANCE OF HUMAN RIGHTS DURING THE LOCKDOWN PERIOD

3.57
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much indeed for the opportunity to allow me to address the House on operations of the judicial system in the country, especially in non-observance of human rights during the lockdown period. 

Madam Speaker, these are very hard times. As you can see, Parliament itself is sitting in a tent in the car park and I am speaking with a mask on my face. We must do everything to survive. 

On 18 March 2020, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, in his address to the nation, articulated a number of measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 pandemic. These measures are contained in his address to the nation dated 18, 21 and 30 March 2020 as well as 4 April 2020. These measures were intended to protect and save lives. 

Pursuant to the measures issued by the President, the Minister of Health, in exercise of powers conferred upon the ministry by sections 11 and 27 of the Public Health Act, Cap 81, made the Public Health Control of COVID-19, No. 2 Rules 2020 that gave legal effect to the measures articulated by His Excellency, the President. 

Madam Speaker, these measures were premised on the need to restrict mass concentration of people at any given time, which is a medium for the spread of COVID-19 pandemic. 

Pursuant to this, the Chief Justice, on 19 March 2020, issued a circular on the administration and contingency measures to prevent and mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic by the Judiciary. I will be laying this circular on the Table because it is very comprehensive. It covers how the Judiciary is operating during this period. In that circular, the Chief Justice suspended all court hearings and appearances for the period of 32 days with effect from 20 March 2020. 

The Chief Justice guided that for cases at the stage of submission, the respective courts would advise the counsels or parties to file written submissions - which is all in the circular I am going to lay on Table. The Chief Justice also suspended all the execution proceedings for the same period, except where attachment had already taken place. 

Madam Speaker, courts were guided that they would continue to handle certificates of urgency and taking of pleas for serious cases and bail applications hearings. Only the applicant and his/her lawyers or in the case of bail application hearing, the sureties would be allowed in court. In this regard courts continue to hear deserving cases in the circumstances once a certificate of urgency is obtained. Examples of these happenings are known to this House. For instance, there was a hearing in the case of Hon. Gerald Karuhanga vs. Parliamentary Commission & Attorney General and in the case of Turyamusiima Geoffrey v. Attorney General & Hon. Dr Jane Ruth Aceng. These are cases that were allowed under this circular. 

The Chief Justice also guided that, during the lockdown period, all judicial officers and staff would continue to be on duty. However, there will be no open court appearances. Judicial officers with pending judgments would use this period to complete them, and where possible, judgments and rulings would be issued to the parties on online or via e-mail. He also gave guidelines on the matter of applying technology during this period. 

In addition to the above, H.E, the President on 4 May 2020, in his guideline No. 7, allowed a quota of 100 lawyers at any one time to provide urgent legal services to the different businesses and to handle urgent criminal matters like arraignment. 

This, therefore, shows that given the current COVID-19 pandemic, the courts are still handling critical matters of human rights contained in Chapter 4 of the Constitution and most especially Article 44 of the Constitution of the non-derogable rights; the right to fair hearing and a right to habeas corpus. 

The Judiciary, under the able guidance of the Chief Justice, has further issued guidelines for online hearings in the Judiciary of Uganda to facilitate inter-alia the access to courts during this period of the COVID-19 pandemic. I will be laying on the Table the Instrument; Instruction No. 2, which the Chief Justice has issued to allow the courts to proceed with technology.

Finally, I would like to confirm to this House that we shall encourage every Government security organ such as Ministry of Defence, Police and any other related security institution to comply with the law and guidelines issued by the Judiciary and the directives of the President.

Madam Speaker, the rule of law is a fundamental principle for this Government and indeed, law-based governance of the country is the ultimate purpose of this Government. Therefore, we must endeavour, COVID-19 or no, to respect the law. 

May I take this opportunity to add to the honourable minister Musumba’s remark because I was there? The Ministry of Lands together with the Ministry of Security, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and National Guidance, made a press conference last week that there would be no demolition and evictions during the period of COVID-19.

At this point, Madam Speaker, can I lay on the Table the documents I have referred to in my statement? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I wanted to know how many chief magistrates and magistrates are actually available in the country during this COVID-19.

4.07
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs for his statement. We are talking about non-observance of human rights during this lockdown period due to COVID-19. We appreciate the directives being issued by His Excellency the President and also by the Chief Justice.

Madam Speaker, we should talk about the reality on the ground. The President gave directives that Ugandans should not be brutalized but that they should be arrested and prosecuted. However, the situation is that these people, especially the law enforcers - I do not know how they interpret this presidential directive. They arrest every Tom, Dick and Harry.

Madam Speaker, you saw what was trending on social media about the fruit vendors in Lira District. Fruits are part of food but women were arrested at exactly 9.00a.m. in the morning. Those who were selling chapatis, mandazi, charcoal in sacks of Shs 500 and tomatoes - These people would come and crush them with their shoes and they arrested the women. One wonders!

These people are taken to court and are remanded without face masks or anything to protect them. Imagine a situation where one or two of the victims is infected with COVID-19. How would their situation be, Madam Speaker? There are no personal protection equipment in the remands and they are packed. In Lango sub-region, all the cells are full. The victims are picked from Lira taken to Kwania; others are taken to Amolatar and maybe Otuke. The cells are full and we are wondering about the human rights situation of such people.

I feel that the minister should talk about the reality on the ground. Some of these offences should be handled locally so that they do sweeping and slashing. Why should we remand everybody? Maybe for capital offences but why should someone selling fruits or mandazis be remanded?

In the case of the Lira fruit vendors, they decided to arrest them on Easter Thursday. They were in the cells from Good Friday to Easter Monday and were brought on Tuesday and charged. These are people whose capital is less than Shs 50,000 but they were made to come out on court bail of Shs 100,000. Let us be humane in whatever we do.

Madam speaker, even if the Minister of Justice and the Chief Justice are saying that it will be online, take the situation of a poor Ugandan processing a certificate. Who is going to process it? How long is that person going to travel?

Madam Speaker, these procedures are too bureaucratic and our people will rot in the cells without anything to protect them. Above all, when they come out, nobody bothers to test whether they are positive or not. They just reunite with their families. It is not acceptable. Take care of the rights of the citizens of this country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

4.10
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regard to human rights and COVID-19 and the social distancing element, I watched proceedings in a court in Lira where a magistrate remanded 60 suspects. She was a lady. Surely, there was no social distancing. How can a magistrate preside over a case where people are lumped together? The court room is full and then she says, “I remand you to this prison”. I think she was also going against the directives of the President.

I think they should also use some common sense really. How can you do that to a human being? After remanding them for three or five days, they go back home, as hon. Joy Atim has said. You go back to your family from a crowded room like that. Even the police are arresting people and lumping them together. In Iganga recently, they said there were 200 people. Where did they go and how did they go back to their homes? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the very matter I raised in my communication yesterday and we really need answers. Minister of Justice, one can do community punishment; the leaders can help them organise the distancing. However, grabbing people with their children to the prisons is not right.

4.13
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank my brother, the honourable minister, for the statement. I also want to thank everyone that has been at the forefront in this fight.

I am concerned, as I have stated here, and in my capacity as shadow minister. One, how do you suspend constitutional rights with a simple regulation? I have raised it over and over again. Madam Speaker, you guided in the past. The first thing somebody would have expected is the President to declare a state of emergency and invite Parliament to make laws that can suspend rights. It is not surprising, whereas the President made pronouncements, the regulations we are talking about, are regulations made by the minister. When they charge these people in courts of law, somebody simply says, “Somebody disobeyed presidential guidelines or directives on the lockdown” which do not exist in the gazette. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this has only given an opportunity to some of our unscrupulous security operatives to extort money from citizens. What they do when it is past 5.00 p.m., they arrest somebody with his boda boda or bicycle and for you to have it released, they charge you Shs 20,000 or 50,000.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we are talking about the guidelines issued by the honourable Chief Justice. First, the minister has not tabled any communication to the police, which is enforcing these guidelines. Magistrates find it hard to access courts. State attorneys and lawyers, still find it difficult to access courts, including court users. Why? It is because they have not been guided or they are fining ignorance.

Madam Speaker, magistrates do not even want to listen to bail applications yet it is a constitutional right for every citizen to apply for bail. Denying or granting it, is a different matter. 

However, the magistrate tells you: “I cannot hear your bail application because of the presidential guidelines”. When did the President of this Republic assume the powers under the Constitution to direct the court on how to conduct business? Why would a citizen be locked up mixed with potential suspects of COVID-19 simply because the President on a radio or television station, pronounced himself and said: “I have suspended.” In one court session, a magistrate said: “Even as we are seated here, we are violating presidential directives.” 

President Museveni may be a good President but we are nursing and breeding dictatorship in this country, however good the cause may be, we must operate within the law. The President simply speaking does not have the powers to say: “I have suspended these rights”. Where does the President get the powers to suspend the right of movement or the right of accessing work? The only thing, the President would have done under wise situations, is to propose laws, bring them to Parliament and we make laws suspending the enjoyment of certain rights. Now, the President has decided to remain alone player in the field that he can suspend rights and make donations.

Finally, we have even ended up creating an ad hoc arrangement to which we are giving public funds. Tell me, for example, where are people banking the money submitted to the National Taskforce on COVID-19? Under what authority of Parliament are they managing these funds? May the minister tell us why they found it so difficult for the President to suspend rights without a legislation made by Parliament? Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and my brother. You asked me a direct question of how many magistrates are available. I have consulted; we have 183 Grade One Magistrates available and 41 Chief Magistrates available. 

THE SPEAKER: Are they in their stations?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, in every court, there is a magistrate standing and this is assured, I have consulted with the Judiciary and this is a standing position.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, listening to my colleague here, let me confirm to this House. The Executive authority of this country is vested in the President who will exercise it in accordance with the law. That is exactly what the President has done. There is absolutely nothing the President liaises or wishes; it is contrary to his own conviction. If he can put his life on line for restoring democracy and the rule of law in this country, how can he be the same one to be accused of violating it? Let us pray that this coronavirus ends and it becomes normality. Isn’t it abnormal that the whole Parliament is meeting under a tent in a car park? Don’t you see this, these are abnormal times. We need to be alive and all these measures are intended to protect the lives of the people so that we can get out of this period without anybody dying. 

If that can be achieved as quickly as possible, it would ease the anxiety every one of us shares. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, thank you, for the statement. However, I would like to close by saying that Ugandans are rather disturbed that all the new cases – in fact the bulk of the cases - are from truck drivers. Ugandans, who are locked in their homes, are not moving but the truck drivers who are testing positive, are moving and continuing with their lives, while the Ugandans are stuck in their homes and are unable to earn a living. We are concerned that other people are free and we the Ugandans are stuck. 

Can I invite the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives on the issues read for the next item?    

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ESCALATING PRICES OF FOOD AND OTHER ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES IN THE WAKE OF THE CORONAVIRUS SCOURGE WITH ITS ADVERSE IMPACTS ON THE SURVIVAL OF CITIZENS

4.31
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I respond to a matter that has been raised by several Members of Parliament, on the escalating prices of food and other essential commodities. I wish to inform members that ever since the lockdown, unlike other countries, we have been having a steady supply of essential commodities. 

This has been enabled by Buy Uganda Build Uganda, where 80 per cent of the essential commodities, are produced locally. During the lockdown, supply of essential commodities have been maintained through the wholesale and retail shops that have remained open.

The distribution of these commodities, within the country, is also facilitated by the pickup trucks, lorries and cargo trucks, which have been allowed to operate during this lockdown period. 

The status of price of food and essential commodities
The hike in prices of essential commodities mainly occurred at the beginning of the lockdown. This was a result of the following issues:
    i. Panic buying. Members of the population went into panic buying and stocked food and essential commodities. 
    ii. Hoarding by some traders. 
    iii. Demand from neighbouring countries like Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan as well as DRC. 
    iv.  The increasing demand, especially in Kampala and Wakiso districts. 
    v. On the issue of salt, importation of salt from Kenya, which was on the high side. So, during this time, prices escalated. I will give examples of some of the commodities. For example, before the lockdown, the price of a kilo of maize flour was at between Shs 1,200 and Shs 2,000 but during the lockdown it went up to between Shs 2,800 and Shs 4,500. For beans, before the lockdown, the price was between Shs 2,500 and Shs 4,000 but it rose – and I will give reasons why – up to between Shs 4,500 and Shs 6,000. The price of sugar before the lockdown was between Shs 3,000 and Shs 4,000 but it went up to between Shs 4,500 and Shs 5,500. 

For salt, the prices are very high. In the beginning it was at Shs 2,000 but it went up to Shs 6,000 – and I will explain why. There are also other items – a tray of eggs, before the lockdown, was between Shs 8,000 and Shs 10,000 but during the lockdown it went down to Shs 5,000. 

The price of medicines, for example, Vitamin C, was Shs 500 per tablet before the lockdown but the price went up to Shs 2,000 per tablet.

The current status of prices of essential commodities 
Maize flour: the current market price is between Shs 1,800 and Shs 3,000.
Beans: the prices are still very high and I will give an explanation. 
Salt: the price is still high, at Shs 6,000. 
Vitamin C: the price has gone up because they say it contains and controls COVID-19. 

Therefore, it has been observed – from the information I have given you – that the prices of essential commodities are reducing and stabilising due to the following reasons:
    1. Reduced demands due to low-purchasing power but also because of lack of access by some citizens to some of these retail centres because of the lockdown. Low purchasing power is because citizens are not earning and they have resorted to taking or consuming alternative commodities or none at all.
    2. Availability of other food substitutes like matooke, cassava and vegetables because the markets remained open and the foods are affordable and most people can buy them within their vicinity or the markets down the roads, near their homes. 
    3. The prices of eggs have gone down because the biggest buyers, the hotels and restaurants, have remained closed but also some farmers, especially remote farmers, have not been able to access their farms and some of them have not been able to access their drugs. Therefore, the prices of eggs have gone down – you find pick-ups along the roads and charging very low prices. You can buy a tray of eggs at about Shs 4,000 or Shs 5,000.
    4. The increased supply of salt, after clearing the imports, has reduced the prices a bit although it is still high but we are fortunate that we have a new factory, Kampala Industries and Infrastructure Development Limited in Mukono, which is going to produce 164,000 metric tonnes of salt and it has already started testing its products. There is also another factory that is producing 550 kilogrammes of salt. Therefore, in future, we will not be able to import salt like it has been the case. These are some of the lessons or benefits we have had during COVID-19.
    5. The rise in the price of essential medicines like Vitamin C is as a result of less production by the local pharmaceutical industry due to inadequate raw materials from India. This is being addressed because some of the products on the high prices have already started arriving in the country and the pharmaceuticals have reopened for business.
    6. The price of maize flour is still relatively high, at Shs 2,000 per kilogramme from Shs 1,500 before lockdown partly because of: increased demand from donors to Government; increased demand from Kenya; increased demand from Rwanda and DRC. 
    7. There is scarcity of beans because farmers are keeping them for consumption and also for planting.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude that, two months since the lockdown, the prices of essential commodities are stabilising due to the low purchasing power and scarcity of consumers. We shall, however, continue monitoring the prices to ensure that the reduced prices do not spill over to the farm gate prices – of course farm gate prices will be determined by the principle of demand and supply when the lockdown is lifted. Thank you for listening to me, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you minister for the update on the issue of the prices. Let us now go to Item No. 6

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019



4.33

Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there amendments to clause 1? I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we normally do clause 2 at the end. Let us go to clause 3.

Clause 3

4.34

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 3 as follows. We propose to amend:
    (i) In sub-clause 3(c), by inserting the words “subject to Article 119 of the Constitution” immediately after the word “review” and, 
    (ii) Deleting paragraph (d).

The justification is:
    (i) To subject the review of contracts under this Act under Article 119 of the Constitution, and 
    (ii) To remove an illegality where the department, not being a party to the contract, being mandated to terminate a contract.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I thank the chairperson for the amendment. However, Article 119 of the Constitution requires review of contracts by the Attorney-General. In clause 3(c), we had proposed a review of the local content component by the Department of Local Content within the ministry.

When you ask the Attorney-General, he looks at the entirety of the contract. So, this proposal by the committee will require the Attorney-General to review local content yet he should be reviewing the entirety of the contract. 
As the movers, we are not comfortable with this amendment, Madam Chairperson.

Sub-clause 3(d) proposes to delete paragraph (d). Madam Chairperson, instead of deleting paragraph (d), maybe we can say, “Recommend for contract termination”, not to delete the entire paragraph. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for your proposals?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, our proposal is to compel the requirement to approve contracts in this Act to the provisions under the Constitution. Whereas the sponsor of the Bill says that approval of contracts is limited to local content, I know for sure the Attorney-General’s power in approval of contracts is not limited to one component within the contract.

So, I do not see why we should limit the powers of the Attorney-General in this respect to only look at other things, other than local content. 

On paragraph (d) on order for termination - termination of contracts - cannot be within the powers of the department. This is PPDA and that is why we are proposing a deletion. I need guidance from legal brains whether in drafting, we can draft a provision to read – in this case that to recommend for termination. I do not know whether this is permissible in legislative drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us stand over it and go to the next one. We will come back to it later.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 5 as follows:
    (a) In sub-clause (5)(a):
    (i) By inserting the words “or through an international standards agency”; and 
    (ii) By deleting the word “service”.

    (b) In sub-clause (5)(b):
    (i) By deleting sub-paragraph (ii);
    (ii) In sub-paragraph (iii), by inserting the words “within five percent” immediately after the word “competitive”;
(c) In sub-clause (5)(c), by inserting the words “through irrevocable bank guarantee or alternative security”  immediately after the word “demonstrated”.

The justification is:
    1. To provide a percentage range within which the competitive prices may be compared. 
    2. To cater for the certification of goods by an international standards agency. 
    3. To remove the aspect of negotiation in public procurement.
I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable mover?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in sub-clause (5), where the committee report is inserting the words “or through an international standards agency”; when you look at what we proposed, it is already catered for and it reads: 
“In case a good is certified by a national standards agency in Uganda to meet the standards developed or approved….”

Madam Chairperson, this means that all international standards must be approved by our national standards agency. When we introduce “international standards”, we are giving opportunity for any person to use international standards. 

So, we are more comfortable with having our national standards agency approve international standards agencies.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As a matter of fact, when you look at sub-clause 5(a), where the insertion is intended to be effected, that sub-clause is talking about a good locally manufactured in Uganda. So, the question of certification by an international agency does not arise.

I, therefore, propose that the chairperson of the committee abandons that amendment because in actual fact, it is superfluous and contravenes the spirit of sub-clause (5) in its entirety.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives first.

THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Chairperson, I support the amendment by inserting the words “through an international standards agency” because sometimes our standards also have to comply with the International Standards Organisation. So, I support the amendment. 

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I also agree with the mover of the motion that we maintain his proposal. We are coming in with affirmative action in respect to local content. If we subject local content to international standards, we shall not have cured anything.

The mover of the motion clearly stated that in case we do not have those standards, our national standards agency should be able to employ the services of the international agencies to work under them. We have had a problem in the petroleum sector, for example, where our welders, because they do not have international certification, have not been able to participate in this sector and yet they have the qualifications.

Therefore, we are coming up with a standalone legislation that will empower our own people. After all, as hon. Niwagaba has said, these are goods that are locally manufactured; they are not going to be exported. We have our own recognised standards agency; in case the goods do not qualify, the agency would employ the standards of outside agencies.

I do implore the chairperson of the committee that we maintain the submission of the mover of the motion so that affirmative action is seen to be put in place. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am persuaded by the debate, therefore I concede. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question that clause 5 – 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, there are several amendments that were made by the chairperson of the committee on clause 5 and we have handled that part.

In clause 5, subclause (5), paragraph (b), the committee is proposing to delete sub paragraph (ii). The reason why we put paragraph (b) (ii) is because we foresaw a situation where manufacturers in Uganda would have a problem with high prices and their products would be rejected solely on the basis of price. However, if they can be given a chance to negotiate with the entities, they can have a chance to find a middle ground; as a result, they can reduce the prices other than straightaway being rejected on the basis of price.

Therefore, we are proposing that if a person is willing and can negotiate a price for such a good or service, a chance should be provided for our manufacturers to do so, other than straightaway rejecting them. He might be selling highly, but because of higher bargaining, he can reduce the price. So, we reject this proposal to delete paragraph (b) (ii).

Madam Chairperson, in the same vein, the committee wants to insert the words, “within five per cent” immediately after the word, “competitive”. We feel this detail can come in the regulations that will be developed. Therefore, we also reject that proposal. 

In subclause (5), paragraph (c), the committee proposes to insert the words, “through irrevocable bank guarantee or alternative security” immediately after the word, “demonstrated”. 

Madam Chairperson, this will be another hurdle set up to fail our people if we put this in the law. There is a better way to handle this. Once you start including statements like “irrevocable bank guarantees”, these are some of the things that have always failed our people to be competitive. I beg to submit.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to take advantage of the presence of the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and say that the country should benefit from Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU). The minister has been very eloquent about BUBU, which has unfortunately been disabled by the lack of this very enabling law. 

Honourable minister, yesterday in your absence, we had actually expected your own presentation in support of local content that has been delivered through a private Member’s Bill. We initially thought it should have come from your docket and the related ministries like the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which we have waited since – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your amendment?

MR MUKITALE: First of all, I am in agreement with the mover of the Bill on other amendments. We are coming from the background of competitive bidding and picking the cheapest bidder. The alternate is what we call “solicitation” in procurement practice. Solicitation in procurement practice is enabled through – Actually, negotiation through solicitation is the best practice.

We have been missing out as Government because what is put in the bid document is conclusive. In solicitation, however, you are looking at proven performance; for example, in this case, for post COVID-19, we are suggesting that we look inward. If you want to empower some industries in Uganda, it should be deliberate; you solicit those ones you want to enable the economy –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what is your amendment? What are you addressing? 

MR MUKITALE: I am defending the mover in rejecting the amendment so that we also allow solicitation to take place. I thought I should also remind the minister, if possible, to make sure that this Bill works this time round. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I would suggest that bank guarantees be allowed as the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has stated. We must juxtapose this law with the other laws on procurement, otherwise you are going to pass a law, which will not pass the test of time. 

We know how Ugandans work. Every councillor will apply for a tender even when he or she does not have the money. We need some benchmark. We cannot just say we want Ugandans. We know how Ugandans perform in contracts. They will just come and say, “I have this price” and you will not have anything to benchmark.

So, I would propose that the amendment of a bank guarantee is taken to be part of the benchmarks.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it necessary? Isn’t it in the Mortgage Act? Isn’t it in any other law? 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, if you do no put it in the law, then you cannot put it in the regulations. Something that you do not put here will not come in the regulations –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I was not talking about the regulations; I was talking about other laws. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, this particular clause speaks for itself because it talks about the quantity and timeline for delivery, if it can be demonstrated by the manufacturer. Do you want to limit the manufacturer to one kind of demonstration in form of an irrevocable bank guarantee? There could be other ways to demonstrate seriousness in providing the quantity within a timeline. 

For that matter, I also support the mover that we retain the provision as is, lest we make a law that will not favour the intention of the legislation, which is local content.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 6 as follows:
a) In the headnote by inserting the words “or services” immediately after the word “goods.” 

b) In subsection (2) by – 
i) inserting the words “or service” immediately after the word “good”; and 
ii) by inserting the words “or provided” immediately after the word “supplied”.

c) In subsection (3) – 
i) by inserting the word “entity or” immediately after the word “Ugandan”;
ii) by deleting the words “or entities.”

The justification, Madam Chairperson, is: 
1) To provide for reservation of services to be exclusively procured from Uganda and further, the Bill defines who a Ugandan entity is in the definition clause.

2) To correct a drafting error. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7
MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 7 as follows:
a) In the headnote by inserting the words “or services” immediately after the word “goods.”
b) In subclause (4) by inserting the words “and services” immediately after the word “goods.”

The justification is: to provide for the preference of services readily available on the Ugandan market. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 8 as follows:
a) In subclause (1) by deleting the word “ministry” and substituting it with the word “department.”

b) In subclause (2) by deleting the words “except that the difference in salary between the Ugandan citizens and non- citizens employed in a similar job shall not exceed 10 per cent.”

The justification 
1. To provide consistency with clause 9, which provides for authorisation by the department; and 
2. The details of the percentages to be paid should be put in the regulations. I beg to move.

MR OTHIENO: I have an amendment, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you circulate it?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member notified us and he circulated it. A copy was also sent to your office.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I wish to propose an amendment to clause 8(2) by rephrasing it to read as follows: “Ugandan citizens and non-citizens employed in a similar job shall be paid the same salaries, wages and benefits commensurate to the job description.”

The justification is: first and foremost, this is an affirmative Bill and the provision is also an affirmative provision. The object of the Bill is to prioritise and protect Ugandans. 

This amendment is intended to provide equal and fair treatment of Ugandans in the job market and eliminate discrimination of qualified Ugandans by foreign firms in the country. So, Ugandans doing the same job should be paid the same salary, as provided for in the job description. If there is anything, the foreign workers can be taken care of by other allowances provided by the employer other than through direct salaries and wages. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as variously proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 9 by deleting subclause (4). The justification is that the clause may be very difficult to implement. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, clause 9(4) reads as follows: “Every employment position held by a non-citizen shall be deputised by a Ugandan citizen for purposes of skills transfer.”

Madam Chairperson, we have a situation in the country where somebody comes here as an expert and does not train any person, yet that person is an expert for 10 years. Whereas the committee thinks that this will be difficult to implement, this country needs this. An expert should come here, transfer skills and after some time, we should have people with the expertise we hired.

I pray that honourable members find this important enough to be part of the Bill.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, it will be difficult, in terms of corporate governance, to say that every position held by a non-citizen shall be deputised by a citizen. The justification would be difficult. 

Maybe what we can do is to request - and I hope the drafter will help us - that whoever is the head of that organisation must have a commitment that that particular job held by a non-citizen will be held for a particular time and will then be taken over by a citizen. To say that it must be deputised by a Ugandan makes it difficult because a Ugandan may even be better qualified than the non-citizen. Therefore, fixing it in terms of management will be difficult. 

I do not know how we can be helped. Maybe the owner of this Bill could help us in terms of governance and management. Managing this may be difficult, so maybe you can find a way of the non-citizen entering into an agreement to hold this position maybe for one or two years and thereafter, it would be taken over by a Ugandan. Maybe there is a way you can rephrase it. Thank you.  

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we might not specifically say that a foreigner who is holding a particular job should be deputised by a Ugandan but it can be made in such a way that if a certain post is held by a foreigner, it should be for a specific period of time. 

In their work plan, they must ensure that as that post is being held by a foreigner, they must train the local person. In Tanzania, for example, they give experts a specific period of time - three years. Whether you have trained a Tanzanian or not, at the expiry of the three years, they will not renew your work permit. Therefore, if we can handle it in that way, I think Ugandans will be able to benefit. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Mawanda, for giving way. I would like to agree with the committee that we do delete this particular provision. There are adequate provisions in clause 9, particularly clause 9 (2), that will enable an employed non-citizen not to be permanently employed in that particular job. One of the ways, clearly, is that the department must authorise. When the department is authorising, definitely they look at the timeframe within which this particular contract of employment is going to hold. Two, there are also issues of immigration. Definitely, the person will be getting work permits every two or three years. 

Therefore, I do believe that keeping this particular subclause in light of the safeguards under clause 9 (2) would be redundant. I implore the mover of the Bill to agree with me and then we support the committee to amend this particular clause. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, in the private sector, it might be very difficult to enforce. We could look at years. We could also look at top management and say, in top management, if there are four managers, they should at least be 50 per cent Ugandans. In middle tier, if there are six managers, we could say 50 per cent or 40 per cent of that number should be Ugandans.

However, if it is private sector and an investor has come here and started business, it is very difficult sometimes to impose this or to enforce it. We could look at sections or tiers in management. 

MR KASULE: I would also implore the mover of the Bill that we delete this section and maybe generally put an overriding statement on skills transfer, because we cannot keep deputizing for every position. We should put an overriding statement on skills transfer.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am persuaded by the arguments of the Members and I concede that it be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, the question is that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14 
MS MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 14 as follows: 
a) In subclause (1) – 
i) by substituting the word “entity”, appearing in the last line of the subclause, with the word “company”; and 
ii) by adding the words “subject to fulfilling the eligibility requirements under section 16 of this Act”. 

b) In subclause (2) by substituting the words “a person” with the words “an individual or entity.” 

Justification 
1. For consistency, since the subclause refers to a Ugandan company.

2. To ensure that the Ugandan entity being subcontracted meets eligibility criteria under section 16 of this Act. 

3. For consistency with subclause (1) which refers to an individual or entity. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.  

MS NAKATE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also want to agree with the chairperson that we substitute the word “entity” with “company.” I had actually given some justification, which is to remove any ambiguity surrounding the beneficiaries of this Local Content Bill. This is because we know that “Ugandan entity” means a Ugandan company or a resident company. Under the Income Tax Act, Cap. 340, a resident company is defined as having its management and control exercised in Uganda at any one time during the year of income. Therefore, we realised that foreign companies that have stayed or transacted business in Uganda for a year or two may actually suffocate our indigenous companies. 

Secondly, we also thought that this was for consistency with other provisions in this very Bill, for example clause 26 (3) (a), which requires the contractor or provider to subcontract at least 40 per cent of the scope of the contracted activities to a Ugandan company. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are supporting the chairperson. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 15 by substituting the words “a person” with the words “an individual or entity.” 

Justification: For consistency, since clause 14 makes reference to an individual or entity. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 17 as follows: 
a) In subclause (1) by substituting for the word “terminated” the words “recommended for termination”; 

b) In subclause (2) by adding the words “or individual” immediately after the word “entity”; 

c) By substituting subclause (3) with the following:
“(3) Where a subcontractor has been recommended for termination under subsection (2), the Ugandan entity or individual shall be barred from doing business with the Government for a period of five years.” 

d) In subclause (4) by substituting for the word “terminated” the words “recommended for termination”.

e) In subclause (5) by substituting for the word “terminated” the words “recommended for termination”. 

Justification 
i) To provide for recommendation for termination of the subcontract by the department since the department cannot legally terminate the subcontract, aware that it is not privy to the contract.

ii) To have the grounds of termination of a subcontract also apply to an individual.

iii) To reduce the period for which an entity or an individual may be barred from doing business with Government. 
I beg to move.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, the committee’s proposed amendment says, “Where a subcontractor has been recommended for termination under subsection (2), the Ugandan entity or individual shall be barred from doing business with the Government for a period of five years.”

Madam Chairperson, the whole exercise is to promote “Ugandanisation” of doing business. Therefore, if an African or a Ugandan businessman or a company falters in any way and we actually bar that person from doing business for five years, you are actually killing that business. I think we have to have that spirit of affirmative action, a spirit of nurturing a Ugandan whom we are trying to build or consolidate in doing business in the name or the face of a Ugandan.

Therefore, I wish to propose that we start with two years and then we can review it later. Definitely, five years would be killing Ugandan businesses. Thank you.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for that. Actually, for us, the movers, we had proposed ten years. Why had we thought about that? We found a situation in South Africa where the local people were used as fronts. A law of this nature was enacted in South Africa and Zambia but it never helped the people. The local people there were used as fronts, to appear as though they were in charge when actually, the foreigners are the ones who are doing the business.


We want to make it serious and show them that although we are looking for affirmative action so that Ugandans participate in business, we are not going to allow them to abuse the process.

MS NAKATE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with the chair on this particular provision of replacing the ten years with five years. The justification is that there are some other laws, for example the PPDA Act, where anyone in breach is blacklisted for five years. We are also saying that the five years for any upcoming company is punitive enough to restore sanity in the administration of the business as compared to ten years that would completely kick them out of business.

Secondly, under this clause, I realise that all the grounds given here for termination of the subcontract are due to a breach on the side of the subcontractor. I, therefore, propose that we insert another provision to provide for termination of the subcontract where there is exploitation and breach on part of the main contractor. I beg to submit.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also do not agree with the mover on the ten years. First of all, our intention is to support our local business people.

Secondly, at times, people make mistakes because of hardship. You may apply for a job, for example, and they ask you for a bank guarantee and you do not have it. On several occasions, people have forged bank guarantees not because they intend to; they just want to give a service but they do not have the capacity.

However, if somebody goes ahead to make a mistake - (Interjection)- I am not trying to officially accept forgeries, but if it is made in good faith, why bar somebody for ten years; you would have killed our people. At least if not two years, let us give them three years, so that we support our people. This is why we are coming up with this law to support our own people. Ten years would be too much; we would suffocate our own people. I propose three years, Madam Chairperson.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, termination is different from blacklisting. Ten years or five in procurement practice is a backlisting. This local content law is a deliberate conscious industrial policy. That is the spirit behind it. 

The Toyotas in Japan made mistakes; Suzuki and Samsung made some mistakes. Actually, at some time, their governments bought minority shares to allow them keep afloat. That is why in Uganda, in the 12 years of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), we have lost all those who could not come in.

Therefore, I would like to request that the mover declines this very stringent, unmotherly, un-Ugandan proposal by proposing that at least we just terminate them.

Again, in procurement, you have a practice of evaluating. The prequalification, the solicitation, does provide for you to improve on the areas of non-performance. Therefore, your conformance will come to that. Madam Chairperson, we pray we do not kill the spirit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The same entities are subjected to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act; how would you run away from it?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, my final point - since the minister wants to come in - is related to the fact that in this Bill, we have been very conscious not to go into non-governmental procurements.

Madam Chairperson, I would like for us to benefit because we are so limited and confined. However, we have a new practice; the loans for the Jinja Express Highway and for the oil company were Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). Can the minister also help us; how can we have PPPs, PSAs that are not directly through Government procurement but may end up with foreigners taking the show?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the minister.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, we know very well that there are also other laws that deal with the local content. We cannot run away from or contravene the PPDA law. Therefore, let us stick to five years because within five years, you give the entity time to recover and prepare. Let us go for five years so that we do not look like we are contradicting ourselves, so that we are consistent with other laws. I rest my case.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we come up with categories of five years, ten years depending on the gravity of the offence or the mistake that the local business person has done. We cannot just come up with a flat five-year period.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to raise a point of procedure. You have always guided us that as we process these Bills, when they are in the committee, Members are always free to come in and make their submissions and give their views. 

I am envisaging a situation where proposals are starting to come in at this stage and wondering whether we are moving well procedurally by allowing Members to start making new proposals, which the committee has not had time to think through.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the headnote of clause 17. 
“Termination of subcontract 
(1) A subcontract shall only be terminated by the Department, on its own volition or upon application by a local content entity on any of the grounds prescribed…” 

The grounds are -
1. Where the entity fails or neglects to perform the contracted works - you have failed. 
2. Absconds or abandons the subcontracted works - you have absconded. 
3. Assigns or sells its shares or otherwise ceases to be eligible to be subcontracted to; 
4. Contravenes any of the provisions of the Act. 

Really, this is about breach; you are protecting breach!

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 18 
in subclause (l) by inserting the words “or individual” immediately after the word “entity”.

Justification: To enable an individual obtain a certificate of completion upon successfully executing the contracted works and for consistency. I beg to submit.

MS NAKATE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose a further amendment to clause 18. We would like to require that the certificate of completion is actually endorsed by both the main contractor and the client. It should, therefore, read as follows: “A Ugandan entity to which a contract has been subcontracted under section 14 shall, upon successful completion of the contracted works, obtain a certificate of completion endorsed by both the main contractor and the client.” 

Justification: We would like to smoothen the working relationship between the contractor and the subcontractor. This also guards against any disputes arising from delayed payments to the subcontractor.

Madam Chairperson, you are aware that many subcontractors are falling out because of the exploitative nature of the main or the lead contractor. Most times, they are paid and they keep claiming they are not paid. Therefore, by having this endorsement both by the lead contractor and client, we will actually cure a lot. I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Nakato. When you look at clause 18(2), the format in which this certificate of completion is supposed to be made is in the regulations. Don’t you think it would be prudent that this particular amendment you are proposing is captured in the regulations when the format of the certificate of completion is prepared, so that the space for the client is provided for in the regulations?

MS NAKATE: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, I would still insist that if these issues do not come out clearly, we shall still have many disputes. I was a contractor before joining Parliament and these are some of the disputes we have been having in the industry. 

Let us, therefore, specify and make it clear that the certificate of completion issued to the subcontractor is actually endorsed by both the main contractor and the client. Later, the form can be designed to suit this purpose. Thank you. I beg to submit.   

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we lose nothing by having that addition. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be variously amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19
MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 19 in subclause (1) by deleting the words “in consultation with the Minister”.

Justification: Under subclause (2), the minister is mandated to approve the national local content plan, which makes the minister a participant in the development of the national local content plan. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 24(4) by inserting the words “by regulations” immediately after the word “determine”.

Justification: To specifically provide for the determination of the thresholds by the minister to be by regulations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26
MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 26 as follows:
a) In subclause (3)(d) by deleting the word “eighty” and substituting it with the word “sixty”; and 
b) In subsection (3)(e) by deleting the words “contractors and” immediately after the word “its”.
c) In subclause (5)(b) by inserting the word “consolidated” immediately after the words “into the”.

Justification:
i) To harmonise the percentages of Ugandan citizens to be employed by a supplier, provider or contractor with those already existing in the Investment Code Act, 2019; 

ii) To delete the reference to a contractor in the subclause; and 
iii) To provide for clarity that the reference is to the Consolidated Fund. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended –  

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in subclause (3)(d) of clause 26, we had provided as follows: 
“(3) The local content plan referred to in subsection (2) shall specifically require the supplier, provider or contractor to – 
(d) employ Ugandan citizens in the project and ensure that at least eighty per cent of its total staff are Ugandan citizens.”
Why do we prefer to employ only 60 per cent? There is no justification, Madam Chairperson. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the House is that Parliament has been passing laws that are similar or related to this and so, it is important that these laws are consistent. 

Madam Chair, we recently passed the tax laws but we ensured that the provisions relating to investment incentives were consistent with the Investment Code Act. Here, we are passing another law requiring some provisions to be cross-referenced with the already existing laws. What we are saying is that all the laws relating to similar subjects must be consistent.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have already passed clause 1. Clause 1(d) makes reference to a person who is in possession of an investment licence. Therefore, if we pass this particular law that tends to contradict the existing laws, we will be running into problems in future. I beg the mover to concede, in light of clause 1, which we have already passed.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, it depends on how we want to look at it. We are now enacting an affirmative action law while the other was an investment code. Here, we are following public money and the point is that we want 80 per cent of the employees to be Ugandan. If we choose this, we will automatically amend the 60 per cent in the other law. There is no problem with doing that, if we choose to prefer 80 per cent for our people. Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of 60 per cent and 80 per cent, remember we are advocating for the East African Community, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the African Continental Free Trade Area. We have Ugandans going to these countries and getting employed in different companies and organisations. We could maybe say 60 per cent because you never know we might need these people because of the protocols we have signed with these countries.

Secondly, we should talk about the expertise. At least there should be another provision to say, “where there is expertise”. We cannot just leave it like this, that 80 per cent of the total staff are Ugandan citizens. Do they have the expertise? So, we could put it there.

Secondly, I thought paragraph (g) had collapsed because of the previous amendments – where you have all positions occupied by non-citizens and deputised by Ugandan citizens. Didn’t we collapse that? Do we need it here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it?

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like the mover of the Bill to convince me. I am tempted to support the 80 per cent but he has to convince us that it will be in the various categories of management. You will find that 80 per cent of the staff are Ugandans but they are lower-cadre staff being paid very small salaries. When you compare the salary structures, you will find that the 80 per cent have no impact in the earnings, as far as the company is concerned. 

Can the mover clarify; when you talk of 80 per cent, how much of the staff budget will it carry? As I said, the 80 per cent could be lower cadres, leaving the cream positions to foreigners. Can you clarify on that?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Let me clarify on this clause. There are loans, which are negotiated and contractors are got from abroad. This entire clause deals with public works funded through loans. What we are saying is that for whatever agreements that go on, it should be a requirement that at least 80 per cent of the employees are Ugandans. 

Now, hon. Cecilia Ogwal brings in something very important: is it sufficient to say only 80 per cent; can’t we talk about the value of what we benefit from this? That would be the most ideal. Unfortunately, we thought that if we covered 80 per cent, it would be more sufficient.

I heard the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives expressing worry about investors. This law has no problem with those investors, as long as they are not coming here to use public funds. We have investors who come here and we give them land and our resources. Those are the investors that this law is focusing on. Those investors who purely bring in their resources are not handled under this Bill. I think I now have made the clarifications. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, this particular clause being referred to is to let Ugandan citizens get employed in the projects and ensure that at least 80 per cent of the total staff are Ugandan citizens. I have heard the argument that there are other laws that refer 60 per cent. That aside, this particular Bill is being enacted in response to the national local content policy. Therefore, the arguments of the 80 per cent versus 60 per cent raise a bit of a problem. 

My problem is about the way it is framed; it does not set categories. There are situations where we may need skills; for example, we have the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) that is supposed to be constructed soon. When you say that they should ensure that at least 80 per cent of the staff they employ are Ugandan citizens, are we sure that if we pass this as it is, we shall have Ugandans with the required skills?

I am aware, Madam Chairperson, that the college that is supposed to train not only Ugandans but all East African citizens in this SGR system is supposed to be established in Tororo, at Rubongi Barracks, and the land has already been acquired. This means we do not have the skills as yet for this kind of project.

Therefore, I think that in line with the other Bills that have been passed, when you say “at least 60 per cent”, you are not saying that it should be 60 per cent but “at least”; they can be even more, where the skills are available. 

Therefore, I would like to agree with the committee that we employ Ugandan citizens in the projects and ensure that at least 60 per cent of the total staff are Ugandan citizens or even more, if the skills are available. Just that adjustment. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I hope we shall not end up with 60 per cent as labourers. I think we need to categorise.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to give an example. One time, Government said for any institution which employs people with disabilities - at least 10 per cent - would be given a tax exemption. What happened is that they went and got the disabled and made them sweepers and cleaners and people got the tax exemption. Let us learn from history. That is why Government has now given us a special grant and reverted. Government lost a lot of money. 

Madam Chairperson, we must define which positions we are talking about. I would like to agree on at least 60 per cent as the minimum and it can then be incremental. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a very important area. I would like us to give ourselves time to reflect on it and also to see how we can design the categorisation so that we can complete it next week. This one is very key; it is really the core of this Bill.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, thank you for your wise ruling on that. I think we are going to work around the clock to ensure that we bring out the best for the people of Uganda. This is just to remind Members that this is about monies and contracts which we get through loans and which do not go through our PPDA process.

There was a proposal in subsection (3)(e) to delete the word “contractors” immediately after the word “its”. That was a proposal –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we leave the whole of clause 26 and do it comprehensively, including hon. Lyomoki’s proposal. Let us do clause 26 comprehensively. I am aware you have an amendment; can we do it next week? Is there any other proposal, other than the one of hon. Lyomoki? It is only that.

Mover, please move for the House to resume. Honourable members, we have to stop because it is already a quarter to 6.00 p.m. and Members and staff have to go home before 7.00 p.m.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.46
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.47
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” and has stood over clauses 2, 3 and 26 and has passed clauses 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.48
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work today. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.48 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
