Monday, 16 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to welcome you back from the weekend and all the events that went with it. I have nothing more serious to communicate.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Last week, we were requested to defer the debate on the report on the Committee on National Economy to today. Mr Prime Minister, I do not know whether you can tell us – The Minister of Finance had given his response; there were some other responses from other ministers and then debate. I do not know which Minister is ready. I think this concerns the Minister of Trade, and that of Transport. Those were the ones expected to make their input to the report on the National Economy.  Minister of Works.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you Madam Speaker. My Minister did not inform me that I had to do this. In fact, what he told me was that I had to answer a question for oral answer which unfortunately I see is on business to come, which means it will be tomorrow.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Trade.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Order Paper would be okay, but when I look around, the ministers you are calling are not around. I do not know whether quorum is really good for us to continue with this business. I am just seeking your guidance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not taking any decisions; we are just debating.

MR MUTUMBA: But still I am worried. Anyway, we can continue, but that is the guidance from the Speaker. I was worried by the scattered members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we defer it, because the responses of the ministers were required before the debate. I think let us generally defer it. Yes, Mr Kigyagi.

MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality): Madam Speaker, we had on this debate on the National Economy, it had been deferred, because members still wanted to make a contribution. So, I do not know whether any of the ministers around can stand in for the minister responsible and the Chairman of the committee is there. I think we can proceed with the debate on this report of the Committee on National Economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the queries were specific to certain ministries and required answers so that they can prompt a debate. I do not think anybody can stand in for another one on this matter.  Let us defer it. I have given it time; I think I have discharged my responsibility.   

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE DOMESTIC RELATIONS BILL, 2003

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the motion for the second reading of the Domestic Relations Bill, Government has received a number of petitions from the Moslem community and from the Joint Christian Council – (Applause) – raising some objections to the content of the Bill. 

Accordingly, the government has asked the Uganda Law Reform Commission to consult all the stakeholders including the Moslem community and the Joint Christian Council so that we can seek their concurrence to the Bill. As soon as those consultations are complete, we will come back and proceed with the debate on the Bill. I therefore, beg to request you, Madam Speaker and the House, to stay the consideration of the Bill until those consultations are complete.  Thank you Madam.

2.37
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and I rise on a point of procedure. We have our rules of this House and the Bill was read for the second time which would have meant that we would have been able to debate this particular Bill. But I am surprised by the honourable minister’s intervention, because this is his very own Bill. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the memorandum, the first part talks about the fact that the Bill is to reform and consolidate the law relating to marriage, separation and divorce. The second part in the memorandum states that the Bill is the product of a report of a comprehensive study carried out by the Uganda Law Reform Commission in which all relevant stakeholders were consulted and several seminars and workshops were held. That it takes into account previous similar studies carried out in Uganda including the report on the Commission of Inquiry into marriage, divorce and status of women, the Kalema report of 1965, the FIDA, Uganda Report on the Draft Domestic Relations Bill, 1980 and the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth report on the Draft Domestic Relations Bill, 1980. 

Therefore, just because there have been some comments made by the Joint Christian Council and the Moslem community, would not be ground for government to withdraw it, because even other Bills hitherto this one, have attracted some response from the public. We can only lay to rest the controversies and areas where we do not agree on the Floor of this House.  

Madam Speaker, I am very perturbed by the kind of precedent this particular move by Government will make us take on. If every time there is any kind of outcry from a particular section of society we have to withdraw the Bill in the middle of our normal procedure, then this Parliament may never be able to enact the laws that we need to enact.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I do not want to go on and on, but as you know, this is one law, which we have been waiting for, for the last 40 years. I believe Members of Parliament are sober enough and prudent enough to take into account the concerns raised by the various sections of the community. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance as to what we should do with this particular Government intervention, because I believe that Parliament is capable of resolving these issues and giving ear to these interventions. After all, these people who have petitioned Parliament and the government are people whom we represent. Madam Speaker, I plead that the issue of Government intervention to shelf this Bill is not supported. I thank you.

2.41
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am not surprised that Government has taken this move, because I knew that it has no intentions of having this Bill enacted into law.  It is very clear, and if I am to be proved wrong, let them do so. 

Madam Speaker, consultation on the law concerning marriage and divorce has been in this country for the last 40 years; it precedes the NRM Government. I see my honourable sister, Hope Mwesigye, looking at me. We were together in these consultations when we were doing them under the Ministry of Gender and FIDA where she is a member. You, Madam Speaker, know this. You were chairing FIDA when all these consultations were going on and they have gone on for years on end. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, when the NRM Government came and re-established the Law Reform Commission, the first item on the agenda of that Commission was this law. This commission traversed the whole country, talked to everybody and they did all the consultation that they needed. That was after the government had rejected our FIDA recommendations and those of the Ministry of Gender on the pretext that the consultations were not enough. 

Therefore, the Law Reform Commission, the Statutory Body of this government, undertook to do this assignment, and it did it thoroughly. It has held, I do not know how many, workshops calling all stakeholders to listen to what was contained in their views and what they gave. I can assure you, even we in this Parliament, under the Equal Opportunities Commission sponsored by Law Uganda, we have gone through this. We called Moslems in this Parliament here, in the parliamentary garden, we met the joint Christian Council; everybody that needed to be consulted has been consulted. 

Madam Speaker, there is no law, which will come in this country that is acceptable by everybody unanimously. There are certain provisions, which are unacceptable to other people and there are those, which are acceptable to others. The laws we have made in this land are not necessarily acceptable to everybody; nevertheless we make them. If the Constitution of Uganda, the so-called gender sensitive and responsive Constitution, which I had the privilege and honour to make - In three positions I was the commissioner of Uganda Constitutional Commission and we traversed the whole of this country and during that exercise we inquired of all these things that people gave views on. I can assure you, read the Odoki Report, it was clearly established by the people of this country that the women of Uganda, the families of Uganda need a law to protect and promote them.

Madam Speaker, even to pass this law through Cabinet, I tell you was a tussle; I was there. One time I shed tears in the presence of the President over this law, I did; we are now going to speak the truth. I shed tears calling upon him to allow the making of this law. 

At the opening of this Session, His Excellency, the President, in the Conference Centre, said that the priority Bill for this Parliament is the law on Domestic Relations, and we cheered him very much. 

Finally, through protracted wars in the Cabinet, the Bill finally came and it went to the Committee of Parliament. The Bill belongs to this House and the House listened to the report, which has not been debated. Since when did the Bill go back into the hands of Government, which has been refusing to bring it here? In any case, what sort of protection and promotion does this NRM Government give to the woman of Uganda when first of all, since 20 years ago, there is no law on marriage and divorce, inheritance, against domestic violence, there is no sensible law against sexual offences? What is this government doing in the promotion and protection of human beings that live in a woman? I want to ask today, that the government should stand up and tell the people of Uganda and in particular the women who have continued to suffer that it has no intentions of passing this law.  

You remember how we fought for the co-ownership clause and finally they said it would find its home in the Domestic Relations Bill? I stood up - If you read the book, which I wrote, I said; “I wonder whether this law will ever come”. And I stand here as we conclude two terms of NRM Government within a gender sensitive and a responsive Constitution; as we have gender activists like me, like you Madam Speaker, like hon. hope Mwesigye and hon. Dora Byamukama, we who fight for empowerment of women and families, shame on us if we can go back after these ten years without this law! Let the government tell us. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I request that you reject the Government proposal, because it is giving lip service to women, we are tired of it; we are indeed tired.

2.48
MR HENRY MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Government position. 

Madam Speaker, the shelving of this Bill is very important at this material time because the political temperature in this country, the timing is very wrong at this material time to bring a Bill which is so sensitive to the main religions of this country. 

The Constitution of Uganda gives liberty to religions in this country to practice what they believe in. We have already seen a demonstration from the Muslim community, we may soon see a demonstration from the Christian faith because this Bill is antagonizing both the Muslim and the Christian faiths. Because of that, and since we are in the process of amending the Constitution, and because we need to amend it in the most amicable atmosphere, I support that we shelve off this Bill as of now.

2.49
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Madam Speaker, this Bill has taken a long time to come before this House. The principle behind the Bill is not being contested. Let me repeat, Government has not stated to us that it does not accept the principle of introducing the Domestic Relations Bill. That principle has been with several governments since 1965.  The fact that we have come this far is an indicator that this Government wanted to pursue that principle to its logical end.  

Madam, there is no Bill, there is no anticipated law that comes before this House without controversial aspects, none. There is no law, or anticipated law that does not invite objections, and petitions from various bodies, none. The reason why Bills are brought before this House is for purposes of it being panel-beaten to a level, which is acceptable to everybody in the community. If every time we raise a voice on a principle in a Bill, then by the now, even the Constitution amendment bills would not be coming before this House because they have raised a lot of controversial issues but we are going ahead to debate those aspects and then removing those that we do not want; that is the role of this House. 

Madam Speaker, if we set a procedure that every time we get a petition then we are going to withdraw a Bill, we might just well pack up and go home because we will not have any job in this House. This House will have no role. I know under 114 of our rules, the mover of a Bill can withdraw it but he must give us good reasons for withdrawing. The fact that the Bill is meeting opposition from certain sectors is not a good enough reason because those areas, which are being contested can be amended or withdrawn before this House, but we cannot withhold the basic principle behind the Bill.  

I will give you another reason, Madam Speaker.  Right now, the Constitutional Court has held that a certain section of our Divorce Act is defective, and, therefore, it is not possible for certain people to get divorces in this country. What are you going to do with it?  Are you going to continue with that lacuna? Are we going to have no divorces, because this Bill is trying to introduce certain areas for divorce? Are you going to have no divorces?  

Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer, I am a lawyer, the principle is accepted that certain clauses of the Bill are not acceptable even to me, but I will stand up and oppose them on the Floor. If I am supported by my colleagues, they will be dropped. But is that good enough? Because Ben Wacha opposes clause 6, is it good enough for hon. Mwesigye to withdraw the Bill? I think there is something funny about the whole process. I think something funny is happening and this House should not be used as a scapegoat for doing funny things.

2.54
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since this Bill was read here, a lot of very positive signals have been sent to the whole nation about the seriousness of this Government to attend to the Domestic Relations Bill which has been pending for the last 41 years, and we were just about to congratulate the Government for taking this big step which the people of Uganda have been waiting for. So, I think today it is a little unfortunate that Government is trying to withdraw what is actually their Bill. This has happened before in the recent past. I think in 2001, this Bill came very close and again it was put on the shelve. 

One thing about the Bill, which other speakers have talked about, is that right at the introduction, at the preamble of the Bill, the Bill is saying, it is recognizing all marriages in this country, the Christian marriage, Mohammedan, Hindu, customary and several marriages. So the Bill does not attack any form of marriage; in fact it recognizes those marriages. We wonder what is the problem with the Bill? The Bill is actually trying to emphasize that each type of marriage is recognized. 

Secondly, the Bill is trying to put into one law all these provisions about marriage. So where is the problem? We have already enacted those laws relating to marriage.  

Again, like some people have said, there is no Bill which is 100 percent supported by everybody. There have been petitions against the Bill, yes, but there have also been petitions pro the Bill. Madam Speaker, you are aware that even two weeks ago, we received a petition pro the Bill by a very large cross section of people not just women in this country demonstrating the fact that this Bill is not just about women like some people would like us to believe, it is about families. There have been petitions pro the Bill, so those petitions, which are against the Bill, surely, we have the capacity to sieve out and panel-beat the Bill here and do a good job.

Madam Speaker, the women and especially this nation, tends to take a lot of credit about what a very gender sensitive Constitution we have. But when you look through the years since the Constitution was promulgated, one thing, which is very clear, is the fact that we are just praising ourselves basing on the Constitution; we do not have enabling laws to activate the provisions of the Constitution. Ugandans are busy romanticizing on a very sensitive Constitution; when are we going to start putting the laws in place which activate those very gender sensitive provisions of the Constitution?  

We thought this Government, especially through this 7th Parliament would at least make a step. In this Parliament we carried over so many other provisions, which were in the White Paper like the Equal Opportunities Commission and Government listened, at least we are very hopeful that the Equal Opportunities Commission will come into place. This is another supportive Bill; why can’t we have this Bill debated now? What will we explain to Ugandans if we do not put this law in place?

So, Madam Speaker, I think Government should reconsider; let us debate the Bill; let us panel beat it. Not all of us agree with all the provisions in the Bill, I, for one think that we should panel beat the clause on cohabitation, for example. I do not fully agree with it, I think it should be panel beaten. We have the capacity to panel beat this Bill and pass it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.59
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the views expressed by the majority of Members here that the Bill should be debated (Applause). When the Minister was submitting, he quoted two organisations, the Muslims in Uganda and Uganda Joint Christian Council. 

After the demonstration of the Moslems in Kampala, the Uganda Law Review Commission organized a two-days workshop for Members of Parliament at Entebbe. Some of us who were still doubting Tomases attended and were convinced that the Bill had been well reviewed especially by women in this country and it was acceptable by even Moslems who had demonstrated two or three days before and attended this workshop in Entebbe. I remember the Secretary General of the Uganda Moslems Supreme Council by the name of Dr Kasenene attended – (Interjection) – Please give the information –(Interruption)

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to inform my colleague holding the Floor and the entire nation that the Moslems of Uganda stand by the document which was presented to you, Madam Speaker, and no consultation had ever been made to the Moslem leadership of Uganda, and we have one leadership of Uganda and this is Uganda Moslem Supreme Council. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we still stand by the document we presented to you and if there is any change, as chairman of Moslem Parliamentary Caucus, I will let this House and the entire nation know about it.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, I think the information he is giving me could also be given to the House when the Bill is being debated on the Floor of this House. I do not see anything wrong with that.  

Madam Speaker, at the end of that workshop, on Saturday evening, the Uganda Law Review Commission promised to hold another workshop on the following Monday, but I do not know whether that took place.  But they promised to hold a follow-up meeting with the Moslem Community despite the fact that the Moslems who represented the Moslem sector were at that workshop.  

So, I would like the Minister to tell this House whether the Uganda Law Review Commission has not given the feelings of the people who attended that workshop at Entebbe, because the way the Minister talked, he left it in abeyance; he did not give us a week or two weeks when this House would hear the views of Government after receiving the report from the Uganda Law Review Commission.

Madam Speaker, hon. Kityo’s observation should also not be taken lightly; the situation we are entering is a bit politically explosive. But if this Bill was to be debated now, maybe within a month we would go through it and by the time we go for elections we shall have forgotten about the Bill. Life is dynamic, we shall not only be thinking about Domestic Relations Bill, so we should debate this Bill.

From hon. Ben Wacha’s submission, the Minister did not say he was withdrawing the Bill, I did not hear him say that. He said they wanted to get input of the Uganda Law Review Commission on the complaints raised by these two bodies. So, I think the Bill is not withdrawn, but we would like to know when the Government will react on this reactions by the Uganda Moslem Council and Uganda Joint Christian Council.
Lastly, UWOPA also organized a workshop, which I attended in the gardens of Parliament. There was a consultant in the names of hon. Ruhindi who really deliberated this Bill very convincingly.  So, to me I do not see any reasons why this Bill cannot be debated, I do not see, I have to be convinced – (Interruption)

MR ATUBO: The clarification I am seeking is; what words did the Minister use? This has been within the Rules of Procedure, within our known law, is it withdrawing, is it shelving, is it taking for further consultations? Before you proceed, I would really like the Minister to put it in very clear words what has he asked the House to do, because we are likely to vote on it. What are we going to vote on? I would like to be clarified what does the Minister want us to do within the rules? He can quote even the necessary rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, can you restate what you want us to do?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker if the Member had been here on time, he would have understood the prayer that I made before this House. I did say that following petitions from different, very important, sections of our society - the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council, the Uganda Joint Christian Council - those are very serious sections of our society whose views we cannot ignore. So, I informed the House that Government has asked the Uganda Law Reform Commission to consult these groups and indeed, the Uganda Law Reform Commission did indicate to me that they were carrying out consultations. As soon as these consultations are complete, Government will come back to this House and proceed with the motion.

As hon. Tibarimbasa did clarify, I have not asked this House to allow me to withdraw the Bill. I am only requesting, that we stand over the debate, and that is normal in any proceedings of the House, and go ahead with consultations. We will definitely come back and brief the House on the status of these consultations.

MR ATUBO: Having listened carefully to the minister, honestly Madam Speaker, to me this is purely an administrative matter. I have a lot of respect for the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, Hon Adolf Mwesige. I would have thought that before this matter was put on the Order Paper for second reading, it was just a matter of the minister walking to the Speaker’s office and saying, this matter should not be put on the Order Paper for second reading because of this and the other. You would have stayed over it; in fact it would have been put on notice of business to follow. I do not know under what rules the minister is even speaking now. 

This House is the highest institution in law making, and we have to go by procedure. If it is withdraw, it should be withdraw, if it is standing over, then the minister should tell us under what rules we are standing over. If there is need for more consultation, the minister did not have to come to this House. 

So I do not know why the minister is here to waste our time, we have a lot of work to do. My motion on life and property of the people of the North has been here for two months and now the minister is talking about domestic relations like foreign relations. So I do not understand, Madam Speaker, really guide us. What are we doing in this House, to be asked to stand over a Bill in the second reading, under what rules, I do not know!

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, our rule 104(1) states as follows: “Subject to this rule the Vice President, minister or other Member in charge of the Bill shall move that the Bill be now read a second time and may speak to the motion.  
(3) A debate shall then ensue on the merits and principles of the Bill on the basis of the explanatory memorandum and the report from the committee.”  

Madam Speaker, what the minister is asking us to do has no basis at this stage. We are going to debate on the basic principles of the Bill. If his consultations merit some amendments on certain clauses of the Bill, it will come during the committee stage of the Bill. Madam Speaker, we can proceed with the debate for as long as possible if the minister is still having consultations. If we feel that we have had enough debate, we can put off the Committee Stage as we wait for the amendments, which he is going to put before the Committee on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.  

Madam Speaker, he cannot ask us to stay debate on the merits and principles of the Bill because he is making consultations. His consultations will not affect the merits and principles of the Domestic Relations Bill; it will affect certain clauses of the Bill and we have not reached a level of debating clauses.  

MR TIBARIMBASA: In conclusion I would to agree with the submission by hon. Omara Atubo from Otuke County and also with the guidance given by hon. Ben Wacha. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the government position regarding the Domestic Relations Bill. But before I proceed, Madam Speaker, allow me to refer to a very distinguished son of East Africa, Prof. Mazurui.  During the days of socialism, Prof. Mazurui made reference to a politician in an East African country who was preaching socialism and was leading what he thought was a band of followers. He went on matching, “boom-boom” but when he looked behind there were no followers. I think, because the Movement is a listening government, it is virtually important that the Movement listens to the people.  

The ideological foundation of the Movement is the people, and if the minister has requested that he listens and consults, it is only fair and proper that we allow him to do that.  I personally, do not have a problem with the Bill; I am enjoying a happily monogamous marriage. All my properties are in my wife’s names; so I do not have a problem.  But as a Movement Government, which is a listening government, we have our foundations, and in democracy we must listen to the people. I thank you.

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do support the position of the government and of course, I must refer to rule 17(3). In effect, hon. Adolf is requesting, by leave of the Speaker, the order of business set out on the Order Paper may be altered on any particular day. That is the essence of what he is asking. I would like to inform the honourable members that we are negotiating with significant members of our society and we are moving very well, and many of them are not Members of this Parliament. 
That is why we would like to move properly with them outside the microphones and we shall have a sustainable law; that is really the issue.  

The law must be sustainable, our prisons are full, when you make a law which is unacceptable to so many people we may have to imprison so many and that is going to affect the stability of this country. Uganda has fought many religious wars. We must be mindful of our history; we must learn from our history. So it is important to negotiate with our friends, and not only Moslems; there are many other groups, so that we come here when we have consensus.  
You will realize –(Interruptions)

MR ATUBO: Mr Prime Minister, thank you for giving way. I am personally very conscious of the views of the Moslem community and others who have talked about the Domestic Relations Bill. But, Mr Prime Minister, all I am saying, and I think others are sharing this view, is that the bill is the baby of the government. It is you who moves the first and second reading. Before you put this on the Order Paper under Rule 73 you are now saying the Speaker can alter? Surely, do you know that we are going to spend another one hour on this administrative matter? 

All some of us are saying is that, do you have to come to the House before you put this matter on the agenda? Do you have to come to the House before you go for further consultation? The effect of what you and the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs are saying is tantamount to some form of propaganda in the House here. That, you know, the Bill was coming before the House, we have decided to “withdraw” it.  This is what you are doing. “We have decided to ‘withdraw’ it for consultation and the House has agreed”. 

So I want to warn Members that do not be taken for a ride. The government did not need to come to this House if they were going for further consultations on this Bill. All they needed to do was, with the leave of the Speaker, even outside this House to say, do not put this on the Order Paper until further notice. But when they now come to Parliament and say, “You see, we are shelving this” they want publicity and some public consumption and then they will go and sit on the Bill indefinitely. That is what you are doing. 
So, I want to inform you, Mr Prime Minister, that you do not need our permission to have this bill put aside for as long as you want and for further consultation. That is all.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Sometimes when some items are on the Order Paper, it is courteous to the Speaker for us to come here and ask for alteration. The matter is contextual; that is why we did it that way.  Because even the Speaker herself is under pressure, so we had to protect our good Speaker and she protects us.  

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is that this we had this Bill in the 6th Parliament, and foreign countries even commented that they would close the tap if we did not discuss this bill that time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was here in the 6th Parliament; this bill was given first reading in 2003. Do not confuse this House.

MR KITYO: Okay. I have taken your information and ruling. But the information I wanted to give to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is that it was not easy just to remove this Bill from the Order Paper. There had to be some way of discussion –(Interruptions)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for hon. Kityo not to withdraw the wrong information he had given to this House when you corrected him, and he continues to talk?  Is he in order not to withdraw the statement first?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, withdraw that statement.

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, I honourably withdraw the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Finally, honourable members, I appeal to you. We are negotiating with significant religious and other groups; give us a chance. We are not going to kill this bill, we cannot kill it, because it is a vital bill. I thank you.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, this Bill has actually been on the Order Paper for the last two months and for you to just disappear without explanation is a problem.  So, Leader of Government Business, you are saying is that you want to adjourn debate, can you give me a specific date because this open dated business, I am not going to accept? I want a date, which will become a government assurance and it must be before July.  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, this Bill has been on and off Table for a long time. A lot of people have made statements about certain clauses of this Bill; a lot of people are against specific clauses of the Bill. There are areas where nobody is complaining about. Madam Speaker, the areas, which are in contention with specific people who have already made contributions to this House in form of petitions. I do not think you need to give them one month in order to go and re-state what they have already stated.   Madam Speaker, I would suggest you give two weeks so that we come back and tell us exactly what they do not want in the bill.

MR KAKOOZA: Hon. Deputy Speaker, as we are in Parliament here, we must consider a lot of things.  Right now we have time constraint, we have a budget, which is coming in place, I expect Parliament to be prorogued any time. Members of Parliament sitting here have constituencies’ problems, I do not see why we don’t plan for the business we are going to do here so that we move harmoniously. Because if we do not plan properly, the whole thing now we are talking about is fidgeting the time we have. –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Kakooza in his submission seems to imply that this Parliament under your able chairmanship is disorganised. We have sat several times in the Business Committee as chairpersons of the various committees, Madam Speaker, and in your absence, and made a timetable for this Parliament, among the issues that were supposed to be given priority was the Domestic Relations Bill. Madam Speaker, is my colleague from Kabula in order to say that we should move in an organised manner as if we are disorganised?  


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a Business Committee in this Parliament where we sit and organize ourselves; at no time have we been disorganised. Hon. Kakooza, when I am in charge we are not disorganised. I know that we shall have a brief recess, but while we are on recess you can use that time to consult –(Interjections)- one month, no more.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, I am really interested in this Bill; one reason, I am contemplating divorcing my wife. 

Madam Speaker, did hon. Matembe and hon. Byamukama –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Dr Kibirige Sebunya in order to bring his personal issues on the Floor of this House when he is indirectly de-campaigning the presentation of the Domestic Relations Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Kibirige Sebunya, we do not know about your business with your wife; we cannot debate it here.

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I am really interested in this Bill, and with all due respect, did I hear hon. Matembe and hon. Byamukama Dora say that this Bill has got its genesis some 41 years ago, and this society has not run aground without it, so that it will seem to me that we could even wait for another three months or more? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister of State for Agriculture, Dr Kibirige Sebunya, in order to raise an issue, which is clearly laid out in the memorandum, and yet he as part of Cabinet must have been aware that when you look at the Domestic Relations Bill Memorandum you will find that studies were carried out and that they include the Kalema Report of 1965 as well as other issues that his Domestic Relations Bill are supposed to address? 

Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to say that nothing has happened in the last 41 years and yet he is very much aware that we have a 1995 Constitution? 
He should also be aware that Uganda has signed international conventions such as the Convention on elimination of all forms of discrimination against women; and that we have new phenomena such as HIV/AIDS, which need to be addressed; and that culture is dynamic and therefore this law, which seeks to reform the marriage, separation and divorce law would in effect be addressing these issues. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Kibirige Sebunya is totally party to that Bill from the Memorandum up to the end of it. So, you are deemed to know the contents of that Bill, and you are estoped from coming here to deny that for the last 41 years there has been need for reform. Secondly, two weeks ago you were here vigorously advocating for the rights of the animals and their protection, how do you rate the human beings vis-à-vis the animals?  You were very vigorous here on the dispatch box.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, we shall try very hard to complete our negotiations within one month. May I also take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to advise hon. Matembe to use parliamentary language. Such words as “shame” should be used outside; those are terrible words. May the Almighty bless her and teach her manners?

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I stood up and talked and used all the parliamentary and diplomatic language I could get, except that I was expressing my anger for the injustice that has been going on.  Now, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in order to single me out for using a language, which I never used at all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe was evaluating all of us. In fact she said “shame on us” including all herself, so it is parliamentary; it is okay.

MR WACHA: As chairperson of the Rules and Privileges Committee and as a person who has studied parliamentary procedure world over, I want to inform this House that the word “shame” when used in Parliament is parliamentary language.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I have said so. Hon. Prime Minister, the date today is 16th May 2005, so on the 16th of June 2005 the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will return here and we proceed with the business.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification over what this one exactly implies on a Member of Parliament like me in my constituency when you give this adjournment on the Domestic Relations Bill. I have had the opportunity to go and consult extensively, now does it mean that I go back to my constituency to consult again? And Madam Speaker, I am asking this because you know very well how contentious it is. As the Chairperson of the Commission definitely you know that if Government brings in new issues, it will necessitate us to go back to our constituencies to consult. 

I want also to mention that for the last six or seven years many of us have been urged to have this Bill enacted. So, I want to find out whether you are going to facilitate us as you are giving leave to the Executive to go and consult. Are we going to be facilitated again as Members of Parliament to go back to our respective constituencies to be able to get the new views, which will pertain to what the Executive will have come up with? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I do not know whether you prefer complete to withdrawal of the Bill without even a date of coming back here? We have said we have given the Government one month; they are the ones who want to consult. If you have completed your consultation, keep your notes, and the areas are actually well documented. No, this is a government assurance and I shall be on the Prime Minister’s back if he does not come back on the 16th. It will be on the Order Paper that day.  

MRS MUSUMBA: I am seeking clarification, on the timetable. To me the 16th of June looks like the budget day –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it will not be.

MRS MUSUMBA: Even if it were not, I am suspicious that it will be another session, the last session of the Seventh Parliament. Mindful of that, I want to quickly request that this be one of the Bills to be saved for purposes of achieving its quick disposal in the next session. What I see in this generation of trickery is that it will fall by the way side in the next session and it will not be presented again. Discussing it will be equal to recalling it. So, I would like to plead with you, Madam Speaker, that during that time when we are prorogued you take the Chair and remind this House that it is saved. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that one, honorable members, I have been very prudent. Each time we prorogue I have saved all the pending business. You can rely on me on that please. And Prime Minister, that is a government assurance; we shall be on your case on the 16th of June. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time. 

You will recall that Government had earlier introduced in this House the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill of 2005. As you will remember, for reasons, which are already in the Hansard, Government decided to withdraw that Bill from the House and instead introduced two shorter Bills combining the provisions provided for in the original Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill. 

The Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill 2005, which we are going to debate today, is therefore the first of the two Bills into which the original Bill had been divided. This new Bill deals with amendments to the Constitution, which are covered by the requirements of Article 260 of the Constitution. For the proposed amendments to become part of the Constitution, they must be passed by this Parliament with at lest two-thirds majority of the Members of Parliament at the Second and Third Readings. They must also be ratified by district councils. The Bill takes into account the following principles: 
The report and recommendations of the Constitutional Review Commission, which submitted its report to Government on 10th December 2003, and the Government White Paper on that report.

The Bill also takes into account the proposal for amendment of the Constitution, which were submitted to the Constitutional Review Commission in September 2003. 

It also takes into account the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Government White Paper on the Constitutional Review Commission Report of 20th December 2004.

The Bill seeks to replace Article 5(2) of the Constitution, which at present deals with districts of Uganda. The effect of the proposed amendment is to recognise that there will be regional governments formed by districts, which agree to form regions as provided in the amendments to Article 178, and the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, and also to provide for districts as reflected in the First Schedule to the Constitution.  

The Bill further recognises the special place of Kampala, which is located in Buganda, as the capital city of Uganda.

The Bill seeks to amend clause 1 of Article 176 of the Constitution to subject that Article to the provisions of Article 178 of the Constitution as amended by the Bill to provide for the formation of regional governments. 

As honorable members are aware, Article 176(1) of the Constitution at present provides that the system of local government in Uganda shall be based on the district as a unit under which there shall be established such lower local governments and administrative units as Parliament shall by law provide. 

The existing Article 178 of the Constitution had been enacted in order to meet the demands of various communities to be allowed to co-operate by way of charter, as one entity, to promote culture and development in the areas specified in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution. 

It was realised over the years, however, that various communities and districts did not take up the charter arrangement. 
Government has, therefore, consulted with representatives of tradition, and cultural leaders, and relevant communities on the matter of the regional tier for the last two years. Thus the amendments now proposed in Article 178 represent the consensus reached as a result of these consultations between government and traditional institutions.

The new Article 178 introduced by clause 4 of the Bill will, in brief, deal with the following matters:
Two or more districts might form a regional government and the manner of achieving this goal, that is, by a resolution of each district council supported by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the council. 

In the Bill, the districts of Buganda are deemed to have agreed to form the regional government. This spirit is reflected in the current Article 178 of the Constitution. 

The special municipality known as “Mengo Municipality” is established in Buganda the boundaries of which will be determined by an Act of Parliament. 

The districts forming a regional government will form a regional assembly, which as we propose in the Bill, will be the highest political authority within the region and which shall have the political legislative executive, administrative and cultural functions in the region. 

The regional assembly, it is proposed, may make laws, which shall have a force of law in the region but which have to conform to the Constitution and Acts of Parliament. 

The composition and functions of the regional governments and the regional assemblies, including the role of the traditional and cultural leaders in relation to those bodies, are also provided for in the proposed Fifth Schedule to the Constitution. 

The new Fifth Schedule will also provide for the manner of voting in the regional assembly and the manner of financing regional governments. 

The funding of regional governments is to be done in accordance with the formula, which is proposed in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
The Bill also provides for the takeover by the President of the administration of a regional government in a similar manner to that in which the President might take over the executive and legislative powers of a district under Article 202 of the Constitution.

The Bill also seeks to amend Article 189 on the functions of government district councils, in order to recognise the new role of regional governments. A clause has been inserted in Article 189 to achieve that purpose. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill also provides the opportunity to replace the First Schedule, which incorporates all the districts so far created since the Constitution was promulgated on the 8th of October 1995. 

The First Schedule is to be read together with Article 5(2) of the Constitution as amended by the Bill.

The Bill seeks, in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, to insert new functions and services of the central government, namely development and upgrading of national roads, and regional roads will be a function of the regional government. 

It further adds the management of forests and game reserves to the functions of the central government under item 24 of the Sixth Schedule. This is because it is felt that the central government has better financial and manpower resources to manage forests and game reserves than the districts or regional governments.

All the Articles that are being amended by this Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, as I have said, will require the ratification of district councils and are mentioned in Article 262 of the Constitution as entrenched, namely Article 5(2), Article 176(1), Article 178 and Article 189. 

Since the First Schedule is required to be read together with Article 5(2), the Fifth Schedule is to be read together with Article 178 and the Sixth Schedule is to be read together with Article 189, they will be considered to be similarly entrenched and to require ratification by district councils under Article 260 of the Constitution.

The Referendum and other Provisions Act, 2005, section 20, clearly provides for the procedure for obtaining ratification by district councils of the Bill requiring such ratification under Article 260 of the Constitution. Our expectation is that as soon as this Bill is adopted by two-thirds majority at the Second and Third Reading, the district councils of Uganda will also have to be mobilized to ratify the Bill, which will have been passed by this House.

I beg to move, therefore, that the Constitution (Amendment No. 2 Bill) of 2005 be read for the second time. I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in line with Article 260(1) of the Constitution, which reads; “A Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution, other than those referred to in Articles 259 and 260 of this Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is supported at the second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.” I want you to guide this House on when the two thirds of the Second Reading would be considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not yet; after the debate. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, after the debate my understanding is that we will already be at the third reading, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it will be after the debate. We exchange ideas, then they will move formally and we take the vote -(Interjection)- this is not the procedure. Do not introduce new, small things in the way we work. You will do it after the debate.

3.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Rt hon. Speaker, honourable members, I have the pleasure to present to you the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005. 

This report was published on 21 April 2005 and distributed, and I am sure honourable members have kept their reports and read them. 
The committee considered the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill of 2005 in accordance with rule 124 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The object of the Bill has been properly articulated by the honourable minister and is also contained in the published Bill. I will not go on to repeat that.

The committee examined the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill and came to the conclusion that the provisions of this Bill are very similar to those of the Constitution (Amendment No. 1) Bill, 2005 hereafter called Bill No.1, on which the committee had carried out extensive consultation, and the provisions of rule 103(6) of our Rules of Procedure. Particularly, clause 1 of the Bill on the amendment of Article 5 of the Constitution, is similar to clause 6 of Bill No. 1, which was withdrawn.

Clause 3 of the Amendment Bill, on the amendment of Article 176, is very similar to clause 76 of the Bill, which was withdrawn. 

Clause 4 on the amendment of Article 178 is similar to clause 177 of the Bill that was withdrawn. 

Clause 5 on the amendment of Article 189 is similar to clause 80 of the Bill that was withdrawn. 

Clause 6 on the replacement of the First Schedule of the Constitution is similar to clause 113 of the withdrawn Bill.

Clause 7 on the replacement of the Sixth Schedule, Madam Speaker, is similar to clause 117 of the Bill that was withdrawn. 

Clause 8 on the replacement of the First Schedule of the Constitution is similar to clause 118 of the Bill that was withdrawn.

Madam Speaker, sub-rule (6) of rule 103 of our Rules of Procedure mandates the committee to examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary, and report to the House within two months from the date the Bill is referred to the committee. 

The committee, therefore, decided that since there was no new matter that has been introduced by the Bill, there would be no serious need to call fresh hearings on the matters already exhaustively discussed with the public except where an express wish is made by any person or groups of persons to make presentations on the Bill. 

The committee, therefore, in addition to the views received in the public hearings on the Bill, adopted the submissions previously received on the matters in this Bill.

The committee discussed the Bill with representatives of Toro Kingdom. The committee had also discussed the Constitution (Amendment No. 1) Bill and received written memoranda from many people and organizations, and will feel greatly indebted to them. The following made representations before the committee, and you have a list of 24 organizations and individuals who appeared before the committee and made representations. The list is on page 3. 

The observations are categorized into two. The first page deals with the Bill amending several provisions of the Constitution. The Committee on Rules and Privileges proposed to the House to amend the rules to introduce a two-thirds vote at the committee stage on constitution amendment. The House rejected this proposal and the rules were not amended as proposed. The committee does not intend to open debate on this issue but for the record, this issue was substantially dealt with by the committee when it considered Bill No. 1. We found it necessary to state for the record and make some recommendations on the way forward. The Bill proposes to amend four Articles: Article 5, 176, 178 and 189, and three Schedules to the Constitution. 

Articles 259, 260 and 261 all clearly provide for a two-thirds vote at the Second Reading, on the principles of the amendment, and Third Reading, on the amendment Bill as adopted at the Committee Stage. 

If a Bill is presented to amend one Article of the Constitution, then by subjecting that Bill to a two-thirds vote at the two stages, what you would have essentially done is to subject that amendment to the stipulated vote. So, the amendment of that Article would have taken a two-thirds vote. 

The Bill presents four Articles and three Schedules of the Constitution for amendment. The case is different from the above. In this case the amendment of a particular Article would not have been subjected to a two-thirds vote at any stage in its own right. 

The proposed amendments to Articles 5, 176, 178 and 189 relate to a proposal to establish regional governance and all the proposed amendments are intended to achieve this object. Therefore, one vote by a district councilor in the ratification of the Bill would be a clear vote for or against the creation of regional governments.

Observations on regional governments:
The Bill proposes to create regional governments to partially address various complaints from several quarters to the effect that interests of certain communities have not been adequately addressed, such as federo and the status and functions of traditional and cultural leaders. The committee observed that the Bill is in good spirit as it is very important for our country to move towards facilitating harmony and mutual co-existence. This, as the Bill proposes, can be done through a conscientious accommodation of both specific and general aspirations of the people of Uganda. 

This means all outstanding issues that hurt the unity of Uganda must have occasion to be dealt with conclusively. Where this is not possible in one transaction, they should be dealt with progressively and consistently. While our focus must be forward, our decisions and actions must have the effect of correcting historical difficulties and voiding them for the future. This, in the opinion of the committee, would give all Ugandans a sense of belonging and a sense of ownership. We think our common humanity is more important and if we could just live up to that potential, Uganda would be a better place where tolerance and mutual respect is the order of the day.

So, our actions and decisions as a Parliament have to be sensitive to the fact that there are objective reasons for people to be concerned, for people to feel left out. As a country we have benefits, we also have burdens and as a Parliament we must be committed to evolving, recognising and adopting systems that will spread our benefits, shrink our burdens and close the gaps. The Bill has come in good time. 
There are strong issues raised concerning deeming of the districts of Buganda as a regional government. We shall equally have occasion to deal with this matter in the same spirit focusing on the bigger picture. The other concerns are that two districts are too few to form a region and that making this optional would leave governance in a state of uncertainty and instability.

Madam Speaker, in the event of marginalisation of a particular community or a district in a region, there should be a clear provision, which is an improvement of the existing Article 178(4). This time the courts of law must be involved. The provisions of paragraphs 12 on the recognition of cultural diversity and equitable distribution of the resources, and that of paragraph 13, do not seem to resolve the matter originally provided for in Article 178(4). Particularly, paragraph 13(1)(a) does not make provision for how the evidence can be evaluated and by which organ. 

The committee observed that there is no commencement period provided for the implementation of regional governments, and this does not provide a clear guide on what should be done and by what time. 

The committee observed that it is not necessary to isolate Mengo Municipality by making it the only municipality created in the Constitution. It is necessary to create Mengo Municipality under the existing laws for the establishment of other municipalities. 

The committee had representations from the hon. Moses Kizige, making a strong case for the deeming of districts of Busoga, and from hon. Nobert Mao on the deeming of districts of Acholi. The committee received similar proposals for the deeming of districts of Toro from Toro kingdom. The committee had occasion to examine these proposals in depth. 

Arising from these observations, the committee has proposed amendments to the Bill to effect the above observations.

Recommendations:
The committee recommends that while the House has decided that it is not necessary to amend the rules, it is important that the spirit of the Constitution is observed and administrative arrangements made to enable decisions to be reached by a two-thirds vote at the committee stage. 

On the four Articles: 5, 176, 178, and 189, since they relate to a proposal to establish regional governance and all the amendments of the four Articles are intended to achieve that object, one vote by a district councilor would be a clear vote on the Bill creating regional governments. The proposed amendments of the four Articles of the Constitution should be effected by one Bill as proposed. 

While the deeming of the districts of Buganda was already agreed to in 1995, and the committee finds no strong reasons for changing the status quo; the committee has found no compelling justification for accepting the proposals from hon. Moses Kizige on the deeming of districts of Busoga; from the hon. Nobert Mao on the deeming of districts of Acholi; and from the Toro Kingdom on deeming of districts of Toro. 

The proposals should, therefore, be dropped. The districts should be able to proceed by resolutions in future to create regional governments.

The committee recommends that a clear provision be made on the commencement period for the implementation of regional governments, and to provide a clear guide on what should be done and by what time. 

The establishment of Mengo Municipality should be done under the existing laws for the establishment of municipalities, and the Government should take immediate steps to establish Mengo Municipality. 

The court should be involved in the evaluation of the evidence provided by paragraph 13(1)(a) in the Fifth Schedule, before the President can take over a regional government under this paragraph. 

The committee recommends that the House do pass the proposed amendments to the Bill, which will cater for the concerns raised in the observations. (Applause). I thank you. 

Madam Speaker, I should inform the House that after the conclusion of the committee’s deliberations on the Bill and writing of the report, we received a letter from the Kingdom of Buganda, which made suggestions on the details of the Bill and the committee took a decision that it had come after the report was ready but would have opportunity to deal with it before the Committee Stage of the Bill. We will have time to consider that. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, this report was signed by more than a-third of the members of the committee. So, it meets the requirement for debate. Now you can debate it.

4.02
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion. As you know, there has been a lot of demand for federalism from the Kingdoms of Buganda, Toro, Bunyoro, Busoga and other areas and at one stage a number of people asked me to clarify federalism and I did circulate it in a document entitled, “What is federalism?”, to all Members of Parliament and to other groups. With your permission I would like to table a copy of the document. 

What are the advantages of a regional tier? (Interruption).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much the Rt hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I think we should begin from a correct note. In accordance with the report presented by hon. Oulanyah, the contents of the report address a regional tier, which is a semblance of approved, or improved, decentralization. Should the Rt hon. Prime Minister endeavor to define federalism? The federalism you are talking about is distanced from the contents of the regional tier report?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why do you not allow the Prime Minister to make his representation? He had hardly started; he had just said the word federalism. Let him –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I had known I would not have allowed him to make any clarification and I intend to resist clarifications as much as possible because I want these ideas to flow spontaneously. 

What are the advantages of a regional tier? First of all, it will have significant functions and services accompanied by money from the central government. The arrangements made here are entrenched. 

Let me read some of the functions and services, which would be performed by the regional governments: secondary education and tertiary institutions, except national universities and other national institutions; maintenance of regional roads; regional referral hospitals other than national referral hospitals and national medical institutions; coordination, monitoring and supervision of agriculture and forests other than the national parks and forests managed by the Government; culture, cultural and traditional lands; promotional of local languages, crafts and antiquities; water, sanitation; to levy such charges as subject to the approval of the central government; functions and services surrendered voluntarily by a district council or district councils; and so on and so forth. I wish to submit that these are significant powers surrendered by the center to the regions.

It was also agreed that the regions would not tax and some people have been making a lot of noise and saying that if they do not tax they can be undermined. However, let us remember that under the 1962 Constitution, Buganda enjoyed significant sources of revenue and they were guaranteed by the Constitution. The center would collect money for example from diesel and petrol and surrender it to the Kingdom of Buganda.  

There is no conflict between the districts and regional tier. Why? Because their functions and resources have been left intact, for example, primary education, primary healthcare, water and sanitation. So the districts whose powers have been enjoyed for some time will not find any cause to worry about the regional tier because their functions and resources have been left intact.  

The third point I would like to make is that it is applicable to any part of Uganda and, therefore, this arrangement creates parity of treatment among all parts of Uganda. Under the 1962 Constitution there was disparity of treatment between Buganda and other parts of Uganda because only Buganda enjoyed a federal status because it really enjoyed many full sources of revenue. But under this arrangement, all parts of Uganda can acquire the status of a region and, therefore, there is parity of treatment. It is thus marketable. 
You recall that when Obote abrogated the 1962 Constitution many areas, which would be lamenting, were happy because he was abolishing the special status of Buganda but now that kind of situation will not arise. 

I would like to make another point, namely that the role of traditional and cultural leaders is well articulated and catered for. Let me illustrate. The traditional leader will be the titular head of the regional government. As the titular head of a regional assembly, he will open, address and close sessions of the assembly. The titular head will enjoy the benefits, privileges and roles provided for in Article 246 of the Constitution and I think 15 percent of the membership of the regional tier is going to propose those members. So the role of traditional leaders is well articulated and that is extremely important.

The other very important matter is that most of the representatives constituting the regional tier, including the chairperson, shall be directly elected through universal adult suffrage. That means that they will be accountable to the people. So, that is a major advantage of the regional tier. 

I would like to submit that federalism is a process and this is where I would like hon. Lukyamuzi to listen carefully. It is a process. It is not achieved in one year; we have started our journey to durable federalism. I thank you.  

4.12
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion was on the Order Paper last week and we were almost going to debate it but it was removed –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was not removed; it has been on the Order Paper all these days.

MR MUTULUUZA: Obliged, Madam Speaker. The Legal Committee Chairperson has pointed out that the Katikkiro had some issues; he disagreed with the report of the committee and even the Bill itself. Is it now procedurally correct to debate the Bill, which was – it was suspended because of some issues that were not agreed upon –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who suspended the Bill? I did not suspend any Bill.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am saying this because I represent the people of Buganda and – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I think if something is to be amended, let us debate it when we go to the committee stage when he can input what he wants to.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, what I am concerned about is that after those issues, which were raised by Mengo were brought in, I expected the committee to again come up with a report pointing out the issues that were not –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can a committee sit perpetually and never finish? Is that really feasible?

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, even the chairperson said that they are waiting for –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said that some things arrived after they had completed their report; that is what he said. That was after they had compiled the report and even circulated it. Let us hear from the Chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus, maybe he has something to say.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, there was a letter from the Katikkiro but it had nothing new. There were some points, which had probably not been included, and I think the chairman of the committee was very clear that where it is necessary amendments should be brought on the Floor at the right time. That is the information I have to give.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, since my chairperson of the caucus has given us a go-ahead then I withdraw.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, in the presentation of the Prime Minister he raised the issue of the secondary schools being included under this tier system of governance yet in the Local Governments Act the secondary schools are supposed to be handled by the districts but this has not been operationalised. Is he aware that this – (Interjection)– I cannot quote the section but it is there. I have read it. Could he revise both Acts and see that so that it does not bring conflict in implementing the tier system when we pass it in the House?

4.18
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I was listening to the report. I want to seek clarification on the issue of deeming regional tiers. According to the report, Buganda has been given a go-ahead but other areas are supposed to initiate it through resolutions by district and sub-county councils. Ideally Buganda has been saved the cost of conducting those resolutions. How will these other areas, for example Sironko and Mbale, meet the cost of conducting sessions to arrive at the resolutions?  

Two, I want to seek clarification following what hon. Timbarimbasa has said. According to the Local Governments Act secondary education is decentralized but the Ministry of Education refused to operationalize that aspect. We have the National Education Service Commission, which is responsible for appointment and recruitment of teachers in secondary schools but for areas, which will not be under the regional tier, what will be role of the Education Service Commission? We are going to have a situation where secondary education is under the regions. Regional tier heads will be in position to appoint head teachers and discipline them, and yet these other areas outside it are left under the operation of the Ministry of Education.

Then, the Prime Minister said that when you create regional tiers you improve financial management. I do not remember exactly but when I was a student I read a paper written by the Prime Minister and in that paper he was arguing out that centralization of Buganda regional areas increased financial management. Has the position changed?

Madam Speaker, I want to ask, according to the Constitution, Article 183, the position of the district chairman is created and qualifications are set out –(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister would like to respond to that small matter you have raised.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The point, which was not grasped, is that when you have these regional arrangements they provide economies of scale and that is advantageous to the running of these systems. So, many of my positions, which I articulated, are still intact and you are one of the good students. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Hon. Wopuwa, I would love to ask you to disregard the Prime Minister’s explanation of economies of scale because these regional tiers will not operate as production units. They are more of service delivery units. If anything, there will be something close to duplication of services. I think the Prime Minister’s argument is not elaborate. He should just say he has changed his position of two years ago because of various political reasons. Thank you.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, Article 183 creates the position of district chairman and the qualifications for the district chairman are clearly spelt out. For the regional heads the qualifications do not seem to come out clearly; and what will be their titles? Will they be regional governors? I have a feeling that it needs to come out properly.

Lastly, I also want to suggest the following. Why does the government not just create provinces like the ones we had so that we do not go through a very long process? These people at the regional tier are going to have advantages; they are going to get free money yet those others who do not have will not get money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.20
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion under rule 46. I want to move this motion because the Katikkiro raised some complaints and said that what they agreed upon with the Government was not put in the Bill; 13 points were raised. I am surprised that the minister in charge of the Buganda caucus has come up to say there is nothing that has changed. They raised 13 issues, which were agreed upon between the Government and Mengo, and which were not put in the Bill. 
In fact when I saw the Order Paper I did not expect this thing to come up. So, I am seeking -(Interjections)- I would like to move under rule 46 which says that any member -(Interruption)

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Chairman of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus under which hon. Kagimu, the Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi falls and, therefore, pays allegiance to as a leader of the group, and the Members of Parliament representing Buganda here, last weekend met the Kabaka of Buganda. They stood here to clarify that the issues raised in the Katikkiro’s letter were issues that have been understood and resolved and where an amendment is required, it will be moved as we proceed. Is it in order for hon. Kagimu, who was probably away and he has just heard of what is happening, to move a motion that might disorganise us when we are on course? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there are matters that would not have been thoroughly discussed during the debate, you can move an amendment to them at the other stage; but let us proceed with our business.

MR KAGIMU: I wanted to move a motion that we adjourn this debate to tomorrow when we shall have cleared with Mengo -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I anticipated that and said that we should proceed. During the course of the debate you can bring it up. We do not have to stop debate because of that.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, my colleague says, “We better get clearance from Mengo”. What happens when I also want to get clearance from Hoima? There are issues, which the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom is also not yet clear about. So, what will happen?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, you abandon that motion. We are not going to proceed with one interest group saying, “I must go back to Kitgum first and get instructions”, and the other one saying, “I want to go to Kisoro for instructions”. Let us not work like that.

4.24
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I support the report in the view of the fact that in the constitution amendment process we have been able to identify so many areas, which we think were not adequately catered for in the 1995 constitution. And certainly I think it is a fact that this question of the regions was not adequately catered for. In the past four/five years we have been in this Parliament I have heard about the various sub-regions, I can mention the Acholi sub-region, the Teso sub-region, the West Nile sub-region, the Ankole sub-region, and of course the Buganda region, among others. 

What I am trying to bring forth is that in our Constitution we catered for districts and these districts were not able to comprehensively address some of the issues, which were later on preserved or referred to the sub-region arrangement. Which means that there is still a vacuum within our Constitution and within our legislation. 

I want to support this Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill because it is coming in to fill the above kind of vacuum. Definitely, Madam Speaker, you will appreciate that within these sub-region arrangements there are some fundamental factors or aspects, which are common for instance the aspect of language. When you analyse these sub-regions there is a very high level of similarity in language, and the aspect of culture. It is a fact that there is very high level of cultural similarity in these sub-regions, not to mention the promotion of the values within these various sub-regions.

I want to look at this from the sub-region aspect and not necessarily Buganda because I know when we make this amendment many sub-regions like Acholi, Teso and West Nile may wish to get this regional tier, which will help in the development of their respective sub-regions. It is prudent that at this level we recognise it because within the Constitution we are about to amend there was an arrangement of co-operation among districts.

MR ERESU: I have been listening very carefully to the submission given by my good friend from Kampala. From the Prime Minister’s presentation, when the regional tiers are created the titular heads will be there. I suppose for the Buganda region the titular head will be the Kabaka of Buganda. But I can see a problem, which I want the member of the Floor to clarify to me. With respect to Buganda itself, I see there is Kamuswaga in Kooki and also Isabaruli in Nakasongola. Who is now going to take precedence over the others in this titular headship if and when the regional tier is created?

MRS ZZIWA: We look at the issue of the traditional rulers in yet another chapter of the Constitution and I think it still remains a chapter in the Constitution until otherwise amended. The Prime Minister’s inference to the traditional rulers or to the titular heads did not really imply that it was mandatory that every region should have a titular head. 

I think in that respect we will not say that if a region does not have a titular head, it does not qualify to be a regional tier. For that matter, we could look at situations where a regional tier may have a titular head, and then they would be able to have the titular head installed or perhaps accorded the place, which that head deserves. But as of now we are looking at the administrative arrangement of this regional tier whose main objective and aim, I think, is the development of the region.

I was proceeding to the aspect of co-operation among districts, which as a matter of argument was presented that some districts may be small in the context of the budget and of resources and may not be able to undertake certain development aspects, which are required of them. Examples are maintaining certain road networks and certain bigger projects, which may include vocational training institutes, among others. This one was expected. They may co-operate to be able to put up such projects. But as it were, of course many of these districts either because of being in their infancy or because of the challenges of administration and management, have not co-operated on project development. Subsequently you find that many districts have continuously started to run back to the centre for a lot of support, including the salaries for the chairpersons, and I do not want to mention many other things. 
That really points out that there are a lot of untapped resources, which can otherwise be marshaled if for instance some of these smaller districts can co-operate and be brought together under another administrative arrangement. It is in that vein that this regional tier would help many of our regions or many of the districts, which would have sought stronger arrangement of development, to be able to develop. 

When it comes to roles stipulated within the Constitution, I think the functions are very well thought out and they are not duplicated. What would have been our fear is if for instance secondary education had been operationalised by the district. But what we have known or what we know already, despite the fact that it had been degazetted within the Constitution to the districts, is that it has not been operationalised. 

That means it remains the responsibility of the centre. So when the centre now goes ahead to degazette it to a regional arrangement, I think that is very much in order. And we know very well that some of our districts would appreciate if in terms of promoting language, culture and other issues related to education and employment they would nurture certain joint institutions together. 

It is for this that I support this Constitution amendment motion, and I urge my colleagues to support it not only for Buganda but also for the whole country, Uganda. It is for purposes of development; looking for development across regions; looking for development across the various sectors and most importantly, looking at people who may wish to co-operate, who have historically been co-operating and who have historically been known as one, to be accorded an opportunity to be one. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.34
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on this regional arrangement. Somewhere in the Constitution there is a provision that districts that may want to co-operate can form themselves into some kind of charter. What I want to understand is: that provision is in the Constitution and indeed let me state here that where I come from in Teso the districts, which were born out Soroti District, that is, Soroti, Katakwi and Kaberamaido, have actually formed themselves into a charter of co-operation as far back as the year 2,000 or was it 1999? The other district, Kumi, is in the process of joining that charter of co-operation.

The clarification I am seeking is, under the charter of co-operation, the districts come together for some of the reasons that have been outlined. The individual councils come together in periodic meetings, and their functions are stated too. When the Rt hon. Prime Minister was making his contribution, and I think this is what is in the provision that we are debating, the perceived regional tier envisages that there will be elections of members who form that body. It is another election, like upgrading the elections, which make up the local government at the district. I am wondering: since there is already a provision in the Constitution for this co-operation under charters, must we go the way of the regional tier? What are the merits and demerits? 

From what I know, the charter of co-operation like we have in Teso is functioning and if supported it will function very much. I would like us to examine that vis-à-vis this, so that we are clear. I am not saying that I do not support the regional tier, but I would like to be clarified on its merits and demerits. Thank you.

4.38
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I have been wondering and thinking quite a lot about the amendments, which are before us. I would like to submit in the following way:

When the 1995 Constitution was promulgated, one of those things that was praised to have been the greatest achievement in that Constitution was the creation of the local governments under decentralization. It was meant to emphasize the fact that for once people would be in charge of the governance in their local areas.  

Today we are talking about regional tier, before that we had also the arrangement that Buganda had already been deemed.  That is why precisely, Madam Speaker, I raised a question that if we created a regional tier and we have, for example, in Buganda already entities which are in themselves independent; we have Kamuswaga; we have Isabantu, we have Kabaka. Are there safeguards in this arrangement which will cater for any event of the disagreements of these traditional leaders so that the regional tier can still be held together?  

In the event of these leaders not seeing eye to eye, are there safeguards that we are providing for in the regional tier that can still hold the regional tier together?  There have been reasons why these people have been created.  Is the Constitution addressing some of these issues, which created these various heads?  Unless those questions are vividly answered, we may be creating a recipe for another problem. 

There has been talk of the regional tiers managing the secondary education in the various regions.  I would like to be clarified like this. What is it that they are going to manage?  Are they going to manage the curriculum?  In other words, is each region now going to have its own curriculum for secondary education?  Who will be the one in charge of examining in the different regions?  

Will the regional governments have their own National Examination Boards?  If it is Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB), which will continue to examine, how will UNEB be in charge of education for whose curriculum it is not responsible?  So, all these are very pertinent questions.  

Finally, I have read and I have been told that part of the negotiation that Mengo is having with Government, which according to me I see as wrong process I must honestly state, because Mengo submitted to the Constitutional Review Commission their report and that was the only body responsible for anything to do with the constitution amendment in this country.  It would have been, therefore, prudent for Mengo again if it found that the Commission had concluded, to come to the Committee of Parliament to put their position other than negotiate with Government.  

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Eresu has really laboured a lot to explain whether the regional tier will be responsible to set up their own examination boards.  Under the current arrangement, are the districts responsible for setting up their own examination – do they have examination boards?  Can you clarify on that?
MR ERESU: I would like to clarify that at the moment in practice the responsibility of the examinations and secondary schools is with the central government, much as theoretically it is said to be with the districts, that is why the central government under UNEB sets examinations.  

But now when you say you are giving it to the regional government and they take over the responsibility, it is a different matter.  In other words, what are they giving? What is it that is going to be given to the regional tiers?

I was continuing, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, I would like to submit as follows. That there is –(Interruption)

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Eresu for giving way.  What I would like to find out is whether during the 1960s when Buganda had federo status and many of the Kingdoms at the time had schools, were those schools sitting exams set by regional government? For instance, Teso College, Aloet, were they sitting exams set by Teso?  Were the exams being sat at Gayaza High School and King’s College Budo set by the Kingdom of Buganda? Nyakasura School, did the Kingdom of Toro set the exam?  I would like to be clarified by hon. Eresu on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is a government proposal. It is for you to explain to the backbenchers what is in that thing. Explain to them, they really want to know.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the support that you have given me in this matter.  The very reason that the frontbench has kept quiet and only begin telling us what they do not also seem to understand is to put us in more darkness, unless the Prime Minister is ready to explain now.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, your point is very well taken. I did not want to over-clarify especially when there is a sector Minister dealing with these matters. I thought he was taking down the notes.  But what I would say is that the centre will be in charge of policy.  When it is in charge of policy, it will make sure that things are well synchronized. So that was a very good question you raised, hon. Eresu, and you should not be worried by what you have raised.  It is a good point and that is how I would answer it.

MR ERESU: In conclusion, I want to say this. I have read and I have heard from many people that part of the negotiations being carried between Mengo and Government of Uganda, which in my opinion as I stated earlier is a wrong procedure, is that they would like to have a Parliament in Mengo or a Lukiiko in Mengo that has got total autonomy in making laws regarding Mengo and should not be subject to any other direction or authority.  I am being made to understand that if that kind of position is there at all, that when laws are made in that kind of Lukiiko –(Interruption)

MR ODONGO OTTO: I just wanted to give you specific information.  In the Government negotiation with Mengo, the drafting was such that, that all regional governments would have powers to make laws on issues within their jurisdiction. That is what was agreed on between the Government team and Mengo.  But Mengo wrote in their letter that, that is not what they agreed on, that they should add that their laws shall not be subject to the National Parliament; that is the position in print from the latest letter from Mengo.

MR ERESU: May I request, therefore, those who have documents to the effect of this negotiations to avail it to Members of Parliament for closer scrutiny so that we can together pronounce ourselves from an informed position?  But can I state this, that in the event of that kind of negotiation, if this parliament goes through we are heading and we are laying a recipe for problems for this country and I shudder; I will not be party to it.  

4.48
MR KAGIMU KIWANUKA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support the motion for the creation of the regional tire.  First of all, I am very grateful to the Government and the President for the effort they took to have talks with Mengo.  This is very serious and I am very grateful that the Government and the Mengo agreed. All the problems that this country is facing is because Mengo failed to agree with the Government in 1961.  Since that time –(Interruption) 
MR WOPUWA: The Government of Uganda in 1962 –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I am just giving him information that following the 1962 Constitution, Buganda and Government agreed. The Constitution was made to say that if you are going to change anything to do with Buganda you need two-thirds of Parliament and two thirds of the Lukiiko.  So, it is not true to say they never agreed; they agreed.

MR KAGIMU: Let me inform him because this is coming from the horse’s mouth.  In 1961 –(Interjections)- no, no, these people are misinformed. Let me inform them first.  What happened is that the DP Government at that time failed to agree with Mengo and Mengo went on to support a wrong party, which brought crisis to this country. 

So, what I mean is that if the DP Government had agreed with Mengo, UPC would not have come and the suffering we have gone through would not have come to this point. I am saying –(Interruption). 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kagimu. Hon. Kagimu has said that the problem that the country is undergoing is because of the disagreement with Mengo.  I would like to know whether all the problems that we have now is as a result of that disagreement or he is talking about a specific problem which is tantamount, or is as a result of disagreement of Government and Mengo.

MR KAGIMU: No, what I mean is that Mengo failed to agree with the DP Government. At that time Mengo was annoyed and it supported a wrong party - UPC. It supported a wrong party and, of course, it is an open secret that all the problems we are having now is as result of UPC –(Interruption).

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am quite aware that majority of the current members of the NRMO have their roots in UPC –(Interjections)- yes, I said majority and I am correct.  You can see my good professor has not opposed me and also quite a number of the Buganda then supported UPC.  

Now, is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the honorable member to talk about UPC then as a wrong party when it lead the country and it commanded the majority and ruled this country for a long time with the majority of the people of this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I think let us not go into the past and start castigating one another. At that time, there was an election and the UPC Government won so it was a government. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, honorable Kagimu, for giving way. I would like to inform honorable Kagimu that he should know the past. In accordance with the London conference of 1961 where all political parties were, the DP party refused to support Mengo’s federo. It is only UPC, which came forward to support federo. Noting that at that time political parties were new any political party could have made a mistake.  So, Buganda did not owe a living to any single political party. It had to support the party that supported its cause. So what is wrong with that?

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much.  When somebody puts –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members!

MR KAGIMU: UPC supported Mengo in 1961; it did not support it genuinely because it had a hidden agenda. It wanted to destroy it. DP would not have done that, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, that one you know. I do not want to go into the details, but the rest is history. UPC had a hidden agenda to destroy Mengo. When DP was talking to Mengo it said, “Let us agree on federo, maybe what you are asking for is too much”, and that is what annoyed Mengo.  

Then Obote said, “No, for me I will give you everything.” He knew that those things would not work and in fact he is even saying it now from Zambia. He said, “I knew what Kiwanuka was asking for would not go through but for me I did it for my intrigues”. He said it in The Monitor newspaper. What are you talking about, Hon. Lukyamuzi; don’t you read newspapers? (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the motion.
MR KAGIMU: So, what I am saying is that Government did a very wise thing to talk to Mengo because if the Government does not move well with Mengo it may cause problems for this country again. 

So, I appeal to the Government to continue moving in talks with Mengo so that they are not at loggerheads. For example, Mengo may get annoyed and de-campaign the Government and we get problems.  But if they are moving together, they are on a right track.  

So, I appeal to my brother, especially honorable Odonga Otto, when they were complaining about Mengo- you see Mengo is very important in the politics of this country. It has a big role in our history.  So, if it is not catered for, things will not be – 

Another point is that maybe, which is related to that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members!

MR ERESU: I feel restrained, but I must give this order.  The honourable member has said that- he has stated it twice that Mengo is very important if you do not handle Mengo very well there will be problems.  Is he in order to state such intimidations without actually coming out openly and stating out what threats and what danger this country is likely to under go if Mengo is not handled well. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, present your case without intimidating the members of this House.

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I am not intimidating but I was referring to history that Mengo was not handled well and we got problems. Even the Acholi who are being killed now are suffering because of the problem of 1961. People should read history properly; unfortunately Professor Semakula Kiwanuka has gone. 

So, I appeal to the Chairman to calm our fears; the 13 points which were raised by Mengo, the chairman should assure people that these problems will be catered for.

There is where they said that Katikiro would be elected on a multiparty basis. I think that is wrong. If I use the right word, I do not know whether it is the right word, to polarize. You see a Katikiro cannot be elected on party basis because people will be divided. We shall see the Katikiro as an NRM Katikiro or a DP Katikiro. The Katikiro should be elected on merit, as we have been, not under a party, so that for him is just independent. 

There was that issue which was controversial that the King would be taken to court. That is terrible. It should not be supported. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do recall that one was withdrawn when we were discussing the White Paper. Please do not go back to matters that have been closed. 

MR KAGIMU: Okay. Let me end there while appealing to the chairman to streamline the complaints that were raised. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, Internal Affairs (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin on a note of recognizing that the people of Uganda have enjoyed decentralization, which was started by this Government. Decentralization brought power close to the people by taking power to the district and further devolving it to the sub-counties and even to the administrative units down. 

This Government in the same understanding of the desire of people to be the ones to govern themselves and determine their destiny has agreed with the request of some regional groups that is willing to devolve even more power from the centre to these regions without affecting the power that was taken down to the district. This is very important for honourable members especially my colleagues of the backbench as hon. Eresu was requesting Government to explain. 

Hon. Tibarimbasa was also raising a point of clarification that they should not be worried at all that power which is at the district will be touched at all by the creation of the regional tiers. That is by the differentiation of functions that are supposed to be performed at the districts and functions that are supposed to be performed at the regional tier. 
Our colleague the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should circulate a paper to honourable Members of Parliament detailing out the way functions have been drawn out so that from the very beginning as we debate, our colleagues do not think that the regional tier is going to encroach on the power that has been passed to the district.

The creation of a regional Government has been very carefully thought out through negotiations that have taken place, although more intensely with Buganda, but also with other regions. 

Like Bunyoro, for example, negotiations have taken place and some of the ingredients that are built within the regional governments, for example, the composition of the assembly are ideas not just born out of Buganda or ideas which are for Government, but when you get one, get all of them to be understood, you will see that it is well thought out. 

One of the biggest point that is fundamental in these regional governments is the point of accountability. Some of us when we went out to mobilize our people during the time we presented the White Paper and subsequently we indicated to our people that although this may not be- hon. Lukyamuzi was talking about federalism and arguing with my Prime Minister that this was another degree of decentralization. The important thing is that power is coming down to the regions. 

MS ALASO: I thank the honourable Minister for giving way. The clarification I want is: Just a few minutes ago the honourable Minister allayed our fears concerning the powers that have devolved to the district that they will not be touched. Can the hon. Minister allay my fears also concerning the cost of public administration? As a country we think it is so high; it is has been so expensive for us to manage public administration. By creating these regional tiers, what are the implications? Will it be helpful, maybe for me, at least if you clarify that? Thank you.

Dr Kezimbira: Thank you Madam Speaker and thank you honourable Alaso.  As I have said power or function is going to move from Central Government with money. If the Minister of Education has been carrying out duties on secondary education, the money that has been used for secondary education at the centre is the money that is going to the region to be used for secondary education.  

Definitely, there could be a difference in the amount of money that could be spent in total but then if this is going to bring harmony to this country, and if eventually it is going to increase or even make services better because of closer supervision of those functions, then this will eventually be beneficial. 

I want to add to that particular point that it is a challenge to those who have aspired for regional governments.  It is a challenge that if a function has been performed well in the centre, when you take it over as a region, you must aspire to do it even better than the way it has been done in the centre, otherwise, how will you justify it. 

So it is going to be competition; it is going to be a challenge to these governments to do better and safeguard what has been put into the law.  They are going to ensure that the people going to run, for example, the assemblies which are discussing what is to be done within the region, the head of that Government, all these being from elective positions, is going to make these people perform.

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  What I would like further clarification on is this: Is the question of tier arrangement an option one or is it automatic? If it is optional then what the honourable Minister was putting to us still leaves a lot of doubt in our mind. If it is a national law then let it be a national law. But if it is optional then the risks are no less than would be expected. The risk would be there because those without it and those who have assumed the status of tier arrangement, what will be the advantages and the disadvantages of doing that?  We must pass a law, which is uniform to the nation and not optional law. This is what my worry is about.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Madam Speaker, the issue of regional government is being put to this country and the kingdoms have listened and will continue to listen to the advantages and also read about the good that are within the regional governments.  Those who will from the very beginning understand it are Buganda who understood their advantages along time ago and others are coming on board, these will immediately take it up.With time, others will see the good in it. 
As I have mentioned the accountability, if it is done well within those regions, the supervision close to them, they may also come and embrace it. But those who will not go for it will lose nothing because Central Government is not going away. It will continue to carry out those duties, which were carried out by Central Government in those areas where a regional tier has not been taken up immediately and the district will carry out other functions and once agreed those other functions can be taken.

Madam Speaker, to conclude, the safeguards have been built within the arrangement of a regional tier. Given encouragement; I want to mention only three:

One, the issue of guarding cultural diversity:  My friends have been talking about the issue of differences, for example, in Buganda or different sub groups, there is a provision which says cultural diversity will be respected and there will be no operation of one group of people within a region where there maybe a predominant tribe for that matter and ways of complaining against it and ways of settling it put down within the framework of this.

Two, equitable distribution of resources in one area whether dominant will not be able to take resources which belong to all people of that region and use it by marginalizing one part. That area, which has been marginalized will have a right to complain; will have a right to have its cause addressed.

Thirdly, for many of us having known what occurred to Buganda in 1966 were worried that our traditional leader, the Kabaka and maybe other traditional leaders in other areas could be brought into politics and this could cause a problem and we see a safe guard of this that the Kabaka or any other traditional leader will not be the one directly involved in this. It would be administrators, selected by people, who will take the reign of this government. 

So, Madam Speaker, while I have asked my colleague the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to do further clarification, we will also venture and help into more clarification so that our colleagues come on board and support him.
5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Nshimye Augustine): Madam Speaker and honourable members, let me also join those who have spoken before me to thank the Chairman and members of the Legal Committee for this very historical report.  I call it historical because it has been able to return a fair verdict for some of us who come from Buganda who have been crying in the wilderness for federo.  

Let me also thank all those who made presentations before this committee and those who are behind the scenes negotiating a harmonious position which I am sure the committee has been able to capture.  

I am sure the People of Mityana South whom I represent in this House should be jubilating with this report.  I cannot stop thanking honourable members because with time many members have come to appreciate this idea of the regional tier, which is federo as far as we concerned in Buganda.

 I now hear members coming from different regions buying this idea and the report has recommended some districts also being deemed as having –okay, some few members have indicated that they would wish, but still debatable, you never know at the end of the day they might also wish to be deemed.  

This tier gives an opportunity to a number of people who may wish to participate in the governing of this country. It also demonstrates the uniqueness of the movement government of decentralization. So this is a further evolution of powers from the center to what I would call an advanced stage of decentralization. It is highly commendable for the central government to agree to part with the juicy part of the power chocolate.  

So, as a principle I support the report and I will continue to support this process when it comes to the committee stage when we are discussing the details. I will make sure that the agreed position between the central government and the government of Mengo where my constituency falls is included in the bill, which eventually will turn to an act.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MRS SYDA BBUMBA (Nakaseke County, Luweero):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to start off by thanking the Chairman and Members of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for a report which is very, very good, very well balanced and takes into account the diverge interest of the people of this country.  
I stand here to support the amendment of the Constitution.  The reason I support is economically prudent. It is culture right and politically democratic.  During the White Paper consultations the people of Nakaseke overwhelmingly supported the idea of a regional tier.  They saw it as an enhancement of the cherished decentralization, which has been put in place by the NRM government. 

Culturally it is responding to some of the regions, which have had cultural concerns of keeping the people who have similar cultures together.  

On the political side it is people-driven- (Interruption)

MS ALASO:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Minister. Hon Minister you said it is economically viable. I was just wondering whether if the regional tier system is adopted say by the region where I come from, it will improve on the distribution of electricity and cut out load shedding.  Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  I had wanted the Minister from Nakaseke to clarify to me that she prefers the regional tier to the federo arrangement and her people will be comfortable if I tell them you have accepted the regional tier instead of federo.  Thank you.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The issue on the Floor is the regional tier and I will restrict my debate on that.  

On the economic prudence of the regional tier, it creates economies of scale, and in economics, economies of scale save resources.  If the Teso region got a regional tier and they wanted to borrow money to distribute electricity in their region, they will be more economically viable. 

On the political sensitivity, it is responding to the demand or to the requests of some of the people who saw gaps in the 1995 Constitution.  It is trying to address those gaps, and in keeping with article 1 of the Constitution. It is voluntary, it is only those regions which want it who will get it; it is not going to be forced on anybody, Madam Speaker.  

Again the issue of the budget, the delegated functions are going to move with their budget like referral hospitals and secondary education.  What is going to happen is that these are going to be transferred from the center to the regional government. 

This is again an operationalization of the provision under Article 178.  Under Article 178 Buganda was deemed, but the other regions were not. I think this is a gateway for the other regions which want to get deemed and get a regional tier to get it.  So it is equitable and it promotes equity among the people of Uganda.  

It also sets up institution to operationalize this act because when you provide for deeming and there is no institution to put this in operation, there is a vacuum, so this one fills in that vacuum.  

I support the creation of Mengo Municipality since Kampala district is the capital of Uganda, the Kingdom or the regional tier of Buganda needs a cultural capital.  The King of Buganda Magulunyondo Chuchu Musota will reign from abroad if there was no cultural capital created. 

I urge the honourable members here to support the creation of Mengo Municipality and the creation of the regional tier.  I beg to support.

5.25
MR SAM KUTESA (Mawogola County, Sembabule):  Madam Speaker, my name is Sam Kutesa, I am a Munyankole of Buganda, and if anybody has been deemed, it is me – (Laughter).  But having said that, I rise to support the report and this bill and the motion. My reasons for doing so are the following:

First, we are at a time when we are making a Constitution, I think for the success of this Constitution and for future stability of this country we must all adopt a spirit of give and take because if we do not do so none of us can stand alone.  
It is an important message that we shall not be able all of us to have our way without bringing in others – (Interjection) – can you give me a moment and I finish my sentence, maybe the clarification may not arise.  

You know, Madam Speaker, since 1995 we have been operating a Movement system. We have had two elections, one in 1996 and the other in 2001, but continuously both in 1996 and 2001 there has been a section of our society who have continued to say that they are conscripted into the Movement and that they would rather be allowed to set up their parties.  This group has been consistent. So as to keep harmony in this nation, the Movement Government has finally said let us open up and give these people political space. This is the way to build a country and have harmony. 

Equally consistently over the years, there has been a section in our society that has been demanding to have a regional tier otherwise named federo.  I think it is incumbent on any Government that wants to promote stability and promote harmony not to completely ignore this voice just in the same way as we thought we should not ignore the voice of those who wanted political space to be open.  So, it is important to listen to the voice of Mengo, as it is important to listen to those people who agitate for political parties.

I would, therefore, like to appeal to this House for them to take into account and base their argument on the idea that we shall all have to give part of what we cherish in order to have a complete and harmonious whole, called Uganda.  Ordinarily I would not have liked to be deemed, because why deem me. I can talk for myself, but there are other things that I must give up for the greater good of my country.  

I would like to appeal to those of you who particularly do not come from Buganda and who think that this idea is for Buganda to realize that there is something you are getting in this constitutional making process that probably the Baganda would never have given you.  So, it is always – I think this is a time of building a country. Therefore, I find myself supporting this motion because I think it is important to build the country.  
But let me also say that anybody who has any qualms should not fear because the bill provides that the powers that were devolved to the districts will remain and therefore nobody will have anything to lose because finally the resources go to the district.  

I heard earlier on when the Prime Minister was making his presentation some agitation about powers of taxation.  The fact of the matter is that it is Mengo who rejected the powers of taxation in a meeting, which I attended along with others, and certainly in the presence of my good Friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi at Mengo.  

Ken Lukyamuzi raised the issue and said that Government has been unfair; it did not give Buganda powers of taxation.  None other than the Attorney General of Buganda, Owekitibwa Katende replied to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and said, “Look, out of our consultation- and in this case they had consulted the King of Kwazulu Natal who told them that it is dangerous to insist on powers of taxation.  

In fact he said to them, “You guys do not be foolish, if there is someone to collect money for you and give it to you, why do you want to be the one to be seen to be the tax collector”.  In fact what is in the bill now clearly makes the Central Government the tax collector. It is the Central Government, which is going to earn a bad name for collecting taxes, and Mengo will be in a happy position of receiving this money without any blemish from the taxpayer. So, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, if you recall that, I think it should put you at peace and know that the Baganda of Mengo were a bit too clever this time around.

There was an issue raised by hon. Eresu about the difference between the Charter and the Corporation and this regional tier.  The main difference is that the Charter under the current Constitution was based on voluntary union of districts.  The regional tier is devolution of powers and function from the centre. Therefore, it is not as loose as the other one which depended on the wish of the districts.  In fact the reality of it, other than Busoga which signed the Charter and registered it - but even then it never became functional - was that the districts were unwilling to part with any of their powers and that is why Government has preserved them and the Centre has instead parted with some of its powers, functions and resources to send them to the regional tier.  

So if I can accept the regional tier myself through being deemed, I would like to appeal to all of you who are not even part of it to accept it because it is part of what you have to give away for you to build your country.

Finally, when we get to the details of debating the clauses where there is something talking about equitable treatment of all districts, maybe it would be useful for clarity’s sake to say that sharing of resources will be per capita based.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May be just to correct the factual error, the charter arrangement is functional in Busoga and we do have common programmes that we execute.

MR KUTESA: I do apologise, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This amendment bill is to replace Article 178, but like rightly you have said, I would have loved to know from the committee and from the Minister what is it that Buganda did not get from this Article 178 of the Constitution that now warrants the new arrangement?  

Because if you read 178, still (3) is deeming but (4) is also giving options for districts that really would not be willing to be within the deeming by a resolution passed by the district to withdraw from the districts deemed and it sets procedures of how- if, for example, a district considered to be a district in Buganda does not want to belong to this arrangement how can they withdraw.  It is important that we should not compel people to belong where they do not want to belong.  I think this is really infringement of the rights of certain people. The constitutional provision 178(4) would have been better if it included in this arrangement.

I also think that if we are bringing out something, it should be what is principally benefiting Uganda uniformly.  But when you look at this Amendment Bill, 178(2) sets out a different method of how the rest of the country can get regional tier and 178(3) sets out a special arrangement for Buganda.  

As a country if we are to move together, we need to have a principle which is uniform and applicable to all the rest of the country, all the tribes and all the regions irrespective of which region.  But to give certain people specific special attention over others, it is not fair.  

If we are agreeing on a principle, it is good to agree on a principle that all of us will subscribe to instead of giving the rest of the country- for example, it is saying, if a district wants to benefit from regional tier. (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA:  Thank you hon. Amongi for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to just inform hon. Amongi that the issue of deeming is not a directive from the Government. It is the wish of the people of Buganda, all districts 97 per cent of the views collected from Buganda wanted Buganda as a federo or regional united regional Government. Therefore, it is not the Government that directed that all districts of Buganda be deemed to have been united to form Buganda as a region.  Thank you very much.

MS AMONGI:  Thank you very much.  I think probably you could not have read the report of the committee because in the report of the committee and subsequently there contestation especially from Nakasongola, may be they can correct me, that they do not wish to be deemed.

It is good to have a principle that everybody agrees on, but to compel really infringes on the rights of other people within Buganda even if majority- that is why some of us have been fighting the system that compels us to belong to them because we think you can not compel people to belong to something they do not wish to belong. 

So, I think principally it is important- and Madam Speaker, generally I do not know how as a country, our overall policy is, because if you look at our policy of Pan-Africanism, of regional integration and then we look at all these different fragmentation that we are now engaged in, it contradicts where we want to go.
What is the bigger picture for this country, do we want further fragmentation or are we looking at the question of Pan-Africanism and regional integration. 

I would also like to be clarified, constitutionally when you look at section 11 of this amendment bill, it is talking of how money and conditional grants will be given and all that; how will financial experts be consulted to agree to this.  

It is important to use the method which is in the Constitution where a schedule allocates how you calculate conditional grants for local governments. When you leave this  way that it will be Government to establish how a formula will be used for financial allocation for unconditional grants, it can be left for abuse. It is better for a schedule to be attached to this on how this calculation for allocation of unconditional grant should be allocated.

Lastly, on cost effectiveness:  This amendment bill does not tell us what is the limit of those to compose the regional Government. It only talks of who are the categories to sit in the regional assembly.  So it means if the regional tier decides to have 300 members, you cannot do anything about it. So there must be specificity on really the limit, the limit of constituency and how many people can fit in the regional assembly because really this country is poor to increase administrative cost and other costs and you leave it at the wish of the regional tier Government to decide. I think it will be unfair for resources that can go somewhere else for important issues.  I thank you and still reserve my support.

5.40
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Let me begin by putting the record correct.  I stand to support the bill and the report for as long as it is looked at as a regional tier other than a federo arrangement.  

Hon Amongi amazed me; district integration is a freedom and a human right.  This country has failed to settle for the last 43 years or so, that is why we have over two million people in camps in northern Uganda.  We must begin somewhere to find a solution and this is one of the attempts to get the solution so that we get this country regain its glory.  
Hon. Amongi also talked about uniformity of sizes. Even in the arrangement of the federo arrangement as student of federalism I do not know of any federation where you have uniform regions in size or affluence, they are always differences and those differences usually balanced with an equalization grant.

I expected the Minister of Justice, and I think this is where I partially agree with hon. Kagimu.  I expected the Minister of Justice before the chairperson read the report to have briefed us about the shortcomings, which were witnessed in the White Paper, the omnibus bill and this bill in regard to regional tier so that we know how we can curb the differences.  Otherwise, how do you expect the fears of the people of Buganda to be allayed over the differences by assuming that the backbenchers will bring a solution when the Executive, which proposed the bill, is silent about the divides?  

So at an appropriate time before we pass this bill, I expect the Minister of Justice to come up and tell us about the causation of differences and how we have ironed out these differences.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, hon. Lukyamuzi, if a bill has been withdrawn, how do you now continue saying the other one, which we withdrew when this one, which is here is saying this. The bill, which we are discussing, is the bill that was in the first place there.  So the matters you have to discuss are contained in this bill, the present bill, there is no other bill. The other one expired and died.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with Prof. Nsibambi that systems like federalism do not necessarily have to begin in high gear.  States like the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Switzerland have started at a low level. Much as they started at a low level, their beginning was specifically linkable to federalism.  Let us also be specific to know that our beginning is linkable to regional tiers other than the federal linkages. I will give you, and my colleagues, full support to ensure that this regional tier succeeds for as long as we specify it and we make it known.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I have known you for being an international person in terms of environmental issues. I want to get clarification from you; if you fail, this country should give up on forging unity and then start legislating on disunity, on issues like of regional tier and federal. (Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am a strong believer in federalism, but I am not the source of power. I have tried to persuade colleagues in government to ensure that we get a full-blown federal arrangement but it has not worked out. So, I have to go with the Katikkiro of Buganda so that we begin somewhere and eventually maybe we shall reach the federal arrangement.  

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a nation of many nations, with unique and spectacular structures. Some of our cultures and traditional values are so unique that they probably exist nowhere else in Africa. We should harness that resource. If we can harness that resource through a regional tier, why not!  

But, Prof. Nsibambi, at Makerere University about 20 years ago, was an authority in the East African political systems and I remember reading some of his works. It was very definite, he specified federalism as federalism. But I was amazed to see him referring to a paper he published recently, much as it was titled “federalism” there were no ingredients of federalism at all. 

Let me quote you a scholar by the name of William Riker, whom I also quoted in my article I published in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Journal of April last year. He defined what is a federal arrangement so that we know where we are going. Riker says: “A Constitution is federal if two levels of government rule the same land and people with each level having at least one area in which it is autonomous and there is some guarantee even though merely a settlement in a Constitution of the autonomy of each government in its own sphere”.  Riker is quite definite.  Once you have a federal arrangement, you must have several sources of power on the same land. What we have underlined, the tier, is automatically opposite to what has been articulated by Riker. 

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with colleagues who think that we must all begin the trend at the same time. But in accordance with the First Schedule, I can see ten regions of Uganda including, West Nile, Acholi, Bunyoro, Kigezi, Ankole, Teso, Toro all endeavouring to achieve some level of unity. Which means, what is being sought by Buganda is not a nightmare; many others would like to have it.  

The report convinces me when it says, why the likes of Busoga, the likes of Toro and Bunyoro be denied the opportunity to come on board the same kind of arrangement and yet, (I want to add), the same areas demanded for this kind of unity in the Sempebwa report? So, there is no justified cause for the government to deny those areas equally ready to come on board the same arrangement as Buganda aspires.  You have not convinced us do not isolate us. Let us encourage others to join the bandwagon so that we can move on.  

Madam Speaker, the story given about Kampala does not also encourage me. Because today we are all focusing our tension on Kampala, but in a developing atmosphere, especially in the continent of Africa, as countries develop they usually –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. Lukyamuzi was starting his contribution he said that he had to agree with what Katikkiro agreed with the central government and these are issues, which he agreed with central government, which he confessed he must also follow. Now is trying to divert us. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you agree that you are musajja wa Kabaka. So, please, confirm the way things were done by the Katikkiro, who is the agent of the Kabaka.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, much obliged. But, Madam Speaker, that does not stop me from comparatively discussing issues. Because if I may quote the Kabaka talking on the same concept he said, “We thank the central government for supporting us, but let us continue amicably to demand for more.” I am doing exactly that and what is wrong?

But finally, Madam Speaker, the Kampala scenario is what I was alluding to. As countries in Africa develop, they usually endeavour to establish alternative sources of power in terms of capital cities. For example, Dar-es-Salaam in Tanzania, the capital was moved to Dodoma, and one day we may move the capital from Kampala to Mbale, and that is a sign of development. So, for us to assume that because Kampala is a capital city, it must be an island does not make much sense before the people of Rubaga I represent.  I hope that matter might be considered as time goes on.  

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, hon. Lukyamuzi, for giving way. As you talk about Kampala, I wanted to inform you that in the first track report for the East African Federation, Kampala is being pointed out as the capital of the East African Federation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Well, I believe to that because I did not see much sense in that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, hon. Lukyamuzi!

MR LUKYAMUZI: I withdraw that statement; I saw sense in it.  Finally, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank you for giving me chance to wind up on a very important point. (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. Lukyamuzi said that I do not have ingredients of federalism, I simply laughed. But, hon. Prof. Kagonyera said that for the sake of the record, I should clarify this matter. I have no hesitation in referring him to Page 2 because I have laid this on the Table. Pages 2, 3, 4 and 5 the ingredients of federalism are there. For the sake of not wasting time for Members of Parliament, I have put this on the Table and I simply inform my friend who I think is improving in this area, that the ingredients of federalism are well articulated. For my Doctorate I dealt with some of these matters.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Since you are a Professor, I will not debate with you at this point in time. But finally, Madam Speaker, much as I have already said I support the arrangement, why do I have reservations? My reservations are concentrated on the financial arrangements for the tier. For example, the tier arrangement in terms of finance does not guarantee any economic empowerment for the region. And the second concern, the region lacks autonomy, it also lacks infrastructure, it lacks capacity to generate revenue and it also lacks capacity to manage finances. Participation of the region in finance in regard to tax collection is not a luxury, the endeavour to participate in tax collection aims at building capacity so that you have people –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Lukyamuzi, I was here when the Minister of Foreign Affairs gave information that you were in a meeting together with them and the Lukiiko of Buganda and that the Attorney General of Buganda, Mr Katende John, advised you to desist from engaging in taxation and that as a Lukiiko you agreed upon it. He said it here this afternoon.

MR LUKYAMUZI: But the Kabaka encouraged me to reform the trend. Otherwise, finally let me thank –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you should speak really for the right constituency. If you are just speaking for Lubaga, you say it. But the position taken by Buganda, which has been brought here officially, is that one.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: But, Madam Speaker, why do you not let me conclude my point?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, when the Minister of Foreign Affairs rose here, you did not contradict him. So, as far as we are concerned, that was the position taken by the Buganda Lukiiko in the presence of you Baganda Members of Parliament.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: But what is wrong in making my point clear?  

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that when you are engaged in a discussion and you put forward a point, and the point is explained by those who have had a chance to sit and negotiate not only for Lubaga but say, for example, the whole of Buganda, and came to an agreement and you agreed with the agreement, it is always best that you realize that there are many thinkers in this place. Thank you very much.
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU: Madam Speaker, I remember we were with hon. Lukyamuzi Ken in Mengo when we were called by the Katikkiro for a briefing. Hon. Lukyamuzi Ken brought up that issue again, he lost it there and then from the words of the Katikkiro he said: “We toured around, we were exposed to other regional governments, how they do their things, the issue of tax will make our Kabaka even more unpopular.”  

Two, hon. Lukyamuzi Ken, again pushed for other things like police, courts and he lost the same in the very meeting. So, I think he is really becoming unfair to us and even Mengo when he over pushes the same stand.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am winding up. In conclusion, what are hon. Lukyamuzi Ken’s worries about the tier?  My worries are as follows: One, the survival of the region in terms of finance is not guaranteed because the Bill talks about a formula to be worked out by experts. Finally, if grants are not sent to the region, a mechanism will be worked out.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Lukyamuzi Ken to persistently annoy the would-be supporters of the motion, which I am sure he cherishes very much? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, when we were discussing the White Paper, I advised that it is more important to convince Members to your side instead of continuing to – Members were now smiling, but now I see their faces are beginning to change. So, please, do not push them to the wall.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like them to smile on and to give us support, but I was making a few proposals in very good spirit. I do not think there are many people who support and harness the Kingdom of Buganda in the way I do. Thank you very much.

6.00
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support a regional tier as a general concept of management. I will base myself on four letters just P, E, S, T.  Madam Speaker, you find regional tier as a management concept, but a society to be managed it depends on the social, economic and political situation in the country. There are some things, which you cannot shun away from. Buganda itself, the foundation of our politics, is right to have a pilot of a regional tier basing on an example of our politics Buganda has shown. For instance, the characteristics; Baganda people have been very accommodative and you find that it creates a bit of difference that whoever comes here – and these people, if they are demanding and we have to move with them, it is really a point to consider and we move with them.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Kakooza. He said that Buganda as a region, it is common knowledge that it must be used as a basis or a pilot for other governments because it has an important position in this country. So, I would like him to give us further, where was it written that we must copy everything from here as long as we support this?

MR KAKOOZA: I think there is a misquotation. I said it may be used as a basis to forge a way forward so that this country can move together. That is why I said that the situation today and the basis of our politics, Buganda has been showing us good characteristics of being very accommodative, better than any other region in Uganda –(Interjections)- yes, this is it. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, you are on a very slippery ground please. Do not begin comparing yourself to other people and saying you are better than them, that is very slippery ground please.  

MR KAKOOZA: Two; I support a regional tier because of financial management, Madam Speaker. In financial management, a system to be more effective and very cost-effective, you find that once a group forms into a regional tier it may be a basis for development within that particular region, and those who wish to do it can prosper than we are in a large system.  

Thirdly, I support this regional tier, Madam Speaker, because if the regional tier says that there is equitable resources, which are going to be shared, when you check the Constitution the 7th Schedule it gives a basis of how this equitable shares are going to be shared for local government. You know that at least Buganda accepting not to collect taxes it is the best way because our budget is sponsored 46 percent by donors and then 54 percent by internal revenue which is generated all over Uganda. It means there is a general contribution. 

So, when Government is putting that formula to share a development it means as a global trend goes on there is economic empowerment to the process of development. So, you find that at least the concerns of those people who are demanding a regional tier could be addressed for more prosperity and development of this country. This is why I support government to have a compromised position, a win-win situation so that we can move together as a country as a nation. I support it fully 100 percent and I beg Members to support a regional tier.

6.05
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Madam Speaker, I thank you. First of all, I thank the committee for a report; I also thank His Excellency, the President for leading the talks and also the continued support to our cultural leaders in the country. 

Madam Speaker, I look at Uganda as a sick country; it is suffering from long illness and we have been all along searching for medicine and for doctors. Like I look at the Movement government as one doctor at some time, now we are going for multiparty politics. We have had decentralization as a doctor or as a treatment in one way or another, now we are talking of a regional tier; in other way another form of treatment, another form of doctor. 

So, to me I have no problem supporting entirely this regional arrangement because in the first place it is not harmfully, it is not contentious the way I have seen amongst Members. It is going to enhance service delivery, you know, unity is strength. We have been spreading resources all over but now that we are going to have these resources in one basket, regions will be able to handle crucial and specific projects and give them a bigger impact. 

This aspect of promoting culture through that committee of the Lukiiko so that our traditional leaders are insulated from political interference, you know our history here. So, to me that one also is another point why I support this regional arrangement.

This fever of looking for districts, Madam Speaker, people are all over, people are eating rats they want districts. Now with regional tier I can assure you we are going to avoid that and the regions now will cater for all these small districts we are talking about. We are going to treat this problem of slow action because the centre has been really overstretched. Like land conflicts, forest reserves, you hear everywhere in the countryside Mayuge, my place in Kooki etc. But now when power is given to the regions and I pray that this issue of the central reserves is also given to the regional governments so that they are nearer the problems you know, a quicker action, quicker solutions. 

The other issue also is about that inbuilt mechanism for conflict resolution. And here I want to appeal to my colleagues from Nakasongola because when you read the Bill, in case of disagreement, in case of marginalisation, there is room for the affected to seek redress either through the courts of law or even the President coming in. So, I want to humbly inform my colleagues from Nakasongola that here is a drug of choice, that inbuilt mechanism to address your concerns.  

My last point is about areas of further clarification from the minister and government. I would want to see more streamlining of the relationship between the regional governments and the districts in view of decentralization. Look at this Works engineer who maintains the feeder roads, which belong to the district, how is he going to relate to this regional officer? Like in implementation if he refuses to take orders of the regional government, how is he sanctioned? We do not want a problem since they do not appoint them we want really clear structures on how officers in the district are going maybe to implement work plans of the regional government. Then the other one is about agriculture -(Interruption)


MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Matovu for giving way. The information I would like to give hon. Matovu is very pertinent. If the goal of this arrangement is economic development, how can it be achieved because the region and the district respectively run parallel programmes? The focal point and the goal should be one; how do we ensure that each one pursues a common line unless you have amended that there is no guarantee development.  That is the information I wanted to give you.  

CAPT. MATOVU: Well, government may take that. The other one, which I want, is about agriculture. Agriculture is a big resource especially in the centre here. I would want to see a greater role by the regional governments not only monitoring and supervision, because you can see really this area used to be the food basket of Uganda but now we survive on relief. I would want to see that our people really do not survive on relief from the Office of the Prime Minister. Those who fear evictions this one cannot happen here because it has never happened. 

The last interesting thing, which the Prime Minister forgot about the advantages of this region tier - in fact, if you want a future President of Uganda, is going to come from these regional governments. Actually, the chairpersons, to me these are presidents in the waiting, because these will be now about 4 or 5 in the country. So, those who want now to become presidents of Uganda they should really go for this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.09
MR HENRY MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill and I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. One of the aims of the NRM is to correct the imbalances and the injustices. I think by providing a regional tier, this government is trying to improve on the injustices maybe, which were brought about by the previous regimes. 

The beauty of the regional tier is that, it does not encroach on decentralization, the powers of the districts are going to remain. What the government is actually doing is sharing its power it has with regional governments and this is federal because federal is all about sharing power and resources.  I also believe that the regional tier is federal because Article 246 of the Constitution is talking about traditional leaders. But, for us a traditional leader here in Buganda is the Kabaka; we have been calling him Kabaka without breaking any law. So, we can still call the regional tier a federal and we shall not break any law. 

The other beauty of this arrangement is that you have resources at your – (Interruption)

MAJ RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, Member for giving way. The Member is saying that one of advantages of a regional tier is to share resources. The clarification I want from him is, are the districts in the present form of decentralization not sharing resources? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to give information to hon. Kityo. We started this debate with specifics and we all agreed that the regional tier generally is not federalism but it can be a good beginning towards federalism. For example, if you are referring to it as federalism, where is the autonomy befitting a federal arrangement? How can it be a federal arrangement if it cannot collect taxes, it cannot plan its economic arrangement, it cannot plan, it cannot act as a source of power? What are you talking about?

MR KITYO: Thank you very much. I will start by answering my honourable colleague here that the resources, which are coming at the district level are not coordinated at the regional level. The beauty of this arrangement is that the districts will continue to receive their money, but also at the regional level they will start to plan and will have a good flow of the region when the districts are working hand in hand with the region. So, this is the beauty.

For, hon. Lukyamuzi, he is right to have his own view and it is very difficult to get it out of him. But for me I am convinced that this is federal.

Madam Speaker, another beauty of this arrangement, particularly in this area, is that people of Buganda will have a chance to elect their representatives. One of the biggest countries with big, big democracy is India. But also India has got big, big administrative units which they call regional governments. The beauty of that arrangement is that some of the people who would vie to come to the national Parliament end up going to their regional Parliaments. This arrangement will reduce the pressure on coming to the Parliament of Uganda because some of these people will go to the regional governments and be representatives of the people at that level. 

Another good thing is that Kampala is growing. But under this arrangement, Kampala is going to have permanent boundaries so that when Kampala grows, the centre will remain the old Kampala like it is in Washington, like it is in New York. So, Madam Speaker, I really support and the people of Mawokota South support this arrangement and we want to see it grow and develop harmony in Uganda. I thank you very much.

6.14
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and honourable members, for me I have stood up to oppose this lousy arrangement. Because, for me, I prefer people to call a spade a spade and speak the truth. Dilly dallying around when you are not even pleasing the person you want to dilly dally with and he will again and again and demand and demand until you do what he is demanding, he will not stop. 

Madam Speaker, we were in CA those days, and this question of Buganda was not a simple question. We discussed and discussed, the Baganda wanted federal. In fact, it was Buganda which wanted a kingdom, the rest did not want. You go and read Odoki’s report where I was a Member. And then we came, we had to put the provision for the sake of Buganda for those who want and eventually others wanted and got their kings and for ours in Ankole we were silenced because we have Sabagabe in Ankole. So, the problem continued. 

The Baganda were not extremely happy, they still wanted to demand – (Mr Tim Lwanga rose_) - you just sit first I will allow you later. I want to advance my point. [Mr Tim Lwanga: “Point of Order”]. Eeeh!! Hon. Lwanga, certainly you are not honest with yourself.
MR LWANGA: Really, Madam Speaker, I have been pushed against the wall, I would have not had a point of order. But I wonder whether it is in order to use a language that we do not understand in Parliament. The Sabagabe in Ankole, what does it mean? Is it in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, two days ago, you read a letter here in Luganda –(Applause)- and even the other time, I think the obituary for hon. Wapa, I was also here. So, I think that one –(Laughter)- let us have a ceasefire.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, hon. Deputy Speaker, for that intelligent ruling. I had told you that he is not honest with himself. So, you can see now. 

So, Madam Speaker, after all those back and forward discussions, we in the end said yes Buganda - we provided for these regional arrangements and we deemed Buganda. I am sure it is in the Constitution. It was deemed, the deeming was never realized, I do not know for what and here we come again. This whole regional arrangement is being put here because of Buganda. So, why do we not become direct? 

You know for me, people hate me for my direct language. I call a spade a spade. Why does the Constitution not come out and say that Buganda is a state within Uganda and then we finish? You have to put me in lousy arrangements, which I know I do not want to go in and I know they will not work because you want to appease Buganda and moreover you are not even appeasing it! Are they not demanding more? 

Me in CA, I told His Excellency, the President that when you are dealing with a blackmailer, you deal with that blackmailer decisively. Either you give what he wants or you do not. But going round, round, he will continue to come and come and come and come. So, why do we not at this particular point in time call a spade a spade and give Buganda what it wants, if you think that is what it wants instead of dragging us in arrangements which eventually do not even work? Where is the king of Ankole? When they said those who want to have a king and then we also put ours, did the President not say, “No way, I will remove him quickly”?
Now, how do you know that even other districts when they want to come in they may not be stopped? And in any case, if now Buganda is deemed, for one reason maybe this time it will accept, I do not know why it never realized the deeming. I understand it will get a municipality. Now I want to ask, will any other two districts, which will be deemed and realized, get also a municipality? Surely, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I mean we are mature people. Uganda has been in struggles of stabilizing itself and becoming a nation for over 40 years. Why do we play games of seek and hide? I am telling you this very arrangement has no good in it! 

I was here, Madam Speaker and honourable members, when honourable members went to consult, when you got your Shs 5.0 million you remember. You went and consulted and I sat in this House and I listened to everybody who stood up. Almost everybody was saying, “My people refused regional tier. My people do not want regional tier.” Who now likes this regional tier for the people of Ankole, for instance, who has told you that they want it?  If you want to deal with Buganda, why do you not deal with it decisively but you do not deal with it now so that you get the ekisanja, then when you want another simanyi kisanja, maybe that you will succumb to whatever. 

MR MUTEBI KITYO:  Point of clarification.

MRS MATEMBE: In conclusion, because the bell has already rang, I want to say that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Clarification.

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  She has refused.

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We, Members of Parliament, twice we have been in Mengo invited by the Katikkiro of Buganda to tell us that they have negotiated with the Government of Uganda and they have accepted what the Government of Uganda has given Buganda. May I know from the honourable member holding the Floor, whether she is in a better position to know what Buganda wants than the Katikkiro of Buganda and His Highness, the Kabaka of Buganda? That is the clarification I want to get.

MRS MATEMBE: For me, your Katikkiro – you even do not know what you want. You went and negotiated, you agreed, he now does not want, you are negotiating afresh. In fact, for me I am not talking about knowing yours, I am saying why should I be dragged into yours, which is not even clear. That is my concern. And if I may continue, Madam Speaker, and conclude –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: I thank the honourable member for giving way. But it is just recent that the Katikkiro of Buganda expressed his dissatisfaction with what came out in the Bill, that that is not exactly what was reached on as far as the talks were concerned.

MR MADADA: Is hon. Issa Kikungwe, who has just come in, in order to confuse this House on information that we have already been given before?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order, he has just walked in. Please conclude.

MRS MATEMBE: Anyway, in conclusion I want to say that the people of Uganda were quite happy with their districts, they got power, they are getting finances to develop their areas - and mark you, we started from regional and we are moving down and down and even people are demanding for more districts. 

How does the government reconcile the demand and continued breakage of people into small, small units and then talking of a duty of a regional unity, which money is it going to share and which power is it going to have? Because I have read in the objective here that the political authority of the region will be the regional government, and I can assure you the districts will be fighting with this regional government and all this arrangement is a recipe for misery, for going back into the reverse tier. 

I must put it on record that we should be honest and go direct and stop dilly dallying, confusing us in this way is no good for this nation.  Manipulation and - simply do not work! Thank you, Madam Speaker.
6.24
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since 1966, Buganda has never been the same. I am talking on behalf of Buganda because I represent people of Buganda.  Therefore, I first of all commend the work, which was done by the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda under NRA revolution. Secondly, I thank the NRM Government for having listened to the people of Buganda and given them what they wanted. Thirdly, I want to thank the people in their respective areas who have consistently supported their cultural values, and here I commend the people of Bunyoro where a Mugabe was deported -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is Omukama.

MR MUTULUUZA: Omukama, sorry! Where Omukama was removed and when he was allowed to be sworn again, they welcomed him and now they cherish him. I also thank the Baganda, UPC Government abolished kingdoms but the people remained unsatisfied. They were not satisfied for having abolished their kings and when they came back, you can see people are united, people are working together, and people are cherishing their leaders.
 
Madam Speaker, the regional tier. As far as Buganda is concerned, we feel that it can accommodate different ethnic and cultural values and dynamism.  When we are together under one leadership as Buganda, I think development and unity will prevail.  When we are together, we feel a sense of belonging, belonging to each other, belonging in a united Buganda. 

Secondly, I thank the framers of this Bill who thought it right to include the areas, which cherish their cultural leaders the Kabakas, and the Omukama and the Omugabe. Because these areas, which had their kings and cultural leaders, feel that when they are not under the same umbrella, they seem to be as a sheep without a shepherd and this is what has happened in Buganda since 1966. I am not a Muganda, but I was here in 1966, I have been here since then, and I have seen how Buganda was disorganized, how the infrastructure, how the environment, how everything got in disarray. Madam Speaker, that is why I support this motion.
The issue of corruption: Madam Speaker, according to the arrangement of the regional tier, the regional leadership will have the monitoring and evaluation role in the activities of a region.  Therefore, I think it will help us to check the corruption at our local district level. Although they will not have powers to stop them, I feel they will check them and maybe help us to curb corruption.

Equal distribution of resources: Right now in Buganda you find that in one district the roads are good yet in another one the roads are bad. This, I think, is the role, which will be played by the regional government to see that there is equal distribution of resources and equal development in all the districts under a regional government.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the member giving the way. Previously I listened to hon. Mutuluuza giving information here on the Floor that the deeming is as a result of districts having made resolutions, now he is bringing in another dimension that actually some districts are more attended to than others?  

A few minutes ago you said you are not a Muganda but you represent the people of Buganda. I heard hon. Kutesa here saying that he is a Munyankole of Buganda. I would like to know, what are you of Buganda? And if the deeming is as a result of resolutions of the districts, why do you not allow them to make a resolution because to us it is just hearsay. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, the deeming was done by the Constituent Assembly. It was done in 1995 and so that –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Yeah, let me answer him for record purposes. Hon. Bright Rwamirama, among the many tribes of Uganda, tribe No. 20 is Banyarwanda. I am a Munyarwanda of Buganda, a Ugandan. I want that clarification taken and I do not want anybody to despise me because of that; no.  

My appeal, before I end, is to the areas, which will adopt this regional arrangement to respect other people’s cultures and equally distribute the resources, that will come from the center as the Baganda are doing.  
Lastly, I want to assure all non Baganda who are in Buganda that for the first time in the history of Uganda the non Baganda who are in Buganda are going to have a status. There is nobody who will play with us anymore because even in Mengo, constitutionally, I will stand and I will represent people in Mengo or here in Parliament. Therefore, I support the motion and request fellow members to support the motion. Let me tell you that if one part of the body is sick, the whole body is uncomfortable. Buganda is uncomfortable. Give it what it wants; give her what she wants, then Buganda, the whole body, will be okay.

6.34
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have a few clarifications.

One, I would like to request the Attorney-General to really give this House the agreed on position by Buganda and the Government of Uganda so that as we debate we should not step on the feet of our colleagues from Buganda. In any case, it could be a general weekly briefing such that we know because as far as we are concerned, in some of our constituencies some people do not support this regional tier but for the sake of our colleagues and to ensure that we all move systematically, we should have this position cleared. What hon. Kikungwe was saying that even the Katikkiro has disagreed, I think he came late and he is not updated, so let us have this done regularly such that we do not step on the feet of our colleagues.

Second is something to do with uniformity. Like hon. Amongi has said, I would like this Bill to have uniformity in as far these positions are concerned. I do not want us to continue like it has been where some traditional leaders are preferred to others. Let us have uniformity to ensure that we are all moving systematically. The reason I am emphasizing uniformity is that I am a scholar of history and economics and right from the LEGCO in Uganda, Buganda wanted several institutions like the Police and some others and what other regions did was just to resist. They had to actually leave this position and they felt that Buganda was demanding too much. 



As we look at the regional tier, we should have that kind of uniformity and we should avoid the crisis of 1966 or even Buganda boycotting the elections in 1955 in LEGCO. We should have something uniform and ensure that we are all moving systematically.  

The other issue is the clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General. There is this Article 13 of the Bill that talks of the taking over of the regional tier by the President. Mr Attorney-General, has Buganda accepted that in case a regional government has failed, Article 202 of the Constitution applies to them? Have you accepted or have you agreed on that position? I am told that Buganda was saying that the President should not have powers to take over a regional government. Has that position been made clear, Mr Attorney-General?

I would like to urge colleagues to support this motion simply because amidst all other reasons I am looking at the regional tiers as something that is going to bring in employment. Given the mere fact that we have a lot of unemployment, why do we not take this opportunity to embrace it and solve unemployment partially?

I would like to request colleagues from Buganda, you know when we are in school we make a lot of fun, saying, “No, Makerere is in Buganda”, and all that, but as we discuss this Bill, please colleagues you need our support and we should really be systematic to avoid stepping on each other’s feet. We should not say, “This one is special”. I am just appealing to you, and if need be, why do you not keep it to yourselves other than stepping on our feet? I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate on this matter will continue tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


