Friday, 19 May 2006

Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYER S

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for exhibiting diligence by your attendance to the business of the House. I thank you for what you did yesterday. But perhaps, let me start with bad news. I have received the following communication, which was addressed to me. It is about the late Ambassador James Obua Otto:

“With deep sorrow, I wish to inform you and hon. Members of Parliament about the death of Ambassador James Obua Otto. He passed away yesterday morning at Mulago Referral Hospital. Uganda and the Lango sub-region, Lira, Erute County North in particular, have lost a distinguished Ugandan citizen who served Uganda in various capacities as indicated in his CV. There is going to be a requiem service at All Saints Cathedral, Nakasero at 11.00 a.m. and thereafter the casket will leave for Gulu where the late will be laid to rest at his ancestral home on Sunday, 21 May 2006. May his Soul rest in peace.” 

It is signed by Charles Angiro, Member of Parliament, Erute County North. We are sorry about this death and I think we should observe a minute of silence. 

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Now the good news. This is a letter received from the FDC, dated today. It is about the Leader of the Opposition. The Forum for Democratic Change, in compliance with the provisions of Article 84 of the Constitution and the requirement of the Administration of Parliament Act has elected hon. Prof. Latigo Ogenga, Member of Parliament for Agago County and FDC Deputy President as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. The party also elected hon. Kassiano Wadri Member of Parliament for Terego County as Chief Opposition Whip; hon. Winifred Kiiza, Member of Parliament for Kasese District was elected as Deputy Chief Whip. 

On your behalf, I congratulate the honourable members who have got these assignments from their party. I promise that I will work with them amicably. Congratulations. (Applause)    

On that note I urge the other parties - because under the law, they are entitled to a whip. I do not know whether they have also exercised their right to -(Interruption)

10.27
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, the UPC committee in Parliament met last evening and elected me –(Laughter)- Livingstone Okello-Okello, Member of Parliament for Chua as their whip for the time being -(Applause)

10.28
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a concern. I know this is a new Parliament and we have several profiles of people in this House. I need your guidance as to whether Parliament has the capacity to protect all Members of Parliament without having guns carried into the Parliamentary Chamber?  Yesterday we had armed men in civilian clothes carrying guns in the Parliamentary Chamber. I do not know who they could be protecting but basing from experience, even the Vice-President has rarely been escorted up to the Chambers with guns.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, with all due respect to the profile of the First Lady, I think you should make a statement to this House. Do we have the capacity to be protected as Members of Parliament without people carrying guns into the Parliamentary Chamber? Some of us cannot make very good laws if the gun per capita is high in this building, just because a few people have to be given the kind of protection and respect they deserve.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have informed me about this. I will investigate but what I can say is that we have the capacity to protect you and you need not get worried.

10.30
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday evening we came up with a name for who is going to be the Chief Whip for the Democratic Party. We elected hon. Issa Kikungwe, Member of Parliament for Kyadondo South in Wakiso District. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations hon. Issa Kikungwe.

10.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We really apologise for the hitch but here with us is the Leader of the Opposition. I would like to present him to you -(Prof. Latigo took to the frontbench)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. (Applause) Now that we have the whips, I would like to advise them to get together with the Government Whip. There is business for them today. Please, get in touch with each other as soon as possible. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It has been the tradition of this House that when new Members get in, they are given a bit of induction to move around this building and get acquainted with the surroundings. It looks like this exercise has not been conducted and I read something in the New Vision today about Members getting lost. I wonder what arrangements are going on to help our new colleagues. 

THE SPEAKER: We are making arrangements for induction in what we shall call the post-election seminar, where a lot of information will be given to Members. However, we ask you to bear with us. We started late because there was urgent business to transact but we have programmes for Members and this will come very soon.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thought that while we wait for induction, something could still be organised, just to help them find their way around this building.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall look into that.

10.33
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): For record purposes, Mr Speaker, I am one of the people quoted in the press as having got lost. I wish to correct that impression. I did not get lost at all. I knew the Chambers very well and I did not seek any assistance. Therefore, I do not think I need any induction as far as getting acquainted with the geography of this area is concerned.  

THE SPEAKER: I think the warning was for us not to wait for people to get lost. 

10.34
MR JOHN NASASIRA (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would have been surprised for a Member of Parliament to get lost in his constituency. I would like to take this opportunity as you announced yesterday that for the time being I am the Government Chief Whip, to congratulate all the Whips and also to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition on having been elected with an overwhelming vote. In the meantime, while I am still serving as the Government Chief Whip, I look forward to working with you, to ensure that the business of Parliament moves smoothly. Thank you.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek a small clarification. We have today a multi-party Parliament in place and in the opposition we have a number of parties. One party has elected their leader of opposition. Could we assume then that the FDC Leader of the Opposition is also the Leader of the Opposition for UPC, DP and for Independents? We have to be clear on that so that we know that when he speaks, he speaks for all the parties, including the Independents.

THE SPEAKER: This matter came up when we were dealing with the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill and it was clearly stated. We shall have only one Leader of the Opposition, from the biggest party on the opposition side. They may arrange to work together and that is an internal matter, which they could arrange to strengthen themselves. Their coordination is up to them and there is no way I can dictate on that.

10.36
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Perhaps in the near future there is need to create provision in our law so that we also have a shadow whip because we are very important in this House. Unless we are taken so, we are almost the majority here. The reason for which I contested independently is very important to my people and should be recognised by law and by this House. 

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that those parties having whips have a common programme for their Party. But for the Independents, each one has got his own programme. Therefore, they could whip themselves.  

10.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity to make a very brief statement. Yesterday I was duly elected to lead the opposition in this Parliament as required by our rules. I take this opportunity to thank my party and many others who are not party members but who expressed their good will towards my candidature. I also thank my colleague, hon. Sam Njuba, with whom I contested. That is the nature of democracy. You offer yourself and the choice is made, after which we proceed.  

Mr Speaker, a lot is expected of me as the Leader of Opposition. For the first time since multi-party politics was suddenly terminated in 1985, we are back to multi-party democracy. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us as the Opposition to show the difference. For so long it has been propagated and it is more or less set in the minds of very many that being in opposition is being an enemy either of the state. 

Far from that, the Opposition is that side of the country, which critically looks at what is happening and offers counsel where it is necessary. It offers very strong rebuke just to remind the Government in power that they have the responsibility to exercise that power judiciously and for the best interest of everybody. We in the Opposition shall play that role without malice to anybody or to the state. (Applause) We shall cooperate where it is in the best interest of everybody and we shall resist particularly the Resistance Movement where we think they are going wrong.

At a personal level, many people might wonder how I will be. I know that some kind of reverse of history has taken place. In the late 1960s when the Prime Minister of this country was from the North, and the Leader of the Opposition was from Ankole, at some stage that leader of the opposition crossed the Floor and abandoned the opposition. In reverse of history I now come from the North with the President of the country coming from Ankole. Fortunately there is only one saying, “History repeats itself but man does not repeat himself”; nobody has ever said that history reverses itself. So I do not expect any reversal of my position as Leader of Opposition.  

I thank all my colleagues. We shall guard our territory jealously and we shall do everything that it takes to promote the interest of the opposition generally, including the independents. We thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We ask our colleagues on the crammed side to share our commitment so that together we could build our country. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE FOR THE POST OF VICE-PRESIDENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this morning I received the following communication from State House:
  
“Rt hon. Edward Ssekandi, 
Speaker of Parliament, 
Parliament of Uganda, 
Kampala.  

Nomination of Prof. Gilbert B. Bukenya for appointment as Vice President 

I congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker on your being elected unopposed in your respective positions in the Eighth Parliament.  

By virtue of the authority vested in the President by Article 108(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I nominate for appointment as Vice-President the hon. Prof. Gilbert B. Bukenya.  

I hereby forward his name and curriculum vitae to you for approval by Parliament as required by Article 108(2) of the Constitution.

Yoweri K. Museveni
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA”

This is the communication that I received. I know you have copies of our Constitution and maybe you have come across the Articles that have been stated in this letter. Therefore, according to the Constitution, the President appoints the Vice-President with approval of Parliament, which approval has to be by a simple majority. That is the state of affairs in as far as this matter is concerned.

10.44
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I move my motion, I use this opportunity to congratulate Prof. Ogenga Latigo on his election as the Leader of Opposition in the House. 

I rise to move a motion seeking for approval of this House of the appointment of the Vice-President under Article 108(2) of the Constitution. I move this motion under rule 41(k) of the Rules of Procedure of this House.  

“WHEREAS Article 108(2) of the Constitution provides that the Vice-President shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by simple majority; 

AND WHEREAS the Office of Vice-President became vacant on the 12th day of May 2006;

AND WHEREAS Article 108(7) of the Constitution provides that where the Office of the Vice-President becomes vacant, the President shall with the approval of Parliament and as soon as possible, but in any case not later than 14 days, appoint a person qualified to hold the Office of Vice-President; 

WHEREAS the President has appointed Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya as Vice-President and seeks approval of this Parliament for that appointment; 

AND WHEREAS Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya being a citizen of Uganda and not less than 35 years and not more than 75 years of age and qualified to be a Member of Parliament is eligible in terms of Article 108(4) of the Constitution to be appointed as a Vice President of Uganda; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Article 108(2) of the Constitution, Parliament approves the appointment by the President of Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

MRS GERALDINE BITAMAZIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): I second the motion.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya is very well known and I think that makes my duty lighter. We have circulated his curriculum vitae. Please, allow me to give an abridged version of that C.V. 

Dr Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya is a distinguished scholar and doctor of medicine. He is the Member of Parliament of Busiro North constituency, Wakiso District. 

He was born in Wakiso on 8 May 1949 and he joined Makerere University Medical School in 1971. After attaining his medical degree and serving his internship in Uganda, he joined the prestigious Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene in London in 1981. There, he was awarded a postgraduate Diploma in Public Health a year later. Dr Bukenya went straight on to the Ross Institute, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He was also awarded a Masters of Science in Community Health at the University of London. 

Dr Bukenya returned to Uganda in 1983 to lecture at the Institute of Public Health at Makerere University. However, a year later, he went to lecture at the Department of Community Medicine, University of Papua, New Guinea. At that university, he was appointed head of department and worked diligently for two years before returning to Uganda as Director of the Institute of Public Health at Makerere University. In the same year he attained his Doctorate of Philosophy in Public Health at the University of Queensland. In 1993, Prof. Bukenya became associate professor at the Institute and was appointed Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Makerere University in 1985. 

From 1985 to 1991, he was chairman of the National Advisory Committee on Environmental Health and Maternal and Child Health in the Government of Papua, New Guinea. For the same duration, he was chairman of the Board of Examiners of the College of Allied Health Sciences, Health Inspectors Programme. 

From 1992 to 1994, he was Vice-Chairman of the Network of African Postgraduate Public Health Training Schools in the World Health Organisation Afro Region and Chairman of that same organisation from 1994 to 1996.

Since June 1995, he has been an associate professor with the Tulane University School of Public Health in New Orleans, Luciana, United States of America. Since January this year, he has been a professor of Internal Health at the Esteemed Case Western Reserve University, United States of America. Therefore, he is a distinguished academic in the medical field. 

In July 1996, Prof. Bukenya offered himself and he was elected as the representative of the people of Busiro North, Wakiso in this Parliament. To this day he has held their love and support and he still continues to hold that seat of Busiro North.

During his tenure of service as an hon. Member of Parliament, he succeeded me as the Chairman of the Movement caucus in the House in the Sixth Parliament in 1996. Thereafter he became Minister of State for Trade and then Minister in Charge of the Presidency. On 23 May 2003, he was appointed Vice-President of Uganda, a post he has held up to last Friday.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, hon. Bukenya is happily married with three children. Having worked with him as the Vice-President for the last three years, the President as the Speaker read is satisfied with the work of Prof. Bukenya and he has now appointed him one more time as the Vice President of Uganda. I move this motion to seek the approval of this Parliament for that appointment. I beg to move. (Applause)

10.56
MRS GERALDINE BITAMAZIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya be approved as the Vice-President of Uganda as nominated by the President of the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, Prof. Bukenya is a Member of Parliament, as we have been told, for Busiro North, in Wakiso District, in central Uganda. The professor is a seasoned politician, as many of you would know. He is a patriot, a man who likes his country very much and cares for his people. He is a strong cadre in the NRM. The qualifications are readily accessed from copies of the CVs, which you have. They range from Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery to a PhD in Public Health. 

The work experience is quite long, as you will find from the copies you have. Prof. Bukenya has worked very much as a medical doctor and that is very important because people with high qualifications normally abandon their work for other things where there is money. But Prof. Bukenya has stuck to his guns and he recently told me that he has a clinic somewhere where he goes to see what people are suffering from.

Prof. Bukenya has served in various capacities as a medical doctor and a highly qualified one in many countries. He worked in Kenya, in Papua New Guinea, in the United Kingdom, in the USA, in Australia, in Malaysia, in the Philippines and in India. Therefore, in Prof. Bukenya we have a man of local and international experience.

Prof. Bukenya has held many responsible posts in various medical and professional associations in the Commonwealth and beyond. He is a man who has interacted with different professionals at different levels and has that wealth of experience, which will help him a lot as the Vice-President of this country. 

It has already been mentioned that Prof. Bukenya is a distinguished scholar. He has conducted a lot of research and he has involved himself in consultancies. He has done some consultancies and research in very critical areas of this country. Therefore, besides doing his work as Vice-President, he is a cornerstone in the health of this country because he has done research in nutrition levels of children in Uganda, in Typhoid Fever in various parts of Uganda; and research about breast and liver tumours. As women we know very well that is where we have most of our problems. He has also done a lot of research in diarrhoea diseases and has focused very much on HIV/AIDS especially among the youth and the women.

Prof. Bukenya has been described as a distinguished scholar. He has written 34 pieces including articles, books and pamphlets. I think those of you with a copy of his CV will see the areas which he has covered in writing. As an educationist myself, I would say that Prof. Bukenya is literate in various forms. 

He has held many political posts, which have been listed, but I would like just to highlight that a man who has held different posts in the political setup has a wealth of experience that can benefit other sectors and departments. He has been a Member of Parliament since 1986, which is already over ten years, for Busiro North. I believe those of you who have been there you must have seen what is on the ground. He was the Minister of state for Trade, a very important post where he picked a lot of knowledge and experience. You know how very important trade is for our country. Being a Minister for the Presidency is not a joke. That office as you might guess requires a man of capacity and he really performed his work very well. 

As Vice-President you have all been living with him and I believe you have been monitoring what he has done so far. In light of his performance as the Vice-Chairman of NRM of the central region, the voting pattern speaks for itself. With many others, he mobilised the central region for the success of the NRM in the last elections. That type of success requires a man who is conversant with political mobilisation skills. He has distinguished himself in that area.

Prof. Bukenya is now known to the last man in the villages for his upland rice project. Many people are happy with him because they now have rice to eat everyday and a surplus to sell. That is a project that will be on record as a project initiated and promoted by Prof. Bukenya. He is now working on a very important programme, low cost housing for rural communities. 

Members will realise that many of our people in various communities do not have reasonable housing. He has already embarked on that and I believe given another opportunity in that capacity he will continue to fine tune that programme. He is also engaged in what we call the essential oil project and refinery. I think many other projects in the country where we need to improve on the production of oil in this country will benefit from the professor’s leadership.  

I conclude, Mr Speaker, I have to talk about the character and personality of Prof. Bukenya.  Prof. Bukenya is a senior citizen and a patriot as I said earlier on. It has already been said that he is a family man and from the look of it, he has a happy family. He is a highly gender sensitive man. I think my colleagues the woman Members of Parliament and women outside this Parliament will realise that Prof. Bukenya always has a smile for the female gender -(Laughter)- I should add that that smile is always encouraging, mobilising and motivating. 

As women, most times men would avoid looking at women for fear that the women might think differently but the professor is always welcoming the women with a good smile. This is very important because in our country, as female members of this house, we need encouraging leaders who consider us as capable individuals who contribute to the development of our country. 

Therefore, I recommend that this House approves the nomination and appointment of Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to submit.

11.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Mr Speaker, I begin by thanking hon. Amama Mbabazi for bringing this motion to the Floor of the House. Being a fairly distinguished professor myself, I see a distinguished professor once I set an eye on Prof. Bukenya. I do not need his CV to know that he is an accomplished academic. We in the opposition worked with Prof. Bukenya in the last Parliament as colleagues. During that period we came to appreciate the qualities that Prof. Bukenya has. He is not only a distinguished academic, but also a very honest man, to the extent that he forgets that honesty is sometimes negative. Those are the things that this country needs. We as leaders should speak honestly and very firmly where we think things are wrong.

Prof. Bukenya distinguished himself as the Vice-President of this country during the last Parliament. Earlier on when he was appointed as Minister for the Presidency, Prof. Bukenya took a personal interest in the conflict in the North. He spent some time working with the leaders from the North on the various ways of resolving the conflict. That contribution opened the eyes of Parliament that subsequently embraced our cry to come together so that that conflict is ended. 

As the war goes towards its end and as the challenge of recovery and rehabilitation of the North will set forth, I believe that the commitment that Prof. Bukenya Gilbert demonstrated as the Minister for the Presidency will become crucial particularly, when he occupies such a high place in the leadership of our country.

My colleagues will give various attributes, in some cases their personal perception and feelings towards the nomination of Prof. Bukenya Gilbert, but we formally would like to say that we warmly welcome his nomination. We believe that it will do him good recognition if Parliament unanimously endorses his nomination. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.11
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate you and your deputy. I would also like to congratulate our colleague, Prof. Ogenga Latigo. Allow me to also congratulate my colleagues upon their election to the Eighth Parliament.  

I would also like to add my voice to those of the mover and seconder of this motion, to talk about Prof. Bukenya Gilbert, his achievements and contributions to this country.

My colleagues have said everything about Prof. Bukenya so I am going to be as brief as possible. I would like to talk about Prof. Bukenya Gilbert, a distinguished scholar and doctor of medicine and an outstanding leader of solid ground. 

He is a nationalist who has always been eager to serve his county. You will agree with me, honourable colleagues, that when many of our people leave this country to go for further studies they hardly have the desire to return and serve their country. After his training in the University of London, Prof. Bukenya returned to Uganda to serve his country. In 1996 he honourably responded to the call of the people of Busiro North in Wakiso District. He offered himself as their representative to Parliament. To this day, he has held their love and support and the seat of Busiro North.

Mr Speaker, Prof. Bukenya Gilbert has not only been a dedicated and loving leader of the natives of his constituency but has also, on several occasions, shown love and dedication to the people of the Northern region. My colleague, hon. Latigo Ogenga, has just pointed this out. This has always given confidence to the people of that region, knowing that they have leaders who care.

On professionalism, Prof. Bukenya has been recognised. On 26th April 2005, he received an honorary degree of Doctor of Science. This is a very high award in the field of medicine. Most important is the fact that those who nominated Prof. Bukenya for this honour characterised him as a distinguished medical educator, a tireless leader in the reinstitution of democracy in Uganda and a strong supporter of the CASE, Makerere’s collaboration in HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis research. This research was established in the late 1980s and has been associated with the decrease in the incidence of AIDS infection in Uganda.

In addition, Prof. Bukenya developed a manual used in Makerere Institute of Public Health curriculum. It has been adopted by the country for its district health offices.  

Prof. Bukenya Gilbert is a lobbyist. I believe you will agree with me, colleagues, he has solicited for a lot of support from the donor community for the development of this country. Because of limited time I will just mention a few. He solicited for medical equipment and scholastic materials worth US $100,000 from the Lona Cross International Ministries based in California. This was to help improve access to quality medical services and education to the people, especially our people in the rural areas.  

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that Uganda spends over Shs 20 billion annually for Malaria treatment for children under the age of five years. This disease has killed many of our children, over 110,000, annually. Prof. Bukenya is a strong advocate for the eradication and treatment of this disease. He has encouraged community-based drug distribution as a prevention measure to check the rising Malaria infection.  

Prof. Bukenya Gilbert on many occasions has attracted investors. You will agree with me that in the Government’s efforts to subsidise the current shortage of hydro electric power, Prof. Bukenya has spearheaded negotiations with the solar power technology company in Thailand to import solar panels. There are future plans of manufacturing them locally under joint venture partnership.  

Among his many achievements you will allow me to point out this one in which the country has generally benefited; he initiated upland rice growing. My colleague, hon. Bitamazire Namirembe, pointed this out. I want to tell my colleagues that when he first initiated this project he had only 4,000 farmers in the first season, in only 11 districts. As we speak now the number has risen to over 32,000 farmers in over 30 districts. This contributed Shs 8.2 billion to the economy in the first year, which rose to Shs 16 billion in the second year. As a result, last year at the Uganda Investment Authority Investor of the year awards, Prof. Bukenya Gilbert was recognized with a personal recognition –(Interruption)

MS BETI KAMYA: Mr Speaker is it in order for the member to read a whole speech when the presenter actually read a very brief one? What exactly is she reading?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. I cannot say that she is reading. Maybe she is just looking at her notes. However, honourable members, every member has got a copy of this CV. Let us be brief and dispose of this matter because we have other business to follow. Please, continue and conclude.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. Let me just conclude.  

I wish to conclude by saying that the fact that Prof. Gilbert Bukenya has been elevated from the office of State Minister of Trade and Industry to Minister for the Presidency and to Vice-President it is a clear indication of his progressive performance. I would, therefore, wish to urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to support Prof. Gilbert Bukenya’s nomination to this office. I believe and bet you will not regret if you support him. I thank you very much.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion that I put the question. Let me put the question to the motion moved and then we see how we proceed. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I seek guidance. The person we are going to approve in a few minutes is the Vice-President for this country, both for the Movement and non-Movement. It would be ideal for us to really clearly –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, is the Member holding the Floor in order?

THE SPEAKER: Our rule is that if a Member moves a motion that the question be put and it is carried, my duty is to put the question to the motion. I quite appreciate your concern because many on this side indicated that they wanted to speak to the motion. The procedure is that once the motion has been carried, I have to put the question. In this particular case I am not going to say those in favour say “aye” and to the contrary “nay”. 

The relevant constitutional provision requires us to have a simple majority. However, it will not be easy for me to know the simple majority without having you cast your vote. So a ballot box is going to be brought here. You will be given a ballot paper where you will indicate whether you approve or not. Here we are not appointing, we are only approving or disapproving because this is about an individual.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, unless we will be in terrible breach of the Constitution or any other provision, is it really necessary for us to go for secret ballot? We can put up our hands. In fact, we can almost say “aye” for the hon. Bukenya to be appointed Vice-President.

THE SPEAKER: When you say “simple majority”, you have to deal with numbers, but you want show of hands?  

MR WACHA:  Mr Speaker, it could be easier if we put up our hands.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: those against are 2; abstentions are 9; and the ayes are 210. You have approved. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

Let Prof. Bukenya come in. (Prof Bukenya thereupon entered the Chamber.) Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya, before you left you must have heard that His Excellency the President had forwarded your name for appointment as Vice-President. I read the letter in the House here. The House has duly considered the appointment and has exercised its mandate under the Constitution. I am now happy to inform you that the House has given approval of your appointment as Vice-President. Congratulations!  

11.30
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker and all my colleagues of the Eighth Parliament, I want to start by congratulating you very warmly for being elected to this Parliament, which is a special one. It is unique, and I do hope we can do a lot of good business in this Parliament.  

I also want to congratulate you, Mr Speaker and your deputy, for your unquestionable elevation to your offices. I want to thank the President of Uganda for nominating me once again to this high office, the second in the land of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, I want to declare my interest in the politics of the Eighth Parliament. My interest shall be to fight and reduce poverty, particularly, among the rural, remote, inner city and disadvantaged poor people. That is my interest. (Applause)

In 2006 I do not see why people should be sleeping in soil-based floor houses. These soil-based floors bring many dangers, which most people may not see.  One day I went to such a house, about two years ago, dressed in light coloured trousers. I hardly stood there for 15 minutes but when I came out of the house, the whole of my trousers was spotted with black little things called fleas. I tried to shake them off my trousers. The owner of the house was looking at me like someone from outer space, wondering why I was doing away what he is used to all the time. They suck blood everyday and they weaken you with time. I ask myself, “Why should we have such floors?”

Mr Speaker, we are about to start a very important programme to control Malaria using either DDT or Pyrethroids inside the houses. Almost 60 percent of the houses I see are mud and have spaces. These mosquitoes can fly and hide in the gaps and whatever you spray will never reach them. Why should we have such houses in 2006?  

When you read most of the books and reports about latrine coverage, we are doing very well. Now we have 60 percent latrine coverage. Why can’t it be 100 percent? Why not 100 percent? These are things that worry me. I think we must work squarely on fighting poverty.

Mr Speaker, there is a common lamp that is used by rural remote populations. It is a small tin with an old cloth as a wick, and they light this cloth. In every tribe it has the same name. It is commonly called tadooba everywhere. When you light it in your house, it gives off carbon monoxide. Everyday you are taking in carbon monoxide. The result is you reduce your capacity to circulate oxygen. Why should Ugandans be in such danger? 

Mr Speaker, I want you to join me in trying to fight poverty practically. We must do everything to increase incomes. I know many people who spend a year without handling money, unless a Member of Parliament goes through such a village or inner city and is asked to give them money. We must, therefore, work very hard to increase the income of our people. We must work very hard to bring about a saving culture. We must work very hard to financially intermediate for our people so that they can use other people’s money to live and improve their wellbeing. 

Mr Speaker, in the future we shall be discussing industrialization. My view is that industrialization should aim at where our comparative advantage is: agro-based industries, tourism-based industries, education-based industries, health services industries and maybe ICTs. We have an advantage over the rest of East Africa. I call upon the honourable members of the Eighth Parliament to work quickly so that we approve these industries to help our people out of poverty.  

Mr Speaker, where there is no electricity you cannot develop a country. I hope that this Parliament will make sure we speed up the building of more dams so that our people have electricity. We can subsequently improve the well-being of our people.

I hear about so many house mortgages, but for urban people only. I hope that we can also go a step further and introduce rural house mortgage schemes for the poor people. That is my big interest and that is what I will work on.  

I want to thank you very much for approving the nomination of the Vice President. I look forward to working with all of you. We shall work together because together we can improve the well-being of our people. Divided, you may not improve the well-being of our people. I look forward to a very interesting period in the Eighth Parliament.  

I want to thank you once again, Mr Speaker, because this is the second time you have presided over discussions for my nomination and subsequent approval. Again, you have done so. I will work with your office. My door is open. 

Soon when I put forward what I think is a blueprint for a practical tested poverty alleviation programme, all of you join me and we go to the people. If we remove poverty from our people, we shall have done our service as the Eighth Parliament. I thank you very much for supporting me.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, Your Excellency, the Vice President. Since you have addressed us here this morning, I think you see the circumstances under which we operate.  The Floor is no longer there, so if somebody crosses we shall not be able to know whether he has crossed the Floor. I think we shall work with you to improve the sitting arrangement in the House. Thank you very much.  

CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE FOR THE POST OF THE PRIME MINISTER

11.41
MR KYANJO HUSSEIN (JEEMA, Makindye Division West): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing in fulfilment of part of the contract I made when I swore to give faithful service to this Parliament.  I congratulate you, Mr Speaker, for being elected to the Chair with all your colleagues. I sincerely congratulate you, Vice President, for having been nominated.

I am standing to draw the attention of this House to the feelings of the Muslim community outside there. We have consistently had this House approve names of those who are going to occupy important positions in government without due consideration to the Muslim community. We have already had the President, the Vice President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Chief Justice. Now we are going to consider the Prime Minister. The Muslim community, dear members, feels seriously marginalized when we move in this type of fashion.  

I am standing to remind you of your responsibility and to draw your attention to Rule 154 of the functions of the Committee on Equal Opportunities. It states that, “The committee shall monitor and promote measures designed to enhance the equalization of opportunities and improvement in the quality of life and status of the people, including marginalized groups, on the basis of gender, age, elderly, youth, children, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, we have an Order Paper and the business which we transact is listed there. If you have any other business that you think is relevant, you will be free to comment.  However I have taken the point. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, again this morning I received a letter from State House addressed to me. It reads:” Nomination of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi for appointment as Prime Minister. 
I congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker on being elected unopposed to your respective positions in the Eighth Parliament. 

By virtue of the authority vested in the President by Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I nominate for appointment as Prime Minister the hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi.  

I hereby forward his name and curriculum vitae to you for approval by Parliament as required by Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution.
Yoweri K. Museveni
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA”

That is the communication I received this morning.

11.45
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, honourable members, before I move the motion for approval of this appointment, I want to congratulate His Excellency the Vice President upon the appointment to the second highest office.  

Mr Speaker, I also wish to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker upon your elevation and retention of your seats in those two offices respectively. I wish to also congratulate my colleagues, Members of Parliament, for their victory. 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to move a motion for approval of the appointment of Prime Minister under Article 108(a) of the Constitution and under Rule 41(k) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 108(a) provides that there shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with approval of Parliament by a simple majority from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS the President has appointed Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as a Prime Minister and seeks approval of this Parliament for that appointment; 

AND WHEREAS Prof. Apolo Nsibambi is qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament, 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows: 

That Parliament approves the appointment by the President of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as a Prime Minister.” 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. 

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, first of all, pursuant to Article 108(a) sub-section (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi is a person qualified to be elected as a Member of Parliament. If you refer to Article 80 sub-section (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1991 together with section 4 of the Parliamentary Elections Act 2005, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, although he is not yet with us here, is a person outside Parliament who qualifies to be elected as a Member of Parliament. He is a citizen of Uganda, he is a registered voter, in Bulange, and he has completed his minimum academic requirements of Advanced Level. I believe that from his CV, which has been circulated to you, you can see that he has those qualifications.

Mr Speaker, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi has wide expertise based on numerous attributes. If you consider his educational background, as you can see from the CV, if I started naming all that I would not exhaust the list. Briefly, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi holds a Bachelor of Science with honours in economics, London. He holds a Masters of Arts in Political Science from Chicago. He also holds a PhD from Nairobi University.

Professor has made wide publications, over 50. He has made presentations, over 80, to international conferences. This has made Prof. Apolo Nsibambi a very knowledgeable and broadminded person, who can correctly measure up to the tasks of a Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

I also recommend this appointment because Prof. Apolo Nsibambi has not only acquired expertise through education but also through practice and experience. He held the position of Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in this Parliament from 5 April 1999 to 12 May 2006. He was appointed Chancellor of Makerere University from 3 October 2003 to-date. Of course, this follows after we enacted the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, which made the President a visitor and now different persons are appointed as Chancellors. 

Prof. Apolo Nsibambi served as Minister of Education and Sports from 15 May 1998 to 5 April 1999. The Professor served as Minister of Public Service from 6 July 1996 to 1998. He served as Chairman of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration of the United Nations since 10 May 2002 to-date. Therefore, Mr Speaker, honourable members, from practical skills and knowledge Prof. Apolo Nsibambi can ably perform the functions of a Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business as enshrined in Article 108(a)2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995. 

As Leader of Government Business in Parliament, he is responsible for coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions. Examples of such institutions are Makerere. Also as Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister, he performs other functions assigned to him by the President. 

Mr Speaker, from the practical experience he has, the Professor is noted to be a good time manager who values time as a resource. He markets, cherishes and practices time. From experience in the Seventh Parliament, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi has been noted to be a man who sprinkles debates with flavour even when the House is tensed up. The professor would normally ease the situation with words like “lugubrious”. He stimulates and controls the tempers of members in this august House.  In the current era were the House is based on multiparty democracy, we need a person of a character like that of Prof. Nsibambi, to manage tempers between parties in this House.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to say that Prof. Nsibambi is near the equivalent of Bismarck the Prime Minister of Germany in 1960. During the unification of Germany, Bismarck was quick to identify some factors that internally divided Germany and quickly addressed them. Therefore, in Uganda there are some conflicting forces based on politics, religion, ethnicity, tribe, federalism, decentralisation and centralisation of government.  We need the professor a man, who is focused, a diplomatic moderator as Leader of Government business. He will champion policies that will unite this country. 

In conclusion, Prof. Nsibambi is highly educated. He has practical skills and knowledge of political science.  He will be a Leader of Government Business with zero tolerance to corruption. Certainly, he will drive this country to proper implementation of NRM government programmes of peace, unity and prosperity for all. I beg to move the motion that this august House approves the appointment of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

11.57
MR HILARY ONEK (NRM, Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you Mr Speaker.  I would like to begin by formerly extending my congratulations to the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda, hon. Gilbert Bukenya, who was my classmate.  I also to congratulate you, Mr Speaker, formally together with your Deputy Speaker for being retained in that vital office and for the role you have played to mould tolerance in our society that enabled a multiparty politics to flourish today in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members of the Eighth Parliament, I, hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek of Lamwo County, Kitgum District and the Member of the National Resistance Movement stand to second the motion.  I came to know Prof. Nsibambi in June 1980 when I joined Makerere University as a Lecturer in the Faculty of Technology. I became Dean of Faculty of Science and he was Head of the Department of Political Science and Public Administration.  I was fortunate to have interfaced with him in the Seventh Parliament. He is one of those rare personalities I hold at a very high esteem and respect.  

While at Makerere between 1980 and 1983, we had divergent political views of life, in our circles, which I belonged at the time. With the likes of Prof. Mamdani the then Senior Lecturer in Political Science, we subscribed to a dialectic materialism view of political economy, a popular position for the young generation. We viewed Prof. Nsibambi as a pragmatic capitalist philosopher. 

Mr speaker, ten years later, time has proved him right after the collapse of the socialist economies in Eastern Europe.  At Makerere University, Prof. Nsibambi excelled in those positions of responsibility he held. He demonstrated superior management skills, as reflected in the results of the performance of his staff. Many other graduate students from his faculty scored highly as reported at graduations during that time.  My colleagues who worked under his supervision, some of who are professors today had job satisfaction written all over their faces. 

He conceptualised and managed to start a development programme that enabled many post graduate students in his faculty achieve their professional heights, some of whom are the likes of Dr Louis Kasekende. This is the former Deputy Governor Bank of Uganda and now Director with the African Development Bank. These completed their PhD courses on record time. The professor was not only limited to articulation of political science at the university but he actively involved himself in empirical application of the principles shaping and transforming the spheres of his domain and contributing positively to the advancement of the destiny of our country Uganda. 
As a member of the constituency assembly, which produced the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, his input was of great significance to the people of Uganda.  Prof. Nsibambi is a world-class scientist. Behind him I have 51 publications, including the book entitled “Decentralisation of the Civil Society in Uganda: The Quest for Good Governance.” He has also presented papers to over 80 international conferences. 

His commitment and quest for excellence drove him to associate and undertake some practical steps like being a member of Academy in Political Science of USA to date, being the Chairman of the Committee of experts on Public Administration of the United Nations since 2002, being a founding fellow of the Uganda National Academy of science from October 2002, being Vice President of the Organisation of Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa 1986–1993, being Vice President of Uganda Association of Public Administration and many others.  He has set up benchmarks, which everyone who appreciates leadership desires. It is difficult to achieve.

Despite all the above professional involvements, the professor never lived an abstract life as some do and neither did he deviate from what other normal human beings do. He is married and blessed with abundant off springs.  I second the motion to nominate Prof. Apolo Nsibambi to be the next Prime Minister of Uganda and beg the House to approve his appointment to the post. 

12.04
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I congratulate you and your colleague. I would also like to congratulate Prof. Gilbert Bukenya and Prof. Ogenga Latigo.  I have only two issues to raise, as I support this motion. Had it not been for Prof. Nsibambi I would have raised a very sectarian question but because of the person in Nsibambi I am very happy to say that I will stand to support this motion. 

The Government of Uganda has set a programme to liberate the people of Northern Uganda who have been in Internally Displaced Camps for a very long time.  The professor is at the forefront of this programme. I am an IDP myself and I would like to be liberated. As he has started this programme, I wish he continued with it and set our people free.  We would like to go home and enjoy the peace that the rest of the Ugandans are enjoying.  All I will ask of the professor is to liaise with his colleague, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, so that as we go home, he gets those good programmes that Prof. Bukenya is dying for, including upland rice.  

Mr Speaker, I remember at one time in the last Parliament, I asked to know if Prof. Bukenya was a Vice President of Uganda or a Vice President of Buganda. This was because the programmes were basically in Wakiso and Luweero but eventually we were very happy when Prof. Bukenya came to Kaberamaido. I saw that the programme was taking a national outlook.  Prof. Bukenya has this good programme of low cost housing. I should remind him that where we live is not fit for human beings. I pray that Prof. Nsibambi will take benefit of that programme and make use of it so that the iron sheets they are giving to the people in the north turn out to be something of benefit to the IDPs.

In addition to that, I would like to say that we should support this motion. Prof. Nsibambi is very available to Members of Parliament. Whenever you make an appointment with him, he will always be there for you.  One time I made appointment with some of our people who were on the frontbench. With these former ministers, for five years we have never struck a deal not even once. However, I always made appointments with Prof. Nsibambi and I never lost even one.  He is very prompt and very punctual. If he tells you 9 a.m, he will be there. Honourable members, I pray that you support the professor and you will not regret it. 

The people in my constituency have heard a lot about Prof. Nsibambi and it is their wish that he is given another term so that he gets an opportunity to visit Kapelebyong for once and we shall be very glad to receive him there.  I beg to plead with my colleagues to support this motion. This is a very useful citizen of our country and he will help us here in the House and as well as our constituencies.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.09
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I congratulate the Vice President for the unanimous approval by the Parliament. I support the motion. For the last five years, I have been on the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. We scrutinised policy statements for the office of the President, the Prime Minister and that of Foreign Affairs.  Much as on many occasions some of the senior ministers would not turn up for their budget and policy statements, there wasn’t even a single day that Prof. Nsibambi did not personally lead a delegation from his office to scrutinise the budget and policy statements himself. He was very supportive. He is very technical and when you want to consult him, he is available, as my colleague has already said.  

Mr Speaker, the professor is very quick to act. When members of Lango Parliamentary group met the President to discuss the issue of the return and resettlement of the people in Lango and Acholi sub region, His Excellency had written to him to consult members. It was just one day after he received the letter that he wrote to all of us, with the copy of the letter. He immediately convened the inter-ministerial meeting with the permanent secretaries of all departments. We met, agreed and we took action, serious action, which resulted in the resettlement programme that is running right now, under the Office of the Prime Minister.  

The people of Northern Uganda are highly appreciative of his quick action to the directive of His Excellency the President. We thank him for that. We have to support him because the journey for the people of Northern Uganda is a long journey and is still ahead. Since we have already started working together, we need a driver who will drive the vehicle. I think that bus might be a combination of colours but he is the right driver for that bus for Northern Uganda.

During the first two years I was in the Seventh Parliament, I did my Masters at the Department of Political Science. I found out that most of the reference books in that department at Makerere University for both under graduate and postgraduate courses were written by Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. Therefore, we are looking at a man of practicality and professional achievement. I therefore support his nomination and appeal to this Parliament to approve his nomination.  Thank you.

12.14
MR NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to congratulate you and your deputy on your re-election to that big office. My problem has been the Constitution of Uganda.  Mr Speaker, you will notice that we have three arms of government and all these arms divided by three, we get a third, which should have gone to the women.  As we talk, women have ignored their rights. They are the ones just proposing and seconding as if they do not want power.

Mr Speaker, it is a shame to them because we know the Constitution gives them affirmative action. They should share everything in politics, economics and social realms.  Now, all the big offices have gone. Where are you?  We have not been here trying to talk for the sake of it because we wanted to support you women, who are responsible persons.  For us in FDC, we make sure women are at the front -(Laughter)
 
Mr Speaker, in fact I think the President of this country is very intelligent. He knew if he had brought Prof. Nsibambi first, we would have approved him and the next person would have a problem.  He knows Prof. Nsibambi is loved, so he decided to bring him last. I would like to tell you that Prof. Nsibambi is one of the best ministers those big people on the frontbench would respect. It is true he is a good time manager.  When he says 8 a.m. he means it. All the other ministers mean 4 p.m. when they say 8 a.m.-(Laughter)

I remember during the sale of UCB - you know I was a tough mover on the sale of UCB - we said we wanted to halt the sale of UCB because it belonged to Ugandans.  When we wanted him to make a commitment he said there are dangerous people here. Over my dead body, I cannot commit myself. And he knew that had he committed himself, he would have been held responsible. Of course, he is a person who has studied and he has reached a place where they say there is no more school ahead. He is a capable worker.

Mr Speaker, Prof. Nsibambi has been one of the best persons regarding Northern Uganda Social Action Fund. All the people who have been on that programme of US$100 million, which came through me as a Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, have been mismanaging the money. It is only Prof. Nsibambi who fought for the rights of the northerners on that fund.  Professor Nsibambi is for the IDPs -(Interruption)

MR OMWONY OJWOK:  Mr Speaker, I happen to be the person who developed the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund when I was the Minister of State in Charge of Northern Uganda.  Immediately the Fund was put in place, there were changes in government and two ministers occupied that place.  We have listened to a very serious statement that everybody who has been in this programme mismanaged the money except the Prof. Nsibambi. 

Could the honourable member please substantiate and put on record here on the Table the evidence to show that these people mismanaged the money? Am I one of them? In history I have never appeared in any controversial matter of misappropriating public funds. Is he in order? If not, can he substantiate? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your colleague has raised a point of order to the effect that you have included him among people who have eaten money. Can you substantiate? If you do not then you –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I know the gang of four. I want to assure you as far as I am concerned, I never saw you on Northern Uganda Social Action Fund because by the time it came before my committee you were not in that ministry.  You look a clean man, as far I am concerned -(Laughter)

MRS MUKWAYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now it leaves two and these are women. Because they are not in this House, I have the responsibility to ask on their behalf. Hon. Nandala should put the evidence on the Floor or else withdraw.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I have not talked about the ladies -(Interjections)- let me make my point. I want to make this clear. Northern Uganda Social Action Fund is under the Office of the Prime Minister. The person who has been in both is the Prime Minister. I agree that there are ministers who have been talked about. You have all read this in the newspapers, regarding controversies on the delivery of the services in northern Uganda. It even led to the resignation of the Director of Northern Uganda Social Action Fund. Yet, nobody has ever come to Parliament to explain why the Executive Director resigned. You see, today, if I knew I would have come with evidence. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No. honourable member, the problem is, your statement is affecting a number of ministers that were in charge of that fund.  Do you have evidence? If you do not, say so. If you have the evidence, you will bring it later since you are still a Member of Parliament. But now you do not have. Why don’t you do the needful?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I refer the honourable members to the Auditor-General’s report of 2004. It is very clear.

THE SPEAKER:  Do you have it here? Next time when you have it, you will come and make that statement and be in position to substantiate.      

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, for purposes of moving, I will make this later. I withdraw the statement.  The professor we are talking about is for IDPs and it is true he is one of those.  For me, I do not come from Internally Displaced Camps but he is one of those people who have been at the forefront of this.  I love this professor because he tells the truth. He never lies.  I plead with the ministers who are going to serve under this Prime Minister this time, to respect him.  It is now in the Constitution; the other time you were saying it is not a Constitutional position.  We are pleading with you to really respect our Prime Minister.  Prof. Nsibambi’s instructions should be taken seriously.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I plead with the women. You have already made a big loss.  I advise that the next step, you accept to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This matter should not attract other observations. The subject we have here today is the approval or disapproval of the appointment. It is not a general debate. 

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to plead with the Appointing Authority to look at regional balance. It is a serious issue and we need every body. Whoever is with them should be given a chance to eat with them.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

12.25
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac):  I have stood up on a point of motion, Mr Speaker, which I had moved earlier. However, I had to give others the opportunity to give their attributes. My motion is based on the fact that the high level of integrity, ethical standards and moral values attributed to Prof. Apolo Nsibambi are well known in every inch of this country.  

The most important thing at this point in time is for His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda to demonstrate what we have already exhibited that the people in government know what is being attributed.  It is the moral value to execute effective duties and services for the good of the poor people in this country.  In all certainty, Prof. Nsibambi is one of those Ugandans we could attribute with such profile to serve diligently in the Office of the Prime Minister of Uganda. 

With that background, I therefore move a motion that the matter be put to question.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

12.28
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, this particular motion requires simple majority under Article 108(a).

THE SPEAKER: I will help you.  We have the original motion moved by the mover and seconded. Members have contributed on it.  Now, there is a motion by a member to terminate the debate on the motion.   I am now going to ask you to vote on the original motion moved for approval and that requires a simple majority. We shall use a different procedure, just as we used for the Vice President.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As we did with the Vice President, we shall vote by show of hands. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position on the motion for the approval of appointment of the Prime Minister is as follows: no members abstained; one against and those for are 196.  The motion is carried.  

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF POSITIONS OF CABINET MINISTERS AND OTHER MINISTERS AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 113(2) AND 114(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again this morning, I received communication from State House: “Parliamentary Approval for increment of the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers.

I hereby seek Parliamentary approval to increase the number of cabinet ministers from the Constitutional 21 to 25; and other ministers, ministers of State, from the Constitutional 41 to 44.  This is because I intend to create new cabinet portfolios in order to be effective in political supervision of the respective sectors and to enhance our goal of transformation.  This will also deal with the issue of representation of different interest groups at the cabinet level.  

I therefore request Parliament to pass a resolution for the increment above as required by Article 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution respectively.

Yoweri K. Museveni
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA”

PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of positions of cabinet ministers and other ministers as provided for in Article 113(2) and Article 114(3) of the Constitution.

WHEREAS one of the national objectives and directive principles of state policy is that all organs of state and the people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability; 

AND WHEREAS the cabinet is a central and active engine of the State to which aspirations of the national unity must be reflected; 

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 113(2) and Article 114(3) put a limit on the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers who can be appointed by the President; 

AND WHEREAS in satisfying the aspirations of the people of Uganda to promote national unity, peace and stability, the composition of cabinet must ensure that all major national interests are represented and the whole country is effectively supervised politically; 

AND WHEREAS, the President has considered it expedient that the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers be varied to enhance effective political supervision to accommodate the various national interests and to promote the transformation of Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:
i)	The total number of cabinet ministers be varied as provided for in Article 113(2) from 21 to 25;

ii)	The total number of other ministers be varied as provided for in Article 114(3) from 21 to 44.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I second the motion.

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, we are at a crucial stage of development when we transform our people from mainly peasantry that I described as more financially intermediated people. We shall need to make a lot of decisions, which shall need to have appropriate and most effective supervision.  Political supervision at this level is very crucial, especially in the mobilisation of our people to understand what we want to do for them.  Sometimes they do not know and we need that political guidance.  

Therefore, it is legitimate at this level of development that although the Constitution had restricted the numbers of cabinet ministers, it is important that we vary and bring more political supervision. Not only political supervision but a possibility of day-to-day contact with our people in the development phase. 

This five-year period is going to be a very important period for intensifying action to improve our well being, especially for those rural, remote and disadvantaged poor.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is self-explanatory, I beg all honourable members to understand the situation and approve this particular resolution.  I beg to move

12.41
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (MRM, Kinkizi County West, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to second the motion. My party is known and needs no introduction. I am not FDC. (Laughter) As the mover has already stated, this is really a self-explanatory motion. Both the 6th and the 7th Parliaments had reasons to vary the number of ministers as is being requested by the President for the reasons given now: the question of unity of our people, the very point which some honourable colleagues on the other side of the House have just been making to ensure that our people see themselves in this government. This is a government of the people, which represents the widest accommodation of all the interest groups of Uganda and, therefore, that must be reflected in the Executive. 

I just want to add to what the Vice-President said by pointing out that, therefore, the proposal being suggested now is to add only two ministries. It is to have the ministries, which we have had in the past and to add in total number only two ministries. As you know, this Parliament has already passed the Bill amending the Administration of Parliament Act, which is now an Act, having been accented to by the President. In that Act, this Parliament created a new office called the Chief Whip. Therefore, one of the additions to these ministries is to obey the command of the law that there be a Chief Whip who is at a rank of a minister. 

Secondly, there will be three other ministries mainly based on an effort to rationalise activities of government and to synchronise work: one of them is Lands, Housing and Urban Development. As you know, Housing for example at the moment is in the Ministry of Works, Transport and Telecommunications but Lands is separate. Now, as we all know and for me as a lawyer, whatever is a permanent fixture on land is part of land. This is intended to rationalise the administration in ministries. 

Then, as you know, in this modern age, Uganda does not want to lag behind. There will be the creation of a Ministry of ICT and Communications and there will be also a bit of rationalisation because these activities have been scattered in various departments.

Finally, there will be the Ministry for East African Affairs. As you know, it is in these five years that we are going to move to Federation of East Africa. I just wanted to add that information to what the Vice-President said, to give that bit of detail and to request that this House supports this very sensible and rational proposition, so that Uganda matches faster than we have done in the past. I thank you.

CHIEF WHIP, OPPOSITION (FDC) (Mr Kassiano Wadri Ezati) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I go any further, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you and your deputy for being elected to steer this institution of Parliament. In a similar vein, I also congratulate His Excellency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya upon being appointed and elected as the Vice-President for the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) Although he is absent, I think we will have erred if we did not go ahead to approve the nomination of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. We know how humorous he is in this House. We would have missed him very immensely if we had made any mistake. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I stand here to oppose the motion. (Applause) This is not a surprise. Even when we met in the lobbies, I indicated to my very good friend, hon. Amama Mbabazi, that if that motion were brought, I would be one of those to shoot it in the first instance. 

We in FDC believe in a lean government. We need to appreciate that Uganda is a poor country. Up to this time, 48 percent of our development budget is supported by our development partners. I do not think it is in order for us, as a young country with a young economy, to continuously increase overhead administrative costs for this country. We would rather use our meagre resources for the empowerment, improvement and general development of our country. 

I do recall what His Excellency, the Vice-President said about trying to vary the number of ministers in order to engineer development. I do not think that increasing the number of ministers is equal to development. In fact, it is the other way round. The amount of money that we are going to spend on this high administrative structure we are creating, will be a waste. 

One thing, which I want to share with you, is that many times the various ministers that we have voted and elected in this House are more of heads of department than political advisors. What will be the point of each and every department, which is already being headed by a commissioner also having a minister? What political dispensation does that minister really dispense in a department? Rather, we would prefer a situation where Government comes up with a restructuring programme of these ministries. 

Reduce the number! You are talking about creating a ministry specifically for East African Federation, what is the use and the function of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation? If it is a matter of pleasing our political friends by rewarding them for having voted for you, I think a different method better be found.

I remember His Excellency, President Museveni one time consoled members of NRM who failed in the primaries. He said, “There is a lot of room in my father’s house.” I do not know whether this is the type of room where he wants to bring people. I think if we were really serious in loving this country and wishing it well, we would rather spend much more money on service delivery than anywhere else. [Prof. Makubuya: “Information”]. I do not know whether the professor will give friendly information. Anyway, I will take it.

DR. MAKUBUYA:  Mr Speaker, I am speaking for the first time in the 8th Parliament. I take this opportunity to congratulate you and your Deputy on your election. I also congratulate His Excellency, the Vice-President on, first of all, being named by His Excellency, the President and on being approved by this Parliament. Same congratulations go to Prof. Apolo Nsibambi on his being nominated as Prime Minister and being approved by this Parliament. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate all my colleagues who are Members of the 8th Parliament. It was not easy for me in Katikamu South. I am sure it was not easy for anybody to get here except for one or two who came in unopposed. I wish everybody good luck in the 8th Parliament!

I rose to give some fairly factual information to my good honourable friend, Kassiano Wadri. The question of the Minister for East African Cooperation is part of our participation in the East African Community. Uganda is already committed to appointing a minister for East African Federation. This was a decision taken by the summit of the community and Tanzania has already appointed a minister for East African Cooperation, just as Kenya has. 

Indeed, the last time I attended, when I still had a powerful signature in the Government of Uganda, the last Council of Ministers of the East African Community, which we attended in the last summit, we were the only ones who did not have a minister. We were urged to appoint one as soon as possible because the East African Federation must be fast-tracked. One of the practical steps that must be taken to fast track it is to appoint a specific minister for East African Cooperation in the partner states.  

You also know that in the last summit, there was a deputy secretary general appointed, specifically designated to fast track the East African Federation. Therefore, you could shoot down other portfolios but this one is part of Uganda’s international commitment to our partners in the East African Community. This is very friendly information, I think. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, my very good friend, whom I believe is also a very prospective minister. Yesterday, we were told we should not refer to you as former but you are very prospective I believe.  I have taken your information but nevertheless I have the following to say: It is not enough for us to talk about the importance of East African regional federation. Even as of now, we have portfolios being held here like the Minister for General Duties. What does the Minister for General Duties do? It means, therefore, that could become part of the general duty that he could specifically be assigned. Do we need to have any other person brought from outside? I mean, we do not just have to create ministries because we want to appease people. I think let us for heavens sake be serious and fair to our poor people.  

Hon. Amama Mbabazi also went ahead to say, “Yes, we want to vary the size of Cabinet so as to have regional balance.” My experience in the 7th parliament was that, even when he had approximately 62 ministers, half way were coming from the western region. Was that regional balance? If you want regional balance, there are 76 districts; appease your voters by hand picking from the 76. To me, the issue of regional balance as a justification for the need to vary the size of cabinet is uncalled for. 

With due respect, I appeal to this august House to seriously consider rejecting this motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR SAM NJUBA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me like everybody else to congratulate you and your Deputy upon your reappointment as speakers of this House. I also wish to take this opportunity to extend my sincere congratulations to His Excellency, the Vice- President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. May I add that the population that once resided in Papua Guinea joins me in congratulating you upon your reappointment.

In the same breath, I extend similar sentiments to my friend, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, for having been reappointed Prime Minister. I appreciate the good words that have been said about him.

May I also congratulate all of you who have come to form the 8th Parliament! I also wish especially to extend special congratulations for those of you who shared with me in the 6th Parliament to which I belonged. I feel happy to be back to this august House. 

Mr Speaker, I have told people elsewhere that I am not going to the House to sit in the opposition for the sake of opposition. I have told them that I have come to this House to constructively contribute to the development of this country. So, whatever I say in the opposition to any proposals, I am doing so because I sincerely believe it is correct. Whenever government does anything that is good, progressive or developmental, I will surely be supportive.

Mr Speaker, turning to the motion, I feel saddened that people at this time should be thinking of increasing the number of ministers. The right thing to do would have been to consider even reducing. Mark you, the 21 ministries were carefully thought about in the Constituent Assembly, to which I was party. That was the maximum. We should consider reducing the ministries! 

I do not buy the idea of saying that we have too many ministers because we have too many districts. If we want to appease everybody in the country, it will not work. Can you imagine that people of Kyadondo East now buy a kilo of sugar at Shs 2,000? I do not come from Moyo but I know in Moyo it is about Shs 3,000. Do you people live in this country? Do you realise that by increasing even one minister you are putting more burden to the people you claim to serve?  

Very few people in this country can afford two meals daily. Very few people in this country can afford shoes. Even here in my own constituency, most people buy from the international market of “mivumba”, even some MPs do that. It is not enough to say we want to appease our people, to reach our population. The government has special presidential assistants all over the place. They have RDCs and assistant RDCs. There are chairmen all over the place in the districts. We have broken the country in various small units and there are cadres and there are GISOs. How far can the common man suffer?  At this point, we must think of reducing the ministries. Why should we have 44 ministers of state? What do they do?  

I have served as a minister and I have served as a minister of state - [Mr Nyombi Thembo: “Information”]. Hon. Nyombi, with all respect, I will not accept your information. I would like to appeal to the Members of this august House that we should not just endorse things in expectation that we will be appointed ministers. Please, come to this country to serve. I voluntarily left this House and stayed away for five years. I am still clean and enjoying myself.  

There is a question of facilitation. We are creating ministers that we are unable to facilitate. What is the result? Corruption! It is not only ministers; you must find them drivers, cars, offices and support staff. Ladies and gentlemen, is it not time that we stopped and reflected back? Honourable members, I ask you to think. You came here to serve this country. 

Prof. Khiddu Makubuya has talked about the important Minister of East Africa Regional Cooperation. However, with respect, we are not discussing ministers. The President has been given 21 slots. He could choose one of them to be Minister of East Africa. Please, let us be economical. Let us realise the pressure we are putting up. We cannot afford. Foreigners are financing half of our budget. When you talk roughly to them, they will not support you. I beg to oppose the motion. Thank you very much.

MS BETI OLIVE KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency, the Vice-President, for his nomination and the hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. I would be cheating if I did not add that hon. Nsibambi is a regular member of Namirembe Cathedral with his wife. He is almost a fixture. I thought that I should add that on his CV.

A few weeks ago, there was an audit of the 6th and 7th Parliament. The general view was that, the 6th Parliament performed a lot better than the 7th Parliament. And from my own research, people’s expectation of the 8th Parliament is that it is going to be a rubberstamp Parliament. We need to redeem ourselves from that expectation of the people. We need to set the standard by making pro-people decisions rather than pro-Parliament or pro- administration decisions.

Ladies and gentlemen, I listened to His Excellency, the Vice-President’s acceptance speech and he reeled off a long list of failures of the last 20 years. It was sad but a reality: 80 percent of Uganda’s population still use “tadobas”, according to the National Bureau of Statistics report of March 2005; 85 percent still live on earth-rammed floors in Uganda. 92 percent have never seen electricity. The fleas are a reality. Those are the problems of Uganda. Uganda’s problem is not the fewer number of ministers and certainly not lack of mobilisation. They want electricity. They want food. 

In my constituency, people do not have tea any more. They cannot even afford a basic tea. In some parts of the country tea means tea and milk. However, in many parts of the country, tea just means black tea and sugar but people still cannot take tea in the morning. They just wake up, wash their faces and go out. These are the real problems of this country.

Mr Speaker, the taxpayer is overburdened. You know it. Electricity is up by 37 per cent. The cost of sugar, the cost of fuel and indeed the cost of everything is up. The taxpayer now knows that the reason these costs are up is because of the extremely high public expenditure. We must face that and work to bring it down.

Bringing a motion on the Floor to increase public expenditure is like touching a raw wound of a person who is already suffering. The hon. Khiddu Makubuya was telling us about Kenya and Tanzania, which have already appointed ministers of state. Kenya has almost five times the economy of Uganda. It also has almost twice the population but they have about 60 ministers. Uganda, which is much less privileged than Kenya has more ministers and a bigger Parliament than Kenya. Kenya does not even have the Minister for Regional Cooperation, yet Uganda has. Therefore, when we are comparing ourselves with Kenya, we should look at all the parameters that we are using.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt my colleague. It is not fair at all for the honourable Member of Parliament for Rubaga North to suggest that Uganda is inferior compared to Kenya. Yet, much as people in Bulamogi may be poor but the reality of the matter is, we actually feed Kenyans not only on fish but also on maize. Is she really in order to insinuate that Uganda is inferior to Kenya yet Kenyans are actually coming here in large numbers to partake of the riches of the Ugandan education and the jobs in the construction industry? Tanzanians are coming just as Indians to this great country. Is she really in order to propose a fallacy to these honourable members of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: No. You see, the kind of conclusion she is making could be based on the misinformation she has or the information she is lacking.  Therefore, the best way to handle this is to give information so that once equipped with information, maybe she will change her mind. Therefore, I think you should inform her the facts -(Applause)- and you have given the information. The children are coming here. Maybe now you are equipped with the information, could you change your conclusion?

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am shocked that the honourable member does not know that while the GDP of Uganda is about US$6.0 billion, that of Kenya is over US$20 billion. These are statistics, which you could pick anywhere.

To conclude my presentation, Mr Speaker, I would have been happier if this motion had been accompanied with the cost implications. What is the cost implication of increasing ministers by this number and perhaps even the opportunity cost? I end my contribution by bringing to this House the outcry of the public out there. They are overburdened by public expenditure and we must work to bring it down, not to bring it up. I appeal to the Members of the 8th Parliament that we want to be audited fives years from today, we want people out there to say that Members of the 8th Parliament made a difference in “our lives” not in their lives.  Thank you very much.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is Friday, and we are not only two who are late for this Juma prayer. We are many and others have gone unceremoniously. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to extend my innermost congratulations to you, your Deputy, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister upon your election. But more so, the maturity you displayed during the dangerous DRB debate. Mr Speaker, you had our vote!

Mr Speaker, I have only two points to make: I am Latif Sebaggala, Kawempe North and the Imam of this Parliament. I congratulate all Members of Parliament upon your victory. It is absurd that the government has come up with this kind of request.  I do not think there is anybody here who would disagree with me that since this 8th Parliament opened we have been working together. We elected you unanimously, just as your Deputy, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister have been.
 
Who will disagree with me that since this 8th Parliament opened, we have been working together: the opposition and the government side. But when we come to this, we strongly oppose it, because we indeed have Uganda at heart.

Mr Speaker, I listened very attentively to His Excellency, the Vice-President. The toilet coverage that we have in this country is only 60 percent and only 10 percent have access to decent housing. There is no way we can go to the luxury of having many ministers. Let us make the work of our President a little bit easier because at times –(Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, my friend hon. Latif. Mr Speaker, when I say 60 percent latrine coverage, it is a very important statement. It means that we can no longer leave the technocrats by themselves to do the supervision. When I say, only ten percent of housing in the rural areas, it implies that we in this august House and the ministers must move faster to mobilize people for a change and that means that hon. Latif Sebaggala should support the increase in political supervision. 

You should not consider the money factor alone. I want to refer you to the very prosperous country of Singapore. By 1965, they had over 45 ministers; by 2000 they had reduced to seven because development had taken place. So, political supervision should not be brushed aside because of today’s money. That was my information.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Latif. I congratulate the Vice-President and the Prime Minister for their elevation. The information I want to give is that, the need for physical supervision in any part of the world now has been superseded by the development in technologies. 

In the past, you needed to physically drive to Karamoja to see what is happening there or even talk to the people on the ground. Now with the mobile phones, which came under the Government of NRM and the Internet, the concept of supervision has changed and I wish our government could take that into consideration because the purpose of those developments is to save on the very cost that we are fighting against. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, my colleague and I also thank the Vice-President. It is good that the Vice-President has talked about Singapore, which is among the Asian tigers and he has also talked about political supervision. To me, political supervision is carried out at various stages: we have LC 1s, LC IIs up to LC Vs. We have the GISOs, the PISOs, the DISOs and so on. I believe all those are to facilitate political supervision. What we have on the ground is enough.  

Mr Speaker, maybe His Excellency, the President wanted to cater for the different interests including creating space for Members of the opposition. But, we as Members of the opposition are saying that, let the ministries remain, even if we are not considered, as long as our country goes on because it is the taxpayers who carry the burden of the ministers. What we need are not many ministries but effective and empowered ministers. This will even save the President from a scenario of forgetting some of the names of his ministers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.26
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division, West): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I think we all agreed on the fact that the President is raising a very important matter regarding the running of this country. My proposal is that, we have not seen the President exercising magnanimity in appointing the Cabinet, judging from its previous size. My proposal, therefore, to the President is that, let the President cover the first mileage so that we can make consideration of whether to increase or not by seeing the set of ministers he is going to put in the old positions first. I thank you.  

1.27
MR JOHN NASASIRA (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. It is true we should all be concerned of how we spend our resources. And hearing some colleagues on this side, expressing their concern of a big cabinet as the only area where we are going to spend money that we could have used for other programmes, I imagined that they would also suggest that we engage in a serious debate to see where money is over spent and reduce this Parliament from 309 to 20 Members. 

So my suggestion is that, this Parliament is here for five years; if we want to debate the cost of administration, the cost of programmes and the size of the different institutions, we can keep it and debate it later. But what this motion is about is for the NRM Government to start its work. We can come back and debate that later.  

Mr Speaker, I was lucky to have been in the Constituent Assembly when we debated and passed Articles from 108 to 113, and under the two Articles that talk about ministers, 113 and 114, it says that the Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament.

Article 113(2) says, “The total number of Cabinet Ministers shall not exceed 21, except with the approval of Parliament.” 

So, the CA was wise enough to leave that leeway, that in case there is need, Parliament will approve any number that exceeds 21 and that is why the President has requested for Parliament to use its wisdom to accept increasing the Cabinet ministers from 21 to 25. What you should be asking is the reason for it. 

Since 1995, when the Constitution was promulgated, this figure of 21 has been standing. We elected the Sixth Parliament in 1996 and I am happy that hon. Njuba was there both in this Parliament, and as he said, and in government. The first request by the President was to increase Cabinet and it was approved and accepted. We had elections in 2001; again through the same process, and the first request by the President was to increase these numbers and it was approved because there has always been a good reason for it –(Interruption)

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I was here in the last Parliament and we gave the President what he demanded. But he had a problem of space, where to put some ministers, because we had a Minister without Portfolio until the closure of the last Parliament. Hon. Kiyonga has been a Minister without Portfolio for five years, and we are asking to add on their number. Let us maybe get two more. The President had a problem of ministers of state –(Interjection)- I am just giving information to the minister, so I am not taking your information.

Mr Speaker, we had three Ministers of General Duties because they had nowhere to fit. There was a Minister for General Duties (Health), the Minister for General Duties (Prime Minister’s Office) and the Minister for General Duties (Finance). Why do we not first of all fit those ones and then ask what is reasonably good enough for the good governance of this country?

MR NASASIRA: Let me build up my case. If I am going to accept such information when there is a general debate, I think I will lose track of my debate.  

First of all, world over, these ministers without portfolio are there because they have got special duties. In any case, the recent minister without portfolio you are talking about was even the National Political Commissar, and Ministers of General Duties are there. But why has there been this demand all the time? That is what we should ask ourselves. There must be a reason, because there is work for it. 

People have been quoting examples of Kenya and Tanzania, but that is not true. Kenya has got over 70 ministers and in any case, my friend hon. Betty Kamya, Kenya’s GDP is not US$20 billion. In fact, the difference between the GDP of Uganda, the GDP of Tanzania and the GDP of Kenya is about two billions. So, let us not be misled by wrong figures; Kenya’s GDP is slightly over US$10 billion. But, Kenya has got many ministers also, about 70 of them.  

Fortunately, the ministries that are being proposed like of ICT - I am happy the Leader of Opposition has highlighted and emphasized the importance of ICT, hence the need to have a minister to deal with ICT. But I do not know how you can supervise projects in Karamoja on a mobile phone. But world over, ICT is increasingly becoming important. What has happened now is that part of that ICT is in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication and part in the Ministry of Finance and it is scattered. 

The importance of ICT is taking on the stage of development. Soon this Parliament will have the ICT policy and the new telecommunications policy here. We seriously need to have a Ministry of ICT and develop it for our development. That will be my own experience because I have been involved in this ICT for some time. We seriously need a Ministry of ICT to bring whatever is ICT-related and combine it with information so that the country can move on.

Now, the issue of the Minister of East African Affairs is actually dictated by the East African Cooperation Community Agreement. Hon. Okoech has already been appointed as the Minister of East African Affairs from Kenya. The former Attorney General of Tanzania, Mr Chenge, is the Honourable Minister of East African Affairs in Tanzania. In fact, we were almost seen in bad light and yet we are the champions of fast tracking the East African Cooperation. But it was understandable because our President had explained that we had just had elections. Hence, the Cabinet is not yet formed, that is why the minister of Uganda was lacking at the East African Cooperation. 

We need this minister to fast track the East African Cooperation and I am sure even Members from this side of the opposition want a fast tracked East African Cooperation, if you are going to talk about the development that you want for our region and for our country. So, this minister is dictated by the agreement with the East African Cooperation.  

Now, let me talk about the new minister, whom the Vice-President and hon. Amama Mbabazi talked about (the one of Lands, Housing and Urban Development).  Again, I want to share an experience with you, honourable members. Housing has been under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication; land is in the Ministry of Lands and physical planning - but all these structures you see, some of which are collapsing, are approved by the local authorities. You cannot have a policy formulator in one minister, physical planner in another and the authority that approves the structures in another. You need to harmonize that side and hence the need for the third ministry. 

Finally, is the matter concerning the Government Chief Whip. The Government Chief Whip is going to be a full Cabinet minister and you do not want a chief whip who is going to be a Minister of Foreign Affairs. If this is done, how will Parliament be run? We need to be here with serious work in Parliament and have a minister who is full-time, dealing with Parliamentary Affairs and I am sure the Members of opposition would want that. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. John Nasasira, for giving way. I have not stood here just because you have mentioned an institution that I am serving in. For your information, I am the Opposition Chief Whip. The point I want to seek clarification on is, if the position of Government Chief Whip is now taken as a ministerial position, what difference will it have when in the last Parliament we had a Minister for Parliamentary Affairs? What different role is that Chief Whip going to play that the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs then was not able to play. Can you please kindly clarify on that?
  
MS ALASO: Thank you. I would like to thank you very much, hon. Nasasira. I want to seek clarification. You did state to this House the need for the Minister for the East African Community and if I got you right, you seemed to say it is what is dictating on us to expand Cabinet. I would not like to go away with an impression that you actually mean that the dictates by the East African Community have put it to us that we cannot pick from what is already available. 

The impression you are giving is that, we must create from somewhere, instead of redeploying the very available human resource we already have, and you are aware that we have three ministers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. So, it is a question of designating one or two ministers to take charge of the East African regional cooperation and I think that is what the other governments in the region have done. 

Secondly, I also find problems with your argument that because part of housing is located in Communication - is not that amounting to an admission that government actually has not reorganized itself effectively to run business? Because even if you continue splitting it in bits and pieces, it will not do until you package the portfolios adequately. So, if you have realized the fact that housing is separate from urban development, why do you not package those ones together and still use the available manpower? I have a problem believing that we need to expand this thing. 

Last year, in the 7th Parliament, we created many new districts and those many new districts need money to operationalise. The expansion in Cabinet comes in with another lot of people. A minister is entitled to a driver, he is entitled to two house helps, he is entitled to a house, two body guards - the whole thing is very explosive!

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, for those clarifications. First of all, with respect to the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, I think you are talking about the last government, but why do we not wait and see whether we are going to have a Minister for Parliamentary Affairs under a multi-party system or not.

Let me again clarify the issue of a Minister for East African Affairs. It is a requirement by the East African Community. Basically, these ministers are going to be living in Arusha more than here. So, do not see it as Foreign Affairs or Regional Cooperation, that is a minister dedicated to the East African Affairs. So, that is a requirement that cannot change. We have to appoint a Minister of East African Affairs as part of the agreement for fast tracking East African Cooperation. 

Mr Speaker, I talked about the Chief Whip as a Cabinet minister. But let me allay the fear of those who are worried about the expansion. When you hear from 21 to 25 and 21 to 44, you think this is new. Actually the government that ended on 12th had a total of 67 ministers. What this resolution is doing is actually increasing the ministers to 69. We are not inventing a new wheel really. The actual change is two ministers and these two: one is a requirement of East African Cooperation and the other one is ICT. So, it is just increasing by two, the other 67 have always been there. 

Finally, I want to appeal to Members of the Opposition, do not oppose this motion because you think you have no interest in it or maybe you are not partners in it. (Laughter) We went to the country with our manifestos. In fact, when you look at our manifesto, the Ministry of ICT is there. We appealed to the people of Uganda to vote for us so that we can execute our programme. The people of Uganda gave us the mandate to come here and form a government. So, we need these ministers to run that programme, according to our manifesto and you cannot tell us how to run our programme. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the motion? Let me hear the motion.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, we have listened very attentively to the merits and demerits of this motion. I, therefore, want to propose that you put the question. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Motion seconded, so I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question on the motion to increase the numbers to 44 and 25. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: These are the results of the voting: Abstentions 1; against 28; for 229.

(Question agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable members, for the contributions that enabled us to dispose of the business we had on the Order Paper. Now, there is –(Interruption)

1.51
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Speaker and honourable members of this House, with your leave, I will lay on Table publications for the honourable members. But before I do so, very briefly I would like to congratulate the Member for Busiro North for retaining his position as Vice-President of this country. (Applause) I welcome the arrival of Prof. Ogenga Latigo to the front bench. It will now be very simple to see you given your height. I congratulate all those who have taken up new positions.  

Mr Speaker, I have been requested by the African Leadership Institute to hand over a number of publications to the Members of Parliament, as they begin their work and I would like to inform you that hon. David Pulkol and hon. Elly Karuhanga, who were Members of the Fifth and Sixth Parliament respectively, are among the leaders of the Think Tanker of the African Leadership Institute. And the Executive Director, Mr Oscar Okech, is out there in the gallery. They developed a guide to assist the Members of Parliament in launching the multi-party system in this country. 

So, I have draft Rules of Procedure for the multi-party Parliament of Uganda. It is a proposal exclusively for the Eighth Parliament and I would like to recommend it to you for your reading, and information as you read the draft rules of this House so that when we come to debate, you are enriched by the contributions from the civil society. They were developed by the Project Coordination Committee comprising the NRM, the FDC, UPC, DP, PAP, AP, CP and JEEMA and I suspect a few of the members who are in mock debate may actually have eventually landed in this House. 

So, it has been developed out of the civil society and the distinguished political parties. Therefore, I would like to lay on Table draft Rules of Procedure for the Eighth Parliament, which is a multi-party parliament. It was developed from a mock-parliamentary debate. They even developed what they call the official report of parliament, which is also available for honourable members. The Office of the Clerk will distribute the copies. Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you very much, good afternoon! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Now that we now have the Chief whip of Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, and other whips, I want to have a meeting with them at 2.15 p.m. in my Office to see how we can set out the two committees, which were approved yesterday: the Appointments and the Rules Committee. It is a bit urgent, therefore, please spare some time and come to my Office to dispose of this business.  

With this we come to the end of our business. House is adjourned to Tuesday. But on Tuesday, we shall be having load shedding and because of that we adjourn to 2.30 p.m. because we cannot sustain it from morning to 5.00 p.m. So, the House is adjourned to Tuesday 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 1.54 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 23 May 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)




