

Tuesday, 12 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As usual, I would like to remind you that the curfew takes away one-and-half hours of our sitting time. Therefore, all the work we do, should be done by 5.00 p.m. so that the staff and members can reach their homes before 7.00 p.m.

Having said that, I have just a few issues to raise: First, His Excellency the President, has given me notification that he will deliver the State-of-the-Nation Address, for the commencement of the Fifth Session of the Tenth Parliament, on Thursday, 4 June 2020. Honourable members, please note that day. You should be here for the State-of-the-Nation Address. 
I have also been given notice that the Budget Speech will be presented on Thursday, 11 June 2020. You will be issued with the necessary cards. However, ensure that you are present.

As we approach the end of the Fourth Session, I would like to urge the sectoral committees, which have urgent Bills, to complete them by the end of this session.

In addition, today is the International Nurses Day, celebrated on the 12th of May, to mark the birth of Florence Nightingale, the founder of the nursing profession. On behalf of Parliament and my own behalf, I congratulate the nurses on this auspicious occasion and praise them for the important role they play to ensure our health. At this special time, we wish to remember the crucial work they are doing at the forefront of the fight against COVID-19 in our country and many other countries.

Thirdly, during this past week, many lives have been lost as a result of the swollen rivers, lakes and floods throughout the East African region. I wish to, on behalf of all of us, convey our sincere condolences to the different bereaved families. 

I now invite honourable members to observe a moment of silence in honour of the several deaths in these natural tragedies. Please stand up briefly. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: The other issue I would like to communicate is COVID-19-related. First, I have received an appeal from the Uganda National Students Association (UNSA). They have written to me reporting that 1,750 national and international students all-over the country, are stranded in their hostels, rentals, halls of residence and other accommodation places. Their inability to anticipate the end of the lockdown, means they cannot go home.

The Government-sponsored students are equally stuck in their hostels and unable to sustain themselves. Unfortunately, they have not been categorised as “vulnerable” and so, they have not been able to access the necessities of life.

In their letter to me, they said that UNSA will be able to compile their names, the institutions and the hostels where these young people are, so that they can be forwarded to the national taskforce.

They also touched on the issue of media education programme. They believe that 73 per cent of the pupils in Uganda have no access to radios and televisions. I am glad that today on the Order Paper, we have a statement from the Minister of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance that might give us a picture of how many Ugandans have radios and therefore, how many children are accessing this education.

The other matter I wish to add is also COVID-19-related. This is the arrest of 38 women-traders from the districts of Alebtong, Amolatar and Kwania, who have been in custody in Kwania Prison for over one week. They were allegedly arrested for failing to observe social distancing in the market. Yes, it is possible they broke the guidelines but at the same time, one needs to ask the question: Where are the local government leaders in those areas? If the women did not observe social distancing, the leaders and the market masters should have closed the market and enforced the measures before allowing them in. However, it is disturbing that the majority of these women had very young children who were equally sent to congested prison – Uganda’s prisons are congested. I would like to urge those concerned to look into that.
 
The other matter is to advise the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney–General and the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to harmonise the remaining portions of the Administration of the Judiciary Bill. This Bill was partly handled but it should be completed before the close of the Fourth Session. I want the minister to work quickly with our chair so that this matter is handled once and for all.

I will be adjusting the Order Paper to allow a motion to be moved. In the meantime, I have received many requests for matters of national concern. However, when I read them, I think some of them could be asked as questions. Only that sometimes, the people to whom they ask the questions do not answer and therefore, frustrate the honourable members of Parliament. I will only allow two; we shall share the rest between today, tomorrow and Thursday, so that we do not take a lot of time. Otherwise, we might take more than an hour on them yet we have other substantive business. 

Hon. Rwabushaija, if you could only raise the issue of the collapsing buildings. The second one has already been raised. We are waiting for an answer from the Government; hon. Rwabushaija, just raise the first question.

2.40 
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the high frequency of collapsed buildings under construction in our country.

A case in point is that last Saturday, 9 May 2020, a building under construction in Kansanga collapsed, killing 12 people, who were sleeping on site.

Prior to that, on 19 April 2020, a building under construction - at former Ssese Gateway Beach on Entebbe Road - collapsed and 20 people were injured. Yet again, on 15 January 2020 in Jinja, on Gokhale Road, another building under construction collapsed and three people died.

On 8 January 2020, a building at Mitala Road in Kansanga collapsed and killed six people.

Madam Speaker, the collapse of these buildings has always led to death and/or injury of workers at sites. I stand to be corrected but I have never seen a report presented to this august House, as a result of an investigation pertaining to the causes of the collapse of those structures in the country, neither have we known whether the relatives of the dead and those injured have ever been compensated.

In addition, are the architectural plans of such buildings approved by the relevant authorities? Are such sites officially supervised? 
My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the relevant ministry – that is Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development – investigates these regular incidents to establish the causes and report to this august House?

Secondly, can we know if the victims or their families have ever got justice? Lastly, can we know what punitive or collective actions have been taken to stop these incidents from occurring?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Rwabushaija. Indeed, the matter you raise is very important. Unfortunately, I must confess that we have never received a report here about what has been done in those situations yet the victims are Ugandans; they continue to die. 

The minister in charge of housing is not here. Is the responsible minister here? The minister is not  - housing is for the hon. Dr Baryomunsi. Okay, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is directed to come and report to this House the actions they have taken to ensure the standards of buildings are observed, but also to inform us how the families of the victims have been compensated and how, in the future, they intend to end this untidy situation.

2.44
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very much for the work you are doing, and to thank Parliament at large, for doing a good job. I am saying this because I had taken time without getting this opportunity.

I also would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for raising the issue of stranded students. I have so far received 16 of them who are stranded around. So, I will be grateful to also interact with the minister to find ways of helping some of them.

Madam Speaker, the point of national importance I am raising relates to the various complaints from medical, clinical officers and nutritionists in this country. They have their umbrella association called the Medical Clinical Officers Association of Uganda. They are members of the Allied Health Professionals Council. Actually they form 44 per cent of the total membership of the council. 
These people are the ones in-charge of our health centres III and some health centres IV. They also manage all the out-patient departments in all hospitals in the country. 
Their concern is that they have not been fully and officially involved in the fight against COVID-19. Their point of contention stems from a letter written by the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Health, Ref. No. ADM 126/01, dated 9 April 2020, which called for volunteers to join in the fight against COVID-19 pandemic.

In that letter, the permanent secretary only called upon other stakeholders in medical field - medical officers, assistant nursing officers, enrolled nurses, midwives, counsellors, psychiatrists, nurses and laboratory technicians; their category was omitted. 
From that time, they were wondering why, despite their contribution to the health care in this country, they have been alienated at such an opportune time that they would contribute to the fight against this pandemic.

Madam Speaker, their prayer, which is indeed my prayer, is that the Ministry of Health should give us clarification on when it intends to officially involve them. They are ready not only to serve just for any renumeration but also to volunteer for the success of the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Health here? Okay, the Minister of Health is directed to respond to the ministry’s failure to include key clinical officers in the campaign against COVID-19. Brief us next week on Tuesday. 

I am happy to see the Prime Minister. I have just been informing the House about the letter I received from the students who are stranded in all the universities in Uganda and who need help. 

I will be passing on the letter to you. I do not know whether you have any plans to support the children who are stuck in the universities and could not go home because of the lockdown. Anyhow, I will be sending you the letter to help you take action.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised the issue of former KCC employees who, up to now, have not been paid their terminal benefits yet the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had allocated Shs 100 billion for that exercise.

You so directed the finance ministry last Thursday to come and give us an update. I wanted to know – good, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is around – what the update is because there are over 1,000 former employees that are suffering. Many have died and those who are alive are living in a very horrible situation, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I think you were here last week.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg that I make a statement over that matter tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: That is now a Government assurance. Let us go to item three.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is: I had submitted a request relating to the food being distributed to our people. I came with samples of the beans being distributed. I told the ministers who are involved that – (Interjections) - if they can only be patient. My sister who represents no constituency, you need to listen to this – (Interjections) - I represent a constituency.

Madam Speaker, the food –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I saw your note but I did not realise you have brought items into this House, whose source I do not know. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the reason I have brought these samples –

THE SPEAKER: Where are they from and who has tested them?

MR SSEMUJJU: They are from Kireka, one of the areas, which I represent in this Parliament. This food was distributed yesterday. Madam Speaker, all that I want, if colleagues can be patient, is for Government to go and investigate this food; it is being distributed. 

This food, which is being distributing – (Interjections) - you will go to one home – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague, for bringing this matter across. Madam Speaker, we are in very big danger. I have also come with a sample that I randomly picked from – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. As you are aware, the Government has been providing food in different parts of Kampala and from the responses of those who are receiving the food - Actually today as I was coming from Lukuli, Makindye, I found people carrying food and majority of them are very positive regarding the response that Government is giving.

Madam Speaker, aware that hon. Semujju Nganda and other members standing in that podium have brought items resembling beans and posho, we cannot ascertain where those food items were brought from. Is the honourable member therefore in order to come and undermine the efforts of Government in trying to protect Ugandans from COVID-19 and from hunger? Is hon. Semujju Nganda in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Semujju, can you tell me who supplied that food? Who brought that food to that place? Who was responsible?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, first of all, this food is labelled. I randomly picked it from one of my constituents when she had just gotten it from the taskforce that is distributing it. We are very much aware that hon. Amongin’s husband is in charge of food distribution, at least in Makindye. She has a conflict of interest in this matter.

Madam Speaker, I have two prayers. One, I would like to be allowed to lay on the Table this sample of food item - 

THE SPEAKER: Lay them there.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, protection. We need Government to tell us what type of beans these are. When the taskforce goes out to procure this kind of food, what is the name of this type of beans that it is procuring? We would like to understand; is it kanyebwa, nambaale - What type of beans are these?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just put it down. I do not know the source - (Applause) - I will send someone to your area to see whether that is what is being distributed.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Using your good Office, I do not want us to downplay what has been displayed here. The fact is, let the Prime Minister’s Office investigate because issuance of bad food has been brought - In your wisdom, what we should do is to investigate as much as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already made a ruling on that issue. (Applause) Please take your seats. Honourable members, let us go to item three. I now invite the Minister for ICT to make a statement. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON CENSUS OF FM RADIO STATIONS IN THE COUNTRY

2.56
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 6 May 2020, you directed my office to provide a report on the census of all FM radio stations in Uganda and their coverage. This paper seeks to provide information to facilitate the response of the ministry to the request of the Speaker on the census of FM stations in the county and their coverage.

Madam Speaker, radio spectrum is a finite but reusable neutral resource required for the operation of every wireless communication or radio based service. The radio frequency spectrum is thus shared by multiple users, countries, services and applications. 

The frequencies within the radio spectrum are clustered in ranges called radio frequency bands. The frequency band designated for FM radio broadcasting services range from 87.5MHz to 108MHz. To ensure efficient and rational use of the limited resource by the radio communications services or users without causing harmful interference to each other, the following principles and practices are applied in the planning and assignment of these frequencies: 
    1. The regulator; Uganda Communications Commission divided the country into 14 radio planning regions as shown in Annex 1.
    2. A spectral separation between consecutive channels is applied in planning and assignment of frequencies in the same region and in adjacent regions. This is consistent with the international requirement and standard on the same. 
    3. Physical geographical separation is also required between any two stations using same or adjacent frequencies.

Madam Speaker, the power of the transmitter is one of the most important factors in determining the coverage of radio stations. The relationship between the coverage and transmitter power is almost linear up to a specific point. Beyond that point, though, an increase in power will not necessarily result in an increase in coverage.

Madam Speaker, typically, a station with maximum transmission power of 100 Watts, antenna height is 60m above ground level, antenna gain is l0 decibels unit used to measure intensity of sound and flat terrain would have coverage of about 70km. The maximum permissible power was capped not just for protection of the populace around installation, but also to ensure realisation of the objective of the principles and practices highlighted above that are applied in radio planning and assignments.

Having given that information, our resource allocation list of FM stations across the country is also provided in Annex II. We have 14 broadcasting regions covering over 130 districts with 309 FM stations in Uganda, according to our reports for the Uganda Communications Commission.

I beg to submit - (Interjections) – the lists are attached. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister for this good information. However, we should have asked the minister in charge of statistics to assist you because we needed to know how many homes in Uganda actually have radios for purposes of this exercise of media training. 

I do not know whether hon. Bahati can help and get for us that information before we can discuss this. Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) is under the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is why I am asking him.

3.03
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we did circulate the Constituency Profile Books to every member in this House. In the booklets, there was coverage of radios; how people access information from different parts of the country. 

I undertake to bring this information tomorrow again so that members can be updated on both the average and also per constituency. Thank you. 

The Speaker: The minister still wants to say something.

Ms Nabakooba: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would suggest that you give us time to get statistics. However, from what I know, 90 per cent of our population have access to radios or televisions in their homes – (Interjections) – that is a fact. 

3.04
Mr james waluswaka (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my colleague, the honourable minister for Information and Communication Technology (ICT), I remember the whole House and indeed myself, raised the issue on how the ministry wants to educate people through e-learning. 

The challenge we have in our constituencies is that we do not access radios and televisions easily. For the minister to come and sugar-coat an open lie to the public that over 90 per cent - I think honourable minister; since the Prime Minister is here,  sometimes we should say the truth and it will set us free. 

Therefore, on behalf of the people of Bunyole West and indeed on behalf of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), I would like to disagree with the minister. However, since she is coming back, she should come with a concrete figure. 

Madam Speaker, I pick from West Nile –

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think it is me who requested for the census for purposes of finding out how many children in Uganda have got access to a radio in their homes so that when these programmes are sent, they can access it.

Mr Alero: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, our Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) mast that was installed in the 70s by Idi Amin Dada was removed. We do not know where it is up to now yet the mast is supposed to serve the whole of West Nile Region. 

Up to now, the land has been grabbed and given to the so-called investors. The masts have been removed so we can never have any good reception. Besides, there is always interference of network from Sudan and Congo. Thank you.

3.06
Mr Kaps Fungaroo (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for attempting to answer the question. The question asked, in my view, is not only about the radio stations, which transmit but also the radio receivers where our people receive the information from. That is the point of concern for learning.

There are places where radio signals are very poor. More so, radios like our mother radio, UBC do not reach certain areas of Obongi and West Nile. The radio coverage is not okay.

Therefore, how many people have radio handsets for receiving the education given through the radios? How many homes have television and radio sets? This is where we should concentrate.

Madam Speaker, you have also tried to put up a radio for us here. Why has the minister refused to give us our own frequency so that we would be able to transmit our messages right from Parliament here? 

Honourable minister, when you come back, bring the statistics about handsets and transmitters.

The Speaker: After hon. Luttamaguzi, let us go to Sebei highlands. I know that there is a problem there.

3.08 
Mr Paulson luttamaguzi (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You told us that Parliament does not work on assumptions. I would like the minister to give us concrete evidence or survey, which she bases on to say that 90 per cent of Ugandans can access radio stations. Otherwise, she should apologise to us. Thank you.

3.09
Ms everlyn chemutai (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For us in the whole of Sebei Sub-Region, we do not access anything to do with Ugandan radio and television stations except UBC. More especially in Bukwo, we only access Kenyan programmes. 

When you talk of putting school programmes on television or radio, our people listen to those from the Kenyan side.

Therefore, honourable minister, Bukwo needs UBC television station and a radio station. Thank you.

3.10
Ms angelline osegge (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would think this is a very serious issue. It is not a matter of just defending the position or the number of radio stations without serious evidence. It is about our children and this country. 

I would have expected the honourable minister to tell us the number of radio stations probably but also reason as a leader in this country that because of these mishaps, this is what we are going to do. It is not just about defending a position. We want our children to learn.

The truth is that the radio coverage in this nation is not up to 90 per cent. I would beg the minister – honourable minister, I would like you to listen to me, if you may. I know that you can tell the truth. When something is not right, please have the honour to say that it is not and plan for something that can help this country.

We are not speaking because we want to discredit anybody but we are all going through pain because of what our children are going through. Our children are the future of this country. If their future is destroyed, we have no country tomorrow. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still insist that this House would like to know the homes in this country that have access to a radio, so that, as we are discussing the issue of media education, we can compare the numbers to the coverage.  So, the minister of finance will assist the Minister of ICT to put the figures together so that when you come, you give us the census so that we can debate from a point of knowledge.

3.12
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The BBC Media Action working with the Minister of ICT in 2017 did a media landscape and the information is not much different from what the minister was saying, except that they link it to adult listenership; 87 per cent of Ugandan adults have access to radio - that is 2017. I have the publication here. I can circulate it to everyone. 

Therefore, I think the minister is basing on that information -(Interjection)- this is a 2017 one, which was published by BBC Media Action. Therefore, my sister, the honourable minister from Mityana is not far from the truth.


THE SPEAKER: The minister of statistics has said they are going to work together with the Minister for ICT and give us the information before we can conclude the debate on the media training of our children. Thank you.

Honourable member, something is being done about your issue. I think Government is working on a plan to bringing stranded Ugandans back. Is it Gen. Katumba who told me that?

3.14
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a committee which has been set up under the Prime Minister on which the Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are members. We are working out modalities to see how this is going to be done without jeopardizing the issue of health. Therefore, it is work in progress and we shall report back once we have put in place the right mechanisms to allow those who are ready to come.

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for picking up the issue before I raised a procedural matter. Last week when I raised the issue about the fate of Ugandans abroad, you said that the Minister of Foreign Affairs should be here today to pronounce Government’s position about the fate of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are dying abroad, they are badly off. Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Minister of Works to inform us about a committee being set up without giving us a time frame.

Madam Speaker, we need to hear today, the Ugandans abroad are watching, their families here are watching and they need to know the fate of their relatives with the exact timeframes and the Government should give us that today and now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a timeline?

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have said that we have started on this work. We have to first get all the details of the Ugandans out there because they are not all stranded in one country. We must have data and we must understand what conditions are pertaining in every different country. Then we shall have a well prepared and organised way of handling things. It is not just a question of jumping on to the issue. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think we have made progress. First of all, now that the Government is moving to handle that issue, I think let us give them time. Ugandans are all over. They are in Australia, USA, Ghana, Tonga, etcetera.

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a month ago I was moving a campaign with friends from all over the world and we got friends from the United States called the Black Star International, who offered to airlift all the Africans that were oppressed in China because of their skin colour.

Madam Speaker, we did not need to spend a single shilling or dollar on that. All we needed from the Government of Uganda was to accept those people to return to Uganda.

I wrote to the Prime Minister of Uganda and I still insist, Madam Speaker, that the Government of Uganda does not need to spend a shilling on that. We have friends that are willing to pay for the return of the people. All we need is for the Government of Uganda to accept those people and receive them. They accept to be quarantined because our people are suffering, they are being oppressed and all we need is to accept them back home. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, for the information. Honourable members, I think we should be clear. China is not the world. Hon. Adeke raised an issue of the Ugandans scattered all over the world and then we instructed the Government to tell us what they are going to do. Hon. Kyagulanyi is talking about China - yes, there are Ugandans in China, Australia, England and USA. Please, let us give the Government time. The Minister of Foreign Affairs is here.
 
3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okelllo Oryem): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the protection, welfare and the care of all Ugandans who live abroad. No individual can take responsibility for the welfare and protection of Ugandans abroad. (Applause)

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in collaboration with the Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Health under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister is in the process of designing a concrete programme in order to ensure that we do not only identify the Ugandans who are leaving, but identify Ugandans who are stressed and desperate but also organize the manner in which Ugandans can be brought home in line with national order.

I seek the indulgence and the patience of everybody in this House, including those outside there in order for us to bring all our Ugandans safely as soon as possible.

The Government of Uganda has capacity and the will to ensure that we assist all Ugandans abroad and ensure that they come home safely to their families. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Please come back to us sooner than later so that the hearts of Ugandans can be at rest. Next item No.3(2), Minister of Internal Affairs.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARREST AND BRUTAL TORTURE OF HON. ZAAKE FRANCIS 	MP MITYANA MUNICIPALITY BY SECURITY OPERATIVES AND THE SPECIFIC ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT AGAINST THE PERPETRATORS

3.20
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity, to respond to the question of the debate about the arrest of hon. Francis Zaake. 

Madam Speaker, on the 6th of this month, I received court summons to defend colleagues and myself, against a court case raised by hon. Francis Zaake. It is true I am ready to continue with the debate but I am now constrained that in the event of this debate, we will be discussing the substance of the court case. 
Is it therefore, right that I should continue to engage on a matter that is already before court?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you are in court, lay the summons here.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I have a copy of the summons. If you will permit me, let me lay it on the Table as evidence of the matter. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time Parliament is allowed to debate matters which are already in courts of law. As long as you steer clear of the sub-judice rule - this is a situation where it is not only hon. Zaake’s case but even other cases of human rights abuses that have been meted out to Ugandans by the Uganda Police Force. 

I, therefore, beg for your indulgence to guide us whether issues which are not related to the case, filed by hon. Zaake - if they can be avoided, the better - so that we are able to consider other issues of general human rights abuses, which are happening in this country.

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and guidance on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been shown a document here, which is a notice of motion. It is in the High Court of Uganda, miscellaneous case No.85 of 2020:

1. HHhon. Francis Zaake, applicant v. the Attorney-General of Uganda; Bob Kagarura Wamara, Regional Police Commander; Alex Mwine, District Police Commander, Mityana; Elly Womanya, Commandant Special Investigations Unit; Musa Walugembe, the officer in charge of Special Investigations Unit; Twesigye Hamdani; Mulungi Haruna Nsamba; and Brig. Abel Kandiho, head of the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence.

Therefore, honourable members, I am not comfortable discussing this matter now because it appears these are the people involved in the arrest of hon. Zaake. I just hope that it can be handled quickly so that we can have time to discuss the minister’s statement.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the ruling. In light of your ruling, I am only wondering whether it would not be procedurally right that we expunge the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs on record about the subject matter as you had guided. Without a discussion on the same, if it stays on record without some of the issues being expounded on by the members, I think that it would present a one-sided account. I would like to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, I would like to also seek your indulgence: I sat at the backbench and the manner in which we are transacting business by heckling each other, really makes me feel very small being in this House. As I speak now, you hear the heckling and that is not how we transact business in this House. I am not in the habit to heckling; so, if I am heckled and I cannot heckle back, then I am made to look out of place. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are sitting in this House, amidst a strained environment. It is as if we are adversarial - even on a matter – (Interjection) - Yes, I have been noting the growing trend. Even where we have in this House a minister who stopped the distribution of food and returned 150 bags of rotten beans, he is here in the newspapers. However, once such a matter is raised, everybody is rising up to suppress it; everybody behaves as if he is winning. 

It is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker, because these are the facts we have. This time round, I think we are better off debating matters of public importance as Ugandans, first of all. We do not seem to be winners; we have suppressed him and that point has been covered. 

I would like to urge colleagues that if there are matters of public importance, let us look at them squarely and we devise means of overcoming them. However, even here we are refusing to listen to the points of reason.
 
Madam Speaker, the obvious issues are being shunned as if we are winning or somebody must lose. The point I wanted to raise is; we have a statement on the Hansard. In fact, last Thursday, the Minister of Internal Affairs presented a fully-fledged statement. What was remaining today was to resume and put that issue to rest. 

However, when the full minister comes up to technically defeat Parliament and technically shut down the voice of the voiceless - Madam Speaker, we are now the voices of the people who cannot have the opportunity to be here. Once you do not want to debate a matter like the torture of a Member of Parliament, where I would like to remind you that this is not the first time we are having such an issue; we have always had issues. However, the rules provide for the Speaker to continue guiding on the matter - if a member deviates from the point and goes into the sub-judice issues, the Speaker rules the member out of order. 

At least, we would have allowed the debate to ensue so that we find a solution to this problem. Otherwise, honourable members, by the time the COVID-19 situation is over, a lot of damage would have been done. Supposing it was you, hon. Nakiwala who was being tortured – Yes, you are looking at me as if I am coming from heaven. Supposing it was happening to you, would you like the House to keep quiet about it? Why are we really shutting down the voices of reason on a matter that is affecting the millions of Ugandans, who cannot be here by themselves? I will take information from -

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not the Speaker. Honourable members, the issue of hon. Zaake was raised by me – I am the one who raised this matter, demanding an explanation from the Government about what had happened to him. At the same time, I am alive to the issue that the matter is now in court. However, how will I control what members are going to say? What I can say is that we leave the matter for now but ask our Committee on Human Rights to follow it up so that if the time comes, we can follow up on this issue. 

I do not know when the case is going to be heard; I do not know whether it will also be treated urgently like they do with other urgent things. Can the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs tell us whether this matter can be fast-tracked?

3.31
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to thank you for your communication to the House, making reference to the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, which has been pending. I share your concerns. I oblige with your ruling. I will ensure that this is quickly responded to. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT PAYING TRIBUTE TO H.E, THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR HIS CONTINUING EXEMPLARY AND INSIGHTFUL LEADERSHIP DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN UGANDA

3.33
MR BONNY OKELLO (NRM, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to move a motion, under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, for a Resolution of Parliament paying tribute to H.E, the President of Uganda for his continuing exemplary and insightful leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS in March 2020, an outbreak of the highly infectious COVID-19 pandemic was declared in Uganda, following similar outbreaks in other countries around the world;

AND WHEREAS the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organisation (WHO);

NOTING THAT as of 10 May 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had affected four million people worldwide and has led to the deaths of 279,000 people worldwide including 79,000 in the United States, 26,000 in Spain, 36,000 in Italy and 31,000 in the United Kingdom;

FURTHER NOTING THAT in spite of the devastating effects of the COVID-l9 pandemic on some countries such as the United States, Italy, Spain and United Kingdom, Uganda has managed, with decisive leadership, to limit the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic as illustrated by the fact that Uganda has only 116 confirmed cases, of which, 55 have so far recovered and has not suffered any fatalities;

AWARE THAT following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, H.E, the President of the Republic of Uganda immediately took decisive leadership in guiding Government's response in stopping the spread of the COVID-l9 pandemic by closing all virus catchment areas such as institutions of learning, places of worship and other public places, limiting non-essential movements of persons in and out of the country and closed the borders of Uganda to human traffic, including Entebbe International Airport, imposed a night curfew and general lockdown of the country for a defined period, mobilised resources from Ugandans and their well-wishers;

FURTHER AWARE that H.E, the President’s insightful leadership is exemplified by the establishment of the COVID-19 response structures such as timely detection, tracking and testing of suspected COVID-19 cases, the provision of food and other life essentials to the vulnerable poor in urban areas, the establishment of a COVID-19 fund into which the public materially contributes to Government’s response, barred the demands for the immediate payment for rent from tenants during the COVID-19 pandemic and has kept the public consistently, and with details, informed of the developments in Government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic through regular televised and radio addresses to the public;

APPRECIATING THAT the exemplary leadership of H.E, the President has seen Uganda become a beacon of hope in the fight against COVID-19 and other deadly viruses and has mitigated the social and economic effects of the virus on Uganda compared to other countries which have all reported far worse COVID-l9 statistics, including infections and deaths compared to Uganda;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that whereas the COVID-19 pandemic has overwhelmed countries with more robust health systems and structures in comparison to Uganda’s, Uganda has managed to mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic owing to the exemplary leadership of H.E, the President;

NOTING WITH APPRECIATION the tireless efforts of Parliament, the national and district taskforces on the COVID-l9 pandemic, Ministry of Health, scientists and security in working under the leadership and guidance of His Excellency, the President towards protecting Ugandans; 

FURTHER NOTING WITH PRIDE the commitment of Ugandans and the business/private sector in not only conforming to the protective guidelines issued by the Government to confront the COVID-19 pandemic but their overwhelming response to His Excellency, the President’s call for contributing in one way or another to the national effort to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT H.E, the President of Uganda has consistently provided insightful and exemplary leadership during previous viral outbreaks and natural disasters, including the recent outbreak of HIV/AIDS, Ebola, Yellow Fever, Congo Hemorrhagic Fever and other natural disasters such as floods, famine and other calamities;

NOW, THEREFORE, this House unanimously:

    1. Pays tribute to H.E, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his exemplary, visionary, insightful and decisive leadership during the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda. 
    2. Expresses its appreciation to Parliament, the national and district taskforces on the COVID-19 pandemic, Ministry of Health, scientists and the security for their tireless efforts in working towards protecting Ugandans. 
    3. Recognises the adherence of Ugandans and the private sector to His Excellency, the President’s guidelines to combat the COVID-l9 pandemic.
    4. Recognises the tremendous response by Ugandans and the business community to His Excellency, the President’s call for contributions towards the national response to the COVID-19 pandemic.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded by several members. Can you say your justification?

MR BONNY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, aware of the fact that for the past two months H.E, the President of Uganda has continuously led the country – we are all aware that the fear for COVID-19 itself was worse than the virus but with well-researched scientific facts, the guidance by the President, through his briefs, has allayed that fear. Even Members of Parliament in this House can attest to the fact that the fear was much.

Secondly, we are aware that for the first time Ugandans have been united under one cause. We have seen Ugandans from all walks of life, from market vendors and our local council one chairpersons, to the private sector, contributing resources. This is the first time in the history of this country such a thing is happening.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that H.E, the President has always taken leads in the fight against epidemics. We are aware that HIV/AIDS had been a problem but today it is no longer an issue – it is history, all because of his guidance.

Secondly, Ugandan scientists, through the support of H.E, have contributed to the fight against epidemics not only in Uganda but in Africa and beyond. This is something we can talk about with pride. This is something, which you can only find here in Uganda.

Colleagues, I request that we all support His Excellency as we continue to engage all other stakeholders. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I invite hon. Bichetero, the seconder, then hon. Jacob Oboth? Let us first deal with the seconders.

3.40
MS VERONICA ISALA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support and second this motion to pay tribute to His Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.

Madam Speaker, by way of preamble, I would like to thank the Almighty God for life and health today and for sparing the world, especially Uganda, from the worst that could have happened to the people regarding the effect of this pandemic. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Parliament of Uganda under your leadership - (Applause) – for creating an enabling environment, however difficult. We started from the chamber during the COVID-19 period, moved to the conference hall and now we find ourselves under this tent. However, it has always been an environment for Members and staff of the Parliament of Uganda to continue serving Uganda.

I pay tribute to the President of Uganda for his international activities. We are getting donations because of what is happening - the achievements and the way he is handling COVID-19. We are also getting regional recognition, particularly from our neighbours. You hear people saying they wish they had our one and only President to help them manage the virus in their countries. Therefore, we do not take our President for granted. I read in a Japanese newspaper an article where they highlighted the work of the President of Uganda in managing the COVID-19 pandemic. 

At the national front, the activities are too many, and we are aware because we live under those activities, but I would like to concentrate on a few. One, I really want to commend His Excellency the President for managing the myth and fear concerning this disease. I commend him for demystifying, localising and introducing very rudimentary education and for sensitising Ugandans directly through the media and when he meets them about the pandemic, more so about its spread, how it can be contained, managed and other protective measures. Madam Speaker, we even have jokes on what has been imported into our local languages; he has made life a bit easy.

Secondly, His Excellency the President has been working based on the advice and guidelines of the Ministry of Health, other health workers and scientists to apply public health preventive and protective methods like testing at entry points, checking of temperatures, which we are doing, hand washing and wearing face masks.

Thirdly, the President has issued directives that have already been mentioned in the main motion. He has not only issued the directives but he has also put in place officers to implement and manage these directives, for example RDCs, security personnel, civil servants and all of us. 

Madam Speaker, never in my life have I seen a church closed. We are living in a situation where previously we used to run to churches, but the churches are now closed. This shows that there is a temptation to open churches and do other things that we would have loved to do, but because of these directives, Ugandans are safe.

When we look at the statistics, half of the people are free from the virus. Also, when you look at the people who contracted the virus, you realise this virus was imported to Uganda. Here we are, managing - The current cases did not originate from Uganda but they were brought either by truck drivers or by our brothers and sisters who travelled abroad.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the President for establishing the national task force and the district task forces. It is through these task forces that contributions can be channelled to help manage the effects of the pandemic like the distribution of food, transport, welfare at the isolation places and quarantine centres. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Kaberamaido have benefitted greatly from all the above and they join me in appreciating His Excellency the President of Uganda. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Jacob Oboth, hon. Simon Oyet and hon. Keefa Kiwanuka. Those are the seconders. We shall then go to the bataka.

3.48
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, it gives me pleasure today to second the motion paying tribute, recognising and acknowledging the role played by President Museveni in the fight against COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I rise today, on the 12th day of May 2020, not to talk politics and not to criticise anybody but to give praise, to acknowledge and appreciate what our leader, President Museveni, has done so far. (Applause)

I have been in this Parliament and we shall agree that President Museveni is a team player. This has been demonstrated - (Interjections) – I will not hesitate to say that the successes registered so far demonstrate that President Museveni is able to inspire loyalty from among his teammates – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, if you could protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please allow the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to make his contribution.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, it is undeniably a fact when we are here to acknowledge what our leaders have done, others will quickly say “they are talking politics”. However, this is a political house with a special mandate to make laws for the peace and good governance of this country without a political eye.

Madam Speaker, to me, President Museveni has set another record. (Applause) He is the ninth president and we have known that he values life. He started the fight against HIV/AIDS publicly. He was one of the first political leaders in the whole world to come out with strategic ways and methods of fighting HIV/AIDS. This has also been demonstrated in the fight against COVID-19.

I think that this could easily hurt - talking about somebody who is still alive. COVID-19 is not over yet but we want to recognise those who have done some work and President Museveni, as a leader, has played his role well. (Applause)

I would like to join others in thanking other people, the Ministry of Health and Parliament of Uganda. We braved the dangers of transmission and death in the face of COVID-19 and we are still here working, Madam Speaker, under your leadership. We want to thank you for that. (Applause)

We have heard of great leaders. We have heard of many being given titles. I do not know which title we would give to a president who has steered a well country and we have not registered any death so far.  

We - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I am being targeted for obvious reasons.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please respect one another.

MR OBOTH: What I am saying is not palatable on my left but I have to say it if it is the truth. (Applause) Madam Speaker, we should not be shy. I would like to thank all other political leaders in this country who have been inspired to be loyal and who have been inspired to work together with President Museveni. 

At national level, there are no varying or divergent voices and I want to thank those other politicians, including those in this House, that have been speaking with one voice against COVID-19. Why can’t we speak with one voice in recognising our team leader called President Museveni? (Applause)

Madam Speaker – (Interjection) – I do not know what that means. I would like to conclude by stating that President Museveni has been steadfast in the leadership of this country in the fight against crises and disasters. I am not saying that all may be okay but so far, so good. Why can’t we give him a “thank you”? 

The psychologists know for sure that we all need to be recognised in one way or another. Recognition is an encouragement. Madam Speaker, in this House, we have recognised other civil servants and public officers who have done a good job. Let us maintain this as a method of encouraging and inspiring others to do even greater. 

What we are doing today is to say “thank you” to President Museveni and to say “President Museveni, go ahead; you are doing well and the sky cannot be the limit”. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I invite hon. Oyet. I am still dealing with the seconders; there are two more. Hon. Keefa is on this side.

3.57
MR SIMON OYET (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. 

This is not the first time we are paying tribute or moving a motion to pay tribute to the great sons and daughters of this country. In 2007, hon. Hamson Obua moved a motion to pay tribute to the then Vice-President of Uganda, hon. Gilbert Bukenya, for his leadership in promoting upland rice growing. I supported that motion - I am on record - and very many Members of the Opposition supported the motion. 

When it comes to this pandemic, we do not have to be political. This is a fight for which we must all join hands and fight together. (Applause) A few days ago, we got a report from Tanzania where COVID-19 killed three Members of Parliament, including the Minister for Constitutional and Legal Affairs – (Interjection) – Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected. This is a House where we debate freely and independently. If you have different views, the Floor is here for you to give them. 

Madam Speaker, I drove from Gulu. I left Gulu at about 11.30. According to the list, I was not supposed to be here but when I heard about this motion, I said I must come and contribute - (Applause) – and be put on record for supporting this motion.

One thing that we must remind ourselves about is that whether you are in FDC or NRM, this pandemic is not going to discriminate. It is high time we join hands together to fight. It is high time we join hands together and appeal to the President to offer leadership, regardless of our political differences.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to say thank you very much for the leadership you have offered in terms of this fight. We must all be together. Today, it is me; tomorrow, it is someone else. One important thing that I would like to say before I leave the Floor is that we should be very mindful of what the people out there will call us tomorrow. This is a non-political issue and I would like to appeal to the President that we must work as a team; call your friends in FDC, DP and the independents for their opinion so that we join hands together. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I invite hon. Keefa Kiwanuka as one of the seconders.

4.01
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, the World Health Organisation had warned of economic and social devastation when the virus hits Africa. With the exemplary leadership that we are having, some countries in Africa may be able to avoid that crisis, touch wood, as the English say. 

The way our President has led us so far in this fight is earning him accolades within Uganda, across different societies and around the world. He has kept the numbers low, with the exception of the problem brought by the truck drivers. These accolades can be seen if anybody bothered checking on Google; for instance, see the Washington Post for 6 may 2020. 

If you look at neighbouring countries, the news coming from there is also very interesting. I quote one paper in its editorial, surprisingly, referring to President Museveni: “His wisdom, judgment, calculation and decision-making is what this country needs. We need someone bolder, courageous and sober to lead us during this time”. That is from one of the neighbouring countries. 

Another one adds, “I applaud President Museveni for his leadership. Sometimes, it is that style of leadership that we need. Look at COVID-19 positive cases here and fatalities and compare that with what they have in Uganda.” That is another commentator writing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring out the context that when the virus was first announced or when the emergency was first declared, countries reacted differently, and we need to understand why. Some countries quickly got it right and others are still struggling.

Madam Speaker, by late December 2019, doctors in Wuhan had already got the world worried about patients quarantined in their hospitals suffering from an unusual type of pneumonia. By 23 January, they had locked up Wuhan and the neighbouring cities. 

On 30 January - and this is very important - the World Health Organisation warned all Government leaders around the world that we are facing a very serious situation and we should prepare for the worst. However, sometimes I have looked at the World Health Organisation like the farmer who went out to sow seed; some people were listening and others were not, just like the seeds that fell on the wayside and others fell on fertile ground.

Some countries with low death and infection rates now per capita, like Germany, Greece, South Korea and New Zealand, quickly swung into action. They took decisive action in real time as the crisis unfolded. The World Health Organisation seed had fallen on fertile soil and it was germinating. They invested heavily in expanding their testing capacity, initiated strict contact-tracing measures to inform their surveillance, adopted extreme social distancing measures, and closed their borders. They put public health over profit without political posturing. They are now reaping the benefits of their hard decisions; they have less case counts and fatalities per capita and they are saving lives.

To us, these are success cases studies in the world of academia. I am sure in public health they will be very interested in looking at how they got it right.

However, there are other countries that got it wrong; unfortunately, for diplomatic reasons, I will not go into that. In these cases, however, some lacked the concern that potential crisis was heading their way from the East. Some lacked a coordinated approach but they kept saying, “this is something we have tremendous control of.” Some countries feared that any draconian action that could help to avert the crisis but with the potential of hurting the economy would be resisted by the public. Their governments and government scientists and behaviour advisers warned them that the public would not accept it. As a result of that, you can see what is happening. 

Actually, according to the World health Organisation statistics, about 50 per cent of the fatalities today, or the people who have died, are accounted for by about four or five countries.

There are also countries which just continued with business as usual. Some, out of political posturing, were organising Women’s Day celebrations, rallies and encouraging protests against lockdowns. Some of them ended up getting infected themselves.

Therefore, you can see now, given that background, that things were really difficult. Some authors have said that many leaders were caught asleep and off guard. However, here is a success story in Uganda; our President, against that background, was found on guard and was wide awake. Using a combination of his exceptional intellectual power, military genius as sabalwanyi, experience in managing other infections like cholera, HIV/AIDS, he is saving lives in Uganda.

Like an exemplary leader in crisis, he quickly absorbed and acted upon existing information and knowledge, rapidly and effectively made decisions and put public health above popularism, and do not forget, in an election year. He has been truthful, humble, avoided political posturing, shown a lot of transparency and where he has not been clear about what is what, he has quickly admitted and on many instances, we have seen him inviting scientists.

However, here is where he has excelled: It is with his communication skills that he is leaving an enduring legacy. (Applause) He is widely acknowledged around the world as an eloquent and goals-oriented leader, especially on the COVID-19 pandemic. He has clearly explained what the virus is, how it is transmitted, who is at risk and he has armed us all systematically with defence mechanisms against the virus.

In his frequent communication, he is always clear and succinct; he has always simplified his messages, delivered them in a layman’s language, being clear about the objectives and not using complicated language. (Applause) I always find him amazing; he communicates with scientific rigor, with a lot of calmness disarming hysteria and with a lot of soberness and determination. No doubt, across the country he has excited the masses around the fight and I think it is very difficult for people to go and hide in areas around the country. So, you can see, this is a result of his work.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, people from within and around the world are looking at him for information, guidance and leadership. In a survey by a communication agency, Burson Cohn and Wolfe, it is reported that his Facebook page has grown from 600,000 people as at 1 March 2020 to 700,000 as at 21 March 2020. He is topping all sub-Saharan African leaders in the percentage growth of his Facebook following. For people seeking definitive answers on the coronavirus issues and policy on managing the pandemic, he has reached over 500 million users according to the same company. No doubt, this is a mark of faith in his leadership and credentials. 

Above all, he has managed to unite the country. He has brought together the Opposition to work with him on this. The religious leaders are praising his leadership role in this. Civil societies have accepted his leadership and the private sector is fighting along with him as manifested by the donations that they are making. He is encouraging research and I am sure very soon we will receive, from Makerere University, a quicker and cheaper coronavirus test.

The Speaker: Please, wind up.

Mr kiwanuka keefa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will conclude by saying that there are some empayas on the way. I understand “empaya” is a Runyankole word for “he-goat”. These can be dangerous on the way. 

I am sure when I go back to Kiboga, they will be asking me about the food, especially the people who were working on a day-to-day basis. There is still need to look at the economy. I think that is the area which requires attention, now that lives have been saved. 

Of course, there is pressure of re-opening. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to be very careful about that because in some countries, we have seen them reopening and closing again.

Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, now that the mover and seconders have finished, the bataka will receive three minutes as usual.

4.12
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to amend the motion. 

Looking at this motion, it is very important and I would like to amend it to include thanking the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda for steering this Parliament very well at this trying moment. (Applause) If we pay tribute to His Excellency the President of Uganda, we must not forget to pay tribute to the Speaker of the Parliament of this country. I beg to move. (Applause)

On the same note, I would like this motion to include thanks to all Members of Parliament who persevere to sit and continue transacting business for the betterment of this country. 

I beg to move those amendments. May I comment briefly on my amendments, having been seconded by very many colleagues of mine, to include the motions – 

The Speaker: Have the motions been seconded? 

Mr byabagambi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that the main mover – (Interjection) – Of course, those are the points you have and no more. 

In the second point, the main mover of the motion – if I was attentive and heard very well – expresses his appreciation to the national Parliament and the district task forces. It is an indication that already, this Parliament is recognised by the main mover of this motion for the contribution they have made in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Is it procedurally right to have a motion on top of a motion without first disposing of the first motion?

The Speaker: I do not know whether the mover has any objection. Do you?

Mr bonny okello: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament is not short of motions. At an appropriate time, if we need to move motions as individuals, we could do it. However, the motion today is specifically to pay tribute to His Excellency the President, and Parliament of Uganda is recognised under the second point. I, therefore, raise my objection to the motion raised by hon. Olanya; he should wait for another time. Thank you.

The Speaker: Proceed with your submission.

Mr olanya: Madam Speaker, it would be prudent to have these two motions together. The war against COVID-19 is not an individual fight. Parliament is doing its best and what the Speaker of Parliament is doing is indeed tremendous. Therefore, it would be very prudent to combine the two motions.

Madam Speaker, despite the calls by many Ugandans to close Parliament, you stood very firm and told Ugandans that the roles of the Members of Parliament and the work of Parliament must not be bogged down. That is why it is very important to pay tribute to you, specifically for steering this House very well.

On this note, I am happy that my colleagues supported it. When we are debating, it will be very important to pay tribute to His Excellency President and at the same time, to the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move. 

Ms seninde: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the issue that is being raised by my colleague, who has just left the podium. I strongly appreciate that the Rt Hon. Speaker together with the Parliament of Uganda has contributed greatly to the fight against COVID-19.

For that matter, I would like to request this House, as a point of procedure, that let us consider the motion of appreciating His Excellency the President independently and then you allow a Member of Parliament to bring another motion specifically appreciating the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Parliament of Uganda, so that it comes out prominently. Honestly, if we mix up issues today, the efforts by the Speaker and the House will be lost. 

Therefore, I appreciate the concern but I beg that we allow the motion of appreciating His Excellency the President to be completed and concluded. Some other day, or even today, we can raise another motion specifically appreciating the Rt Hon. Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this as a matter of procedure because of the importance of the contribution by His Excellency and the contribution made by the Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will come back to give my ruling later. Late us proceed.

4.20
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to continue from where my colleague, hon. Olanya, stopped. 

From the onset, I would like to say that this motion has been ill-timed because usually we pay tribute to the good work after completion of such work. We are one and half months into the lockdown due to this pandemic and during these one and half months, the numbers of the infected people has been growing. As I talk, we stand at around 119 cases and you never know what the situation may be by the end of this week.

Madam Speaker, by considering and passing this motion now, we will be like someone who thanks a woman for preparing a good meal before it has been served to them at the table. There is a common English saying that the taste of the pudding is in the eating. We would rather wait until we have successfully contained this pandemic to pay tribute to His Excellency the President.

In so doing, it will not be him alone because he has not worked alone in this process. There is an action system and all other actors have been fully involved in this process. Therefore, it would be wrong, at this time when we are still in the middle of the ocean, to begin thanking him when we have not gone ashore.

Madam Speaker, I think the only country in the world that we can at this time thank is Comoros, if you get your facts right. Otherwise, right now, we are still in the middle of the ocean - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that Uganda went into a lockdown, and comparing Uganda with the rest of the world including Europe, China and most parts of Africa, is the honourable member in order to say that this motion is not timely? 

Also, aware that as a country we are making progress and we need to motivate - this is a motivational motion to enable the presidency and all the other stakeholders, including the Ministry of Health, to continue with the good fight on behalf of Ugandans. Therefore, is my senior and very good colleague, hon. Wadri, in order to state that this motion is not timely, yet even a blind person can see the progress Uganda is making and the great efforts the President, the Ministry of Health and the different task forces are playing to ensure that Ugandans are safe, besides the other challenges? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the COVID-19 pandemic is a new issue; no one has experience in it. All of us are learning, day by day. Certainly, I think one needs to acknowledge that some progress has been made in the country, especially since – God forbid - so far no one has died. I think it is something worth acknowledging. I think we should celebrate it. (Applause) Hon. Wadri, please conclude.


MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Having said that, even if we were to talk about assessment, I think the people who are at the frontline of the pandemic, in as far as control is concerned, are the health workers. If you went into the field, the complaints you will find out amongst health workers is that of poor facilitation where they are not even given personal protection equipment. I think that is where we should focus our attention, rather than come here to heap praises when things in the field are actually not okay.

Madam Speaker, I came from the constituency yesterday; even the Shs 165 million that we approved through a supplementary to the districts has not reached them yet. The RDCs have only received Shs 33 million out of Shs 55 million. Therefore, we should go back and look at our progress made vis-à-vis the mistakes made. It is only fair that we also look at the discriminatory approaches that have been handled -

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, as the Minister of State for Local Government and someone who took trouble to tour some of the districts including Arua - (Interjection) - Yes, I was in Arua and the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) told me the money had already been received. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to mislead the country that the districts have not yet received the Shs 155 million?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week this issue came up. I think what we discovered was that there was a conflict between the guidelines from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and those from the Ministry of Local Government, which made it difficult for the districts to start using it. They did not know who to obey. Please, Prime Minister, sort it out.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I attended the Arua District task force meeting on Monday and Thursday last week. It is true the minister had been there but she can call and find out if that money has been disbursed. The money is not there yet.

Madam Speaker, in this period of the pandemic, many Ugandans, especially those living in urban areas, will not necessarily die of the Covid-19 infection but because of starvation. People are very poor in towns; they have no means, no food, yet Government has been very selective in distributing food to only Kampala and Wakiso. When will you reach Arua, Koboko, Busia or Kabale? This is the issue on the ground. 

Therefore, at this point, for us to begin heaping praises when all these things are not as pleasing as we are saying will be a misgiving; hence the reason I said this motion should have waited until this thing is brought under control. That is when we shall be able to say, “Yes, we have succeeded.”

Madam Speaker, even the police officers manning the roadblocks and running up and down chasing people for failure to observe social distancing have not received a coin, yet they are enforcing the directives of the President. Therefore, how can you say everything is going on well? I know the Minister of Internal Affairs is here - (Member timed out.)

4.29
MR YORKE ODRIA: (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for offering yourself to lead us in this Parliament of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you again because you always sacrifice yourself to go and meet the Executive and you agree on issues. After agreeing on issues, they turn against you as if the intention is to tarnish your reputation. I think that is wrong. 

Madam Speaker, I stand here to second this motion on the following points: I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency and point number one is – (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, Parliament is debating a motion to pay tribute to the great leader of this nation. I listened to the honourable Member complaining that while the Speaker works very hard and coordinates with the Executive and they come to an agreement, the Executive disappoints her so that the Speaker is failed. 

I am a member of the Executive and I would like to know this kind of betrayal. Therefore, I would like to pose a question as to whether the honourable Member on the Floor is in order to continue insinuating and imputing improper motives on the Executive without substantiating.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this motion was being introduced, I believe it was to bring the country together. I think let us try to move together. (Applause)

MR ALIONI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wonderful and wise ruling. I stand to support this motion on the fact that His Excellency has integrated the spirit of consultative leadership by working with technical people and I think that has been an achievement. He has worked with doctors and the right people, which is the result of the success that we are trying to achieve in fighting COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I also want to pay tribute to the President because of the countrywide grassroots information flow and awareness about COVID-19. I have been deep in the villages and when I received a call from my brother, Bonny Okello, about this motion, I had to drive yesterday and I reached Kampala at around midnight. Deep in the grassroots, there is awareness about COVID-19 and I believe that this is a great achievement by His Excellency and his team. I thank him for that.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, as you know, West Nile region is bordered by two countries, Sudan and Congo. I would like to thank His Excellency for beefing up security countrywide and across all the porous border points that we have in this country. (Applause)      

However, as I conclude, I have one recommendation for Government. It is true that currently, the situation is not okay when it comes to food. For the last two months in West Nile region, there has been no rainfall. We had little rainfall and people planted seedlings but as we speak, they are all burnt because there is no rain. It is a sign of famine coming ahead.

Madam Speaker, my prayer to Government is that the food that we are distributing in central Uganda – This country is not only made up of central Uganda. We have got other regions - West Nile, eastern and western regions. My prayer to Government is: can this food be distributed uniformly throughout the country? (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Bonny Okello for the motion. 

Madam Speaker, President Museveni is a role model, a mentor, and has exhibited characteristics of a good leader in the fight against COVID-19, which all leaders must emulate. President Museveni has always been telling us, “My children, stay at home. Bazukulu, stay at home. Let the anger of death pass and once it has passed, we can all come out”. This is a loving President and a father. Let us congratulate him for that. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, between 1960 and 1985, a period of about 25 years, Uganda was ruled by eight presidents. This period was characterised by chaos, anarchy, lawlessness, instability, insecurity, coup d’états, insanity, impunity, civil strife, assassinations and economic decline. However, between 1985 to date, a period of 35 years, President Museveni was able to stabilise the country. There is peace, progress, stability, development and unity. President Museveni is a Pan-Africanist, a peacekeeper, a nationalist, a liberator, a freedom fighter and he is a leader who cares for his people. Long live President Museveni and long live the people of Uganda! 

We shall continue fighting COVID-19 so that nobody dies in this country. I say all this for God and my country. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Asamo, hon. Muhanga, hon. Bbumba, hon. Ababiku and hon. Kawooya to move nearer to the microphone. Let me first get the ladies then I will go to this side. 

4.38
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to add my voice to those senior members and colleagues of mine that talked before me, to thank the President of this country for the great job he has offered to us. 

The young people of this country are known. Most of these young people are not employed and it would be a challenge for them to get treatment and to fight COVID-19 if they got it. I, therefore, stand here to thank the President and his team - the national task force, the Ministry of Health and the local health teams – as well as the different stakeholders who have helped the young people of this country to understand COVID-19 and to educate them on how to fight it.

I would, however, like to request the Office of the Prime Minister and the Government to make sure that by the time they open – I know there will be a challenge of masks. Most of these people are not working. These are the boda boda guys. These are the people who spend whatever they earn on a daily basis. I request the Ministry of Health to come up with a way of distributing masks to those young jobless people, who leave home every day to come and look for what to eat, before they are arrested by the police. 

I would also request that the central region does not only stop in Wakiso and Kampala. There are young people in Masaka, Kalangala, Buvuma and those other areas that have lakes, as well as those in the different parts of the country, and they are affected by the high rise of water levels of the lakes. As a result of the quarantine, these young people cannot even move to their villages or go to their relatives. They are dying out there. I request the Government, first of all, to give them help and also make sure they get mosquito nets. Those stagnant waters have a lot of mosquitoes. 

In the end – I do not have enough words to thank the President of this country for the great work he has done. He has been a great leader. He is such a grandfather that we all feel proud of. Thank you. May God bless you.

4.41
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When COVID-19 was announced on 22 March 2020, all Ugandans went into fear and anxiety. We did not know what to do. I think that is the time when all Ugandans became Christians and cried out to God. There was fear in all homes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency. He had to get on the frontline and call the leader of Parliament, leader of the Judiciary and all the other stakeholders and asked, “What can we do?” He even called the religious leaders. By the time we heard they were closing churches, I was like, “Is it real?” However, the leaders said, “We were consulted.” I think we need to pay tribute to somebody who consulted. Otherwise, we would have gone into chaos. I thank him for that.

Madam Speaker, whenever the President is consulting, he even goes to the extent of receiving SMS messages to hear what the wananchi are saying. He then comes back and gives answers to some of the questions raised by the wananchi.

Madam Speaker, looking around our neighbourhood, we know what has happened in some country where their president has even gone to the extent of becoming a lab assistant, a minister and he is not consulting. He is running the government alone. I will not mention the country, but we have seen that the COVID-19 infections have increased there. I think we need to appreciate and give credit where it is due. I thank the President for that.

Madam Speaker, there have also been lessons learnt from COVID-19. I think COVID-19 has even given the President more insight to think further. Before COVID-19 came, President Museveni had moved around the whole of Uganda preaching the message of food security. When the pandemic hit us, we realised food was the only answer. Food was the real thing that we needed. We did not want clothes or anything but we were looking for food. I think God had talked to the President and said, “Go around with the message on food security.” That was critical.

Madam Speaker, I was listening to the economic debate and one of the leaders in the economic area said that now the President was consulting them. We think after COVID-19, Uganda is going to be a new Uganda. It has brought up different stakeholders. Many Ugandans have brought food to Uganda through the Office of the Prime Minister, under the leadership of hon. Karooro Okurut. Where were these Ugandans before? It shows you the unity – (Member timed out)

4.44
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Almighty Allah for gracing this country. I will start by paying tribute from the known. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you for steering this Parliament well during the COVID-19 situation. We know it has not been smooth but you have stood firm against the very many challenges, which you and Members of Parliament have faced. I take this opportunity to commend the Members of the Tenth Parliament. Madam Speaker, you have exhibited exceptional management skills during this crisis. Thank you.

I now want to move to the main motion. Madam Speaker, they say that Uganda is gifted by nature and this is not only rich flora and fauna but also the competent human resource, led by none other than H. E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. As we all know, under the current situation, he has put the lives of Ugandans above everything else. 

We are in an election year and we know heads of state who have decided to hide the bad situations in their countries because they have elections fairly soon. He has put that aside and prioritised the lives of Ugandans. He has put the lives of Ugandans above the economy, although it is very important. Many leaders have put the economy above the lives of the people. I strongly commend His Excellency the President for that.

The strategy he designed, which is homegrown, has put Uganda’s performance on the world record. As one of the movers said, if you go to Google and if you watch international media, H.E Yoweri Museveni is being commended. Uganda is becoming an expert through its wise leadership in managing epidemics. The first one was HIV/AIDS, which many leaders did not want to talk about. He helped us in Uganda to demystify it – (Member timed out)

4.48
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support this motion moved by hon. Okello to pay tribute to our President who has done very well around the world. This morning, I was reading the Washington Post, one of the journals read widely in America, and they were warning that President Trump should look at how East Africa has handled COVID-19 in order for him to do it better. 

I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that the curve is really flattening. Even if I am not a medical doctor, I can tell that this COVID-19 is coming to an end and I am sure cases will not rise in Uganda. Apart from the Washington Post, I have seen what the President has done reported on many international media outlets. That is why I want to call upon Ugandans to really rise to the occasion and thank our President. What he did and what he has demonstrated world over, where even Sky News, one of Britain’s biggest Media House have recognised what he has taught Ugandans especially doing exercise.

The doctors said people who are healthier, exercise and they are much better. At 75 years old, our President went down and made 30 push-ups. I have seen a lot of young people including myself who cannot even make five or 10 push-ups.  A lot of other people who have picked his idea of exercise are going to be healthier and I think will not contract COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, one of things that the Washington Post commended him for was the way he guided Ugandans without taking any political postures. He has refused to politicise COVID-19. He said it is a war and all Ugandans have followed what he has done and we are good.

Madam Speaker, the World Health Organisation (WHO) recently said the world is going to have a catastrophe, especially Africa. Many other prophets of doom in the Western World have said so.   However, we have demonstrated here, in Uganda, that it will be well. That we shall not fall sick to the levels that anybody else – (Member timed out.)

4.51
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues to pay tribute to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for demonstrating and registering the following special values:

Before I move into that, as the Pan African Parliament President of the Eastern Region and the Vice President of the Women Caucus in Africa, I will at one time, come here and move a motion to pay tribute to you, Madam Speaker, for the way you have made African women proud. (Applause)

On that note, I wish to join my colleagues to pay tribute to His Excellency the President who has demonstrated and passed the political score card of a tested leader. A unifying President, a team player, a visionary leader in management of state crises, disasters and epidemics in society. He has managed the issue well that Ugandans have got trust in him that he is a focused leader. 

On the onset, the President handled COVID-19 head-on. He said “This is not business as usual but it is a war”. Indeed, he has tackled it in the way he normally tackles issues concerning Uganda’s security and other wars.

Majority of Ugandans have now come to trust that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is indeed in charge of this country, focused and fit to continue moving with the vision and being in charge, especially when he demonstrated that he is very fit and healthy.

The President of this country demonstrated that he honours and respects family values. That is why he brought all the families together. Our husbands and kids are together. There is now peace within our families. I am confirming that as the President for the Women and I will be doing research on that.

Madam Speaker, I again want to appreciate the President - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, on the African continent, we refer to you as Madam President. So, I am right to say that. (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this motion because His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda deserves it. He has earned it. When the whole world came into this shock, trauma, helplessness and hopelessness – Uganda has been put on track. He directed the country and we all followed.

In such panic, if we did not have a steadfast leader, who was there with us right from the beginning up to this current situation, many people would have lost their lives. Therefore, His Excellency deserves this tribute.

Madam Speaker, many lives have been protected. When you look at the health status, if he did not guide this country right from the beginning to manage the crisis, I do not know what would have happened to us. He saved not only the lives of his family members but our own lives. Life lost cannot be compensated. For protecting the lives of Ugandans and saving all us – we are seated here because we are alive. We, therefore, must appreciate what His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has done.

Madam Speaker, you have guided the Parliament very well. I therefore, wish to appreciate your effort to ensure that this war is fought as a team. However, I would like to request God to give more wisdom to His Excellency the President to guide us to handle the post COVID-19 effects, especially the hunger in the country and the restoration of our economy. I say this for God and my Country. Thank you.

4.57
MS SHEILA KABAIJE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion and thank my colleague, hon. Okello, for the motion to pay tribute and commend His Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for spearheading the fight – He has always been a great fighter - against COVID-19, with great wisdom.

I would like to thank His Excellency for steering the country so far so well, during this critical time when the whole world, great nations are struggling to put an end and stop to the spread of COVID-19, a pandemic that has scared the entire world.

I would like to appreciate his great guidance, particularly as an educationist, for taking the first step to close the educational institutions, where we would have had the greatest disaster. A big part of our population are youth; we have one of the fastest and youngest populations around the world. If he did not take this wise step, we would be in a very bad position. As a parent and an educationist, I take special interest in thanking him for this.

I would also like to thank him and state that it is very clear that all the cases we have here are imported. The whole country, from the national taskforce to the lowest level, holds him in high esteem and respects him very well. They have taken seriously all his guidance, hence the successes that we are seeing in the fight - where we stand out as Uganda, having succeeded in the fight against COVID-19.

I can confidently say that our President is not only a hero in Uganda, East Africa and Africa but in the entire world. Therefore, on behalf of the people of Kiruhura and Kazo, I extend sincere appreciation to His Excellency for his steadfastness, decisiveness and precision in handling the Coronavirus, which has brought many nations to their knees.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

5.00
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to the President for the great work that he has done. Indeed, Uganda has done a great job of fighting this pandemic. The President has done a commendable job, together with the capable team at the Ministry of Health, who have done a world class job.

Madam Speaker, the President has held 13 briefings to the nation. Through these regular briefings, the President has kept Ugandans well informed about the pandemic, how to combat it and how to avoid it.

The President has applied the long-term tested NRM’s revolutionary methods of work in applying scientific advice of health professionals. This has enabled the President to implement tough but necessary measures. How I wish the East African nations and Africa at large were moving together while facing these challenges.

Madam Speaker, history will record the Yoweri Museveni administration approvingly for protecting Ugandans from this most pervasive pandemic. The people of Nyabushozi join me and the rest of us, honourable colleagues, to appreciate the great job that the President has done in the face of this war.

Madam Speaker, I rest my case. 

5.02
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am most honoured to join my colleagues in paying tribute to His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, for the leadership demonstrated, that has remained a source of admiration for the rest of the world.

As we speak, from every corner of this country, Ugandans are united in thanking the President and indeed the Government of Uganda for the leadership that was given to ensure that the pandemic does not ravage Uganda.

When most leaders across the country were pondering, dillydallying and wondering what to do and playing politics, our visionary leader was able to diagnose the situation and took a decision when most people were still wondering. We did not even have a single case reported here officially when a decision was made very firmly to close these borders, to stop the passenger flights and to issue standard operating procedures that fortunately, Ugandans were able to embrace.

That is why as we speak, Uganda has not registered any single death and also, the recovery rate is shocking to even the great nations that we had thought were so powerful and would be able to deal with this issue. I am, therefore, reminded of the words of Martin Luther King Jr when he said, “The ultimate measure of a man – in this case a person or leader – is not seen where he stands in times of comfort and convenience but rather, where he stands in times of challenges and controversy.”

We have been able to test the leadership credentials of His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni. That is why it is only proper that this Parliament and indeed the rest of Ugandans commend His Excellency and encourage him to continue with the fight, so that we can defeat this enemy. 

I would also like to thank His Excellency for empowering the Ministry of Health. We have seen on many occasions the ministers of health – (Member timed out.)

5.06
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues to pay tribute to His Excellency the President for the great work he has done so far.

In my language, we have a saying that, “He who has never seen dares to kiss a knife”, meaning that I, as hon. Kangwagye, who comes from Bukanga, the constituency that borders Uganda and Tanzania, has a lesson that I have learnt. We have a story to tell.

We have seen people being transported to Bukoba without being brought back. We have seen bodies of people laid on the ground, being killed by this pandemic. We have seen people running away from Tanzania and coming to Uganda. We even have people today; we have managed to quarantine and isolate more than 20 people running away from Tanzania and coming to Uganda, seeking refuge.

Madam Speaker, let me tell you: In our language, we always say that a right is right, even though the majority say it is wrong. This is the time to say that President Museveni is a unique creature on earth; a person who has real wisdom, the person who is really endowed with a lot of knowledge; the person who can easily stand and say, “No, enough is enough. Much as we need Uganda and our economy, the lives of Ugandans are better than anything else.” 

He has tried to protect the lives of Ugandans. He has been there for us. He has kept us; he has sheltered us. He has really shown the world that the health of Ugandans is a real priority to him. I should not say a lot. I would rather say that the Almighty God should only bless Museveni and his people for the rest of his life. I thank you.

5.08
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the people of Mawokota North and on behalf of the private sector and on behalf of Uganda as a whole, to pay tribute to His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the outstanding role he has played in mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on Ugandans with zeal, enthusiasm, selflessness and how he confronted the frontline as a gallant general; we salute him!

Our country was engulfed in vulnerability, fear and apprehension as we watched on television screens of the developed countries counting bodies or corpses and numbers of cases on a daily basis but the President comforted us. The guidance and measures taken by the President have rendered us resilient and today, we are assured of our own future and that of our children.

The global leaders have gaped in awe and wondered how a developing country like Uganda could survive the pandemic. The East African Community is seeking guidance from us on how to manage the pandemic. We owe this to an exemplary and effective great leader, His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The fact that he took very hard decisions in order to protect Ugandans is an inspiration to us. 

The COVID-19 pandemic is a matter of life and death. It has no colour; no affiliation of any kind, no politics and it is still with us. Let us struggle together in unity and patriotism. Let us give credit where it belongs; Uganda will emerge a mighty nation.

I would like to applaud the Ministry of Health for the technical guidance, the Prime Minister’s Office and the Rt Hon. Speaker, for maintaining Parliament alive during the passing of the Appropriation Bill, 2020. This too played a great role in this struggle.

I would like to thank the media and all Ugandans for responding to the call. I salute them and I would like to pray that God protects our President and gives him strength and that God protects Uganda. I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.11
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kacumbala County, Bukedea): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the movers of this motion, for acknowledging the achievements scored so far by our President. Given that the statistics from sophisticated economies or countries with sophisticated infrastructure in form of communication and hospitals shows that they are being overstretched, with people dying like flies, means that when one catches COVID-19, they are as good as dead until they are pronounced otherwise.

Madam Speaker, it is so wonderful to note that Uganda is where it is today, in regard to this pandemic because of a well-thought out strategy by the President; a strategy to limit the spread of the virus. The strategy thought about mobilising, in a very short time, a very powerful human resource team. It also helped Government to urge powerful Ugandans to mobilise themselves to stop the spread of this virus. This calls on us to thank the Almighty for having given us a good President.

If we had a careless President, by now, we would be in trouble. Given where we are, we should blow our trumpet and we are not going to wait for anybody to blow it for us. We, therefore, have to encourage our team to continue with the spirit and say, no, to COVID-19. 

We thank the President and give tribute to him. We also thank God for giving us a good President. I beg to move.

5.14
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in paying tribute to the President for the work well done during the difficult current times of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The President, from the onset, became a very good listener. He listened to the technical people, analysed what they said and became more scientific than the technical people themselves, when communicating to the country. I would like to thank the President, for that very good insight and the guidance he has offered in all the addresses he has made to the nation.

Madam Speaker, we have the Local Council systems, formally Resistance Council systems - I would like to thank the President, for encouraging those systems to rise up to the task and take care of their rural communities. They have helped to inform authorities about people who have come to their localities and by doing so, they have averted the spread of the virus. Most especially us from the borderlines, the Local Councils are very active, vigilant and have enabled us to track all those entering the country to be taken to the quarantine centres.

No wonder, when the President talks about this resistance council system, you realise this was his brain child; it is helping us to further avert and fight this pandemic.

Madam Speaker, at this point in time, we also need innovation. The President has not only communicated to the people on how to fight the pandemic, he has also encouraged innovation. As we speak, we used to have only one company making sanitizers but through his encouragement, we now have 38 companies making sanitizers, which is a very good boost to this country.

Additionally, innovation has now moved the Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation from importing ventilators, which has been a challenge to big countries out there, to making a few of our own. That is a very big achievement, which has come about during these difficult times of the pandemic. 

All in all, the President has led very well. Parliament also has moved very well. We have stayed here and mobilised resources towards the fight against the pandemic. I also would like to thank the national taskforce for the work well done. However, as a country, this is just the first leg - (Member timed out.)

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Housing) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you and the entire institution of Parliament for having allowed Parliament to function even when we are battling with COVID-19.

When the COVID-19 pandemic started, scientists in this country did what we call modelling, to simulate and see how it would revolve. The figures, which were computed, indicated that if nothing was done by the end of April 2020, we would have registered over 18,000 cases of Coronavirus in Uganda, with 566 deaths arising from COVID-19.

However, as we all know, Uganda took decisive steps to address the pandemic. It is because of those steps that we have not been hit hard as predicted by scientists through scientific models. What we have had in management of the COVID-19 is that political leadership and early decision making are key in the containment of this epidemic. President Yoweri Museveni has taken the lead in giving guidance and leadership in the fight against COVID-19. I therefore associate myself with the motion and hereby second and support the motion. 

We know, for instance, that in countries where the infection rates are very high, there is a relationship with political leadership, which is not very focused in terms of fighting this disease. In China, for instance, I can say without fear of contradiction that when the medical officer who identified COVID-19 as a new disease reported to the authorities, he was arrested by the political leadership. Unfortunately, he later died of COVID-19 but because of that lack of focus by the leadership, a lot of time was wasted and we know what happened in Wuhan.

We also know that there are many other leaders who have not taken the issue very seriously and we see the problem rising into bigger and bigger issues. However, President Yoweri Museveni and the leadership of this country have taken this issue as a serious matter. The progress, which has been realised, is not on its own but it is because there has been guidance and leadership by the President.

I would also like to support the motion because as the President leads the country, he values consultation – (Member timed out.)

5.20
Mr Robert kafeero (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and indeed to appreciate him for his role in the fight against COVID-19, a very dangerous pandemic.

These two months have been a learning process for me. I have learnt that if you are a fighter, you must fight for all the good causes. His Excellency the President fought to liberate Ugandans in the past, which he successfully did. Now, he is busy fighting to defeat a very dangerous pandemic, which he is steadily and aggressively doing and I am sure he is going to win.

I have also learnt that if you are a leader, you must be a leader in all cases. I have watched and followed His Excellency the President accurately explaining medical and technical issues to the masses in order to guide them on how to fight this pandemic. It is not easy to take the lead in a struggle where you are not an expert. The President has perfected this and it is yielding wonderful results. 

Right now, we have no death due to coronavirus. He really deserves to be saluted because he is a great man and I salute him. Thank you.

5.23
Mr rwakajara arinaitwe (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and I thank hon. Okello, the mover of this motion.

Madam Speaker, I am a believer and therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God who gave us President Yoweri Museveni with a lot of wisdom. (Applause)

Everybody here knows the history of Uganda. Since 1986, we have gone through many things but we have succeeded in all of them. We won many wars under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni, we have been having different epidemics like this one, HIV, Ebola and so many others. Under his leadership, we have successfully defeated them.

You know that since 1986, many revolutions in this region have taken place. There have been revolutions in Rwanda, South Sudan and many other places including Burundi. His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni has participated fully to bring peace in all those countries. 

In the last few months, we experienced very many challenges; locusts in eastern Uganda that were defeated in a simple way while other countries were being terrorised by the same insects. We have had the issue of water and moving islands that we have also handled with our technical military officers. When it came to – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like to reduce the time to two minutes.

5.26
Ms janepher mbabazi (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion and I thank the mover. Before that, allow me to appreciate your efforts, Madam Speaker. We are delighted that we have you as our leader. Thank you for being our mentor and mother and for not being afraid to stand for what is right.

As I pay tribute to His Excellency the President for the timely intervention in coronavirus, I thank the President and the Minister of Health team for a job well done that was beyond everybody’s expectation. I thank the President for believing in our scientists, which made his work easier. If this country is run along scientific lines, we shall prosper.

Let me also thank the President for setting up a team to coordinate this exercise. The team has worked miracles that we have never seen before in this country. I beg that His Excellency embraces this team’s work for the prosperity of this country.

I also salute the Parliament for equally standing up to the occasion, despite uncoordinated efforts that sometimes brought some hiccups. I pray that we work as one unit to overcome COVID-19 and beyond.

Finally – (Member timed out.)

5.28
Mr vicent woboya (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, in the same vein, to thank you for providing a conducive atmosphere for us to deliberate on this very important motion.

I would like to support the motion. Obviously, colleagues have spoken a lot but I would like to highlight just a few areas for which we attribute the good work that His Excellency the President has done during this COVID-19 pandemic.

The first is the issue of awareness in the whole country. Madam Speaker, its common knowledge now that everywhere you go in the country, you will find that even little children do understand this problem of COVID-19 and they are trying their level best to make sure that they protect themselves and their families. This is attributed to the clear-headed leadership by His Excellency.

On the issue of inspiration to scientists, we are hearing good results. There is a ray of hope. First of all, doctors in Makerere led by I think Dr Wayengera have now come up with a low cost ventilator and we believe that should things go worse, we can use our own innovativeness, knowledge and our scientists to deal with the problem. Therefore, I would like to thank the President for leading this team of scientists and I would like to call upon scientists especially Ugandans elsewhere in the world who think they have knowledge, to join us and we fight together. 

The other issue is about children. The future of our country lies in our children. Assuming that these children were left in schools, we would now be crying. However, we thank God and thank the President for taking a bold step to close all the schools. Now we can see our children and our future is in our children - we are guaranteed of our future.

Madam Speaker, other countries are still grappling with challenges of even sanitizers. However, through the knowledge and guidance of the President, people have shifted from producing waragi, which is a danger to the community, to producing sanitisers, which is a safety measure to our country. We thank him for that. 

I would like to summarise by thanking the President - you heard  of the Ugandan students who were held up in China, but the President took a bold step and sent some resources and children were able to get some support- (Member timed out.)

5.31
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. It is often said that the quality of leadership can be best tested during a crisis. And if you really want to test the quality of leadership this country has, look at the crises this country has gone through and you can quite easily see that in all these crises, the President has been tested, tried and has proved capacity and capability to show the way.

For us we can look back in 1971, the country went through a crisis. The President foresaw it on day one and on day two, he was already out of this country preparing to wage a war to restore democracy in the country. Since 1986, the country has gone through many crises. Even when HIV/ AIDS broke out, the world was silent but President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni stood out and saved lives.

In our case now, Madam Speaker, let the facts and figures speak for themselves. I would like to refer to hon. Chris Baryomunsi’s figures - these we know. At the beginning of March, the mathematical models were predicting that by the end of April, 18,787 cases would have been confirmed in this county. As I speak, only 121 cases have been confirmed. Therefore, if you want to put arithmetic at play, by leadership, our President has shown that 18,666 which would have been confirmed cases have been saved. Tell me if you are really objective, 566 cases would have died. We have not witnessed any death.

Surely, if you want to give credit, these figures should show that by the decision the President took, when he took it, he has saved 18,666 cases which would have been confirmed and he has saved 566 lives which would have died- (Interjection)- yes, that is the truth.

Madam Speaker, the President has already taken a step ahead, I can confirm to this House- (Interjection) - post COVID-19. The President has already formulated an economic model that picks lessons and builds this economy on a domestic resource base so that if COVID-19 was to come again, never would people line up due to hunger. This is a great leader, God bless him. Thank you.

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for steering us very well. I add my voice to thank the President who has taken us through as a country.

The first Cabinet meeting we had, the President said, I cannot afford to see my people die. Thereafter, he took us through, systematically, with proper analysis before he came out to give guidelines. Madam Speaker, Uganda is a country with many porous boarders. We would have had may victims of COVID-19 now if we did not have a good leader to guide the country. He is a leader with his ear to the ground. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, you saw when the market vendors especially the women were sleeping in the markets, the President directed that they are given mosquito nets. When the security was giving people excesses, he said, they must be apprehended.

Even when he knocked a goat, he compensated. Where can we get a President who is down to earth? I would like to thank him and even now as we speak, even a child of three years will tell you, President Museveni told us not to shake hands. 

He has given us time as a country to speak to us every week. He is almost on the radios and TVs twice to make sure that the people are alive. I would like to thank you and the President and to pray to the living God to continue giving him good health. Thank you.

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col. Rtd. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to His Excellency the President for his outstanding leadership in the COVID-19 pandemic period. 

Uganda’s strength is very amazing. We are not a giant of science, not an economic giant but we have a human resource ably led by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He has proved a great strategist. The decision to close schools and send these children home was a classic one. It does not only save us from the spread but it guaranteed Uganda’s future. 

He has proved that he is God fearing. Mobilising religious leaders of all denominations and not only to pray for the nation but to also stay gatherings and worship, to avoid spread of disease and his continuous engagement with them, to pray for the nation.

Mobilising resources from outside and inside the country, to cater for the needy people and where we have challenges. He has proved to be a teacher of great wisdom. Keeping Uganda informed and actually, taking every sector together and informing us of the next to be done, has been tremendous. 

Turning challenges into opportunities
As we move now, Government is planning after identifying weaknesses, to address these weaknesses so that we are food secure, technologically able and also economically sound. I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He deserves it. 

Uganda is at war with the monster. We need to put our differences aside because what brings us together as Uganda is life. We need to guarantee the future of our children by working as a team. As a team player, he has earned his reputation not only here in Uganda but also internationally.

I would like to thank all of you who have been playing part in fighting COVID-19. We also appreciate the medical fraternity for a job well done. It was estimated that we would get 18,000 plus infections and lose 560 people, God forbid! We have not lost anybody and we are still below at 120 plus. Thank you. 

5.40
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to join all the other Members to support this motion. When COVID-19 started in the world, I kept on watching and witnessing big economies tear apart; big Presidents in the world failing to make decisions for the benefit of their countries. I saw many deaths in many different countries as you have all seen, honourable members, what has been happening in the world.

Madam Speaker, our President stayed simple, making focused decisions and that is how we have been able to move this far. We are not saying that we are now successful and COVID-19 has come to an end. However, it is like when you are in class. When you pass Primary Four and you score above 80 marks, when you are given excellent, it gives you the encouragement to even work harder in the next class. I think this has been steady progress that the President has done in the leadership and providing guidance in the fight against COVID-19. 

He has done the first best able step in ensuring that he provides guidance to young children, youth, women and to all of us in this country, in the fight against COVID-19 that today, we still stand at 120 cases. I would also like to thank the Minister of Health. The Minister of Health has been candid in ensuring that we progress in the fight against this virus. 

Similarly, Madam Speaker, you too have played a role in making Parliament stay here and debate continuously. We really thank you for also continuing to make us stand here and continue with debate and talk about issues that we are talking about in this crisis of COVID-19. 

I would like to pay great tribute to the President and thank him once again, for being visionary and guiding the country. I strongly support the motion and I am behind the movers of the motion. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

5.43
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): The English saying goes, we should give credit where credit is due. Madam Speaker, I would like to also recognise His Excellency right from a historical perspective, suffice to mention that right from the beginning of his youthful years, the person of the President has always had a passion for Uganda and Ugandans at large.  

We all know how he fought dictatorships here while others would have gone to spend their youthful years but the President decided to give up his life for Uganda. 

Still, with his vision and heart for the country, he has had irresistible momentum of peace and by peace, I mean the real peace we all enjoy now and we see. From all the Government’s efforts, we are seeing a special place for health of Ugandans at his heart. We have seen other campaigns before this; the Ebola immunisation, Kick Polio Out of Uganda Campaign, to mention but a few.

Madam Speaker, in the face of this pandemic, we used to think that it was far distant in China and that is where we first heard that it was and we thought it was miles away but this man had already thought about it. The first time we heard that the virus had spread out of China, this alert man was at it already. 
To that effect, we would like to thank him because of that, we have not had any skirmishes or deaths and we have almost a flat curve. His two timely decisions have saved this country; closing schools and by stopping mass gatherings.

The second one, when we had the first case, the lockdown. This visionary leader has really – I can mention and I should not be accused of being blasphemous - but we can say that the President, currently, has been like Jesus to this country – (Interjections) - Yes, where the whole world was taken by a storm, and fled for fear.

Madam Speaker, for a moment, we all lost hope but the President, because of his visionary leadership and his unusual intellect and capability, his ingenuity and clarity of purpose and maintenance of aim, he has been able to calm the storm and he has restored the hope of Ugandans. We applaud him for having approached the fight in the context of respect for Human Rights – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Can I now invite the Leader of the Opposition and then the Prime Minister?

5.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, we had a debate here and I have been pondering within myself, what has changed from last week to this week, for us to make this big U-turn? What has changed? Members of Parliament, we need to be people of high integrity. This is not being people of high integrity. 

I would like to say that our people are still in tears; our people are starving. Do you know that a very decent person can go to steal because of lack of food? Our people are dying of other causes – (Interjection) – I will even give you some, leave alone the pregnant women that we came and stood on the Floor of Parliament here –(Interruption)

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, I happen to have followed debates in this Parliament throughout last week but a motion of this nature did not surface in this House. Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to mislead this House by imputing wrong motives on these honourable members?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the other motion was different. Please, conclude.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I feel sad that at this point, when we are still in the middle of fighting COVID-19, we are already giving praises moreover to one person who would even like to take excessive advantage of this COVID-19 for just one – (Interjection) – we have institutions of governance and they are many – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, sincerely speaking, you had guided very well on the point raised by hon. Mutebi. The Leader of the Opposition continues to make no point at all, wasting people’s time, by attaching the name of the President to insinuate that the President is just taking advantage, yet he is not here and he cannot defend himself. The members of Parliament chose to pay tribute to him. 

Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to continue wasting our time, labouring with a point which you have already ruled on?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to remind you that Members are free to move motions in this House. So, no one should be gagged from moving a motion of whatever type. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, please, conclude so that we can move on.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I think I have not been allowed to debate this thing freely. The truth is that we had moved a motion of displeasure here because of the institution of Parliament being side-lined. 

Madam Speaker, I came from Gulu on Sunday evening. I went to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I was very sad that even people who could be saved could just die; I would like to give an example of a man who was knocked by a boda boda. He was taken to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital and he was not supported.

Therefore, if a person dies at this time –(Interjection) – Do you think that person has died because of COVID-19? It is because the institutions are not working – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Allow her to conclude.

MS AOL: It is because institutions are not working. Members of Parliament, this is the time that we should allow technical people to first analyse – (Interjection)– we would like to talk about accountability. There are national and international donations. 

These should first be worked on and brought to Parliament before we can sing praises – (Interjection) – these premature praises are not right. Really, is this what we should be doing, Madam Speaker?

I know members of Parliament are already scheming for something – (Interjection) – Let us not be schemers but let us work for the people. People are crying; people are starving; people are dying – (Interjection) – Why should we sing praises only? If we should sing praises, let us – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I invite the Prime Minister to close.

5.54
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving this House an opportunity to debate this important motion. I would also like to thank you for being innovative in order to neutralise the impact of COVID-19 in terms of stopping the work of Parliament. The fact that we are in an open space and we are compliant with the regulations and guidelines against COVID-19 is, in my view, a credit to you.

Madam Speaker, I heard my sister, the Leader of the Opposition, concerned that we are paying tribute and thanking the President when we are still in a war situation. The fact of the matter is that the President made an early diagnosis when many other people were still putting very many question marks. He made an early diagnosis and took an early decision to stop the pandemic from invading Uganda. Even when the pandemic eventually reached Uganda, Uganda was better prepared and able to confront it, thanks to the vision, the early diagnosis and the guidance of H.E. the President. (Applause)

It is true, Madam Speaker, that he did not only look at Uganda but he has also looked at the region. The President has been in regular contact with his colleague leaders in the region to see how best, together, there can be cooperation in order to overcome this pandemic. I believe that together, a number of decisions have been taken, which have enabled trade and other essential movements, especially of cargo, to continue in spite of the lockdown.

The President mobilised the country. He was consultative; he consulted religious and political leaders and as a result, the whole country has rallied behind him in the fight against this pandemic. It is true that he is a leader – and we are not just talking about an individual but we are talking about a leader, who has had a positive impact in many things but also, in this case, in the fight against this pandemic. 

For example, well, a number of colleagues have already gone through the details of how he led the war for liberations, how he led the fight against HIV/AIDS and how he led the fight against Ebola. There is no doubt that he is a tested and successful commander and by the way, it is very good to be led by someone who is tested. Otherwise, you can find yourself in a ditch.

His Excellency set up a national task force and on this national task force, political parties represented in Parliament have got membership in addition to the Cabinet ministers. The Parliament of Uganda, on the suggestion of the Speaker of Parliament, is represented on this national task force. (Applause) Actually, the Rt Hon. Speaker has recently proposed - and we have accepted - that persons with disabilities should be represented through Parliament. We even have representation of the Committee on Human Rights in Parliament. Therefore, the committee is representative but the idea was initiated by His Excellency, the President and we are building on it.

You all know that the decisions he took were not easy. He closed all the schools and 15 million children went home. He closed all the borders, the airport, churches and mosques – Pray at home. These were major decisions. Fortunately, because of consultations that he made - and being a reliable and tested leader - these have very smoothly gone on and have been accepted by the country. (Applause)

His Excellency, the President, has used this opportunity to support science and technology and I am glad the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation is with us. He has held several meetings with scientists and I am glad one or two of the speakers brought this point up. He is consulting scientists so that when managing this pandemic, we do not make any mistake; we follow well tested scientific truth and facts. Really, I fully support this motion.

It is true the President has not been alone. The Minister of Health has done exemplary work. (Applause) She has done very good work with her dynamic team. The health workers all over the country have been absolutely spot-on and are doing work in a very commendable way.

The other day, we visited Entebbe Grade B Hospital and we spent about an hour with Dr Nsereko, the physician, and a team of nurses. One of the impressive things that Dr Nsereko told us was, “We have been here treating COVID-19 patients but none of us here…” meaning the health workers who are dealing with this problem never tested positive. (Applause) This showed that this physician, the nurses and the other health workers are doing great work and taking care of themselves in order to be able to help more patients in future.

On the question of science, technology and innovation, the President has directed the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get money so that urgent equipment required by Ugandan scientists to make vaccines in Uganda against COVID-19, discover and make drugs, therapies and test kits, in Uganda.

There are a number of Ugandan scientists - Dr Nantulya and many others - are doing wonderful work. All we need to do, Madam Speaker, as we have done before in this august House, is to continue giving support to these scientists. They will excel anywhere. Some of you may have seen a Ugandan scientist yesterday, on social media, who legally won $1.5 million in the United States of America for an excellent work in treating infectious diseases, affecting the eyes. A Ugandan is now a celebrity in the United States of America.

Once again, I would like to salute the mover and the seconders of the motion. It is a very timely motion. It is right to encourage leaders and support them when they are doing good work. Indeed, President Museveni is an excellent example in this context.

The final comment is to pay tribute to the Parliament of Uganda. It has consistently supported science. In fact, it called for the creation of the Ministry of for Science, Technology and Innovation. (Applause) I am very happy that His Excellency, the President responded positively and did the same. 

I would like to urge you to continue with what you have done before to support science and the campaign against the pandemic. I am confident that we, together, under the leadership of President Museveni, the Minister of Health and health workers, are going to defeat this pandemic. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, hon. Olanya moved a proposal to amend the motion. However, I have looked at the proposal, under rule 60(4) and realised that if we are to amend it as proposed by him, it will substantially alter the principle of the question, which is proposed, namely; the question whether Parliament should pay glowing tribute to His Excellency, the President, for his continued exemplary leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda. To include it, will substantially alter this motion. 

The motion is very important to acknowledge the work of Parliament and parliamentarians. So, I will grant hon. Olanya an opportunity to move a separate motion to enable us to pay tribute to Parliament and members of Parliament in this campaign. I move that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do agree with the motion as moved by hon. Okello.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the beans, I am going to send out a team to identify their source and compare it what the Prime Minister is distributing to the people of Uganda. We shall come back to you with the results.

I would like to also apologise to the staff because we have gone beyond the usual time. It is now 6 o’clock yet I know they have to walk home. I really apologise. However, I would like to thank you so much for the work done today. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


