

Friday, 19 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, honourable Leader of the Opposition, members of the Cabinet, Members of the House. I would like to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and to thank you for coming back today to complete an exercise we informed you about yesterday, namely to pay tribute to a very senior citizen of this country, who was one of the first Members of Parliament in the Republic of Uganda.

In the VIP gallery, we have Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, hon. John Kawanga, Dr Siranda who is the General Secretary of the Democratic Party (DP), Mr Kenneth Kakande, Mr Samuel Muyizi Mulindwa, Mr Opoka Simon, Mr Mwesigye Fred and Hajji Kamesi Musa. They have come to pay respects to the deceased senior citizen. We also have hon. Livingstone Okello Okello, former Member of the House; hon. Miria Matembe, former Member of this House; the honourable Dr Lulume Bayigga, former Member of this House.

Sitting with the family we have Dr Kizza Besigye and the President of the Democratic Party, hon. Mao. In the gallery are friends and relatives of the late Mzee Byanyima. We also have Winnie Byanyima, former Member of this House. We shall be updating you if there are other arrivals. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late Boniface Byanyima.)

National Anthem.

East African Community Anthem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also welcome Ambassador Kezaala, the National Chairman of the Democratic Party and former Mayor of Jinja. You are welcome.

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOULTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. BONIFACE BYANYIMA, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, ANKOLE NORTH EAST CONSTITUENCY IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite the Prime Minister, I welcome the following people who have come to witness the proceedings: hon. Henry Kyemba, Dr Nduhura, hon. Paul Musamali our Member of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Oduman Okello, hon. Alice Alaso and hon. Kassiano Wadri. If I see other members, I will let you know. (Applause) 

3.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Mzee Boniface M. Byanyima for his dedicated service to the nation. I am doing so under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this august House. 

“WHEREAS Parliament received the sad news of the demise of Mzee Boniface Byanyima, which occurred on Tuesday, 16 November 2017 at Nakasero Hospital in Kampala;

AND WHEREAS Mzee Byanyima was born in Buhweju District in 1920 and attended Kinoni Primary School in Rwampara, Mbarara Junior School, Mbarara High School, King’s College Budo and attained a Diploma in Education from Makerere University College; 

AWARE that upon his graduation in 1951, he was posted to teach at Bishop Tucker Theological College, Mukono and that in 1954, he pursued a postgraduate diploma at Exeter University and on completion he returned to teach at Mbarara High School, and he is remembered for being a bold and principled man; 

FURTHER AWARE that Mzee Boniface Byanyima served as a Member of the Legislative Council (LEGCO), representing the people of Ankole North East, and a Minister of Public Service from 1961 to 1962, a position he held with trust and integrity; 

RECALLING that Mzee Byanyima served as the National Chairman of the Democratic Party from 1980 to 2005, which position he served with intellect, honesty and commitment and was a consistent champion of multiparty politics; 

FURTHER RECALLING that Mzee Byanyima dedicated his life to the development of Uganda and therefore deserves the recognition of this Parliament and nation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda at large for the loss of a distinguished senior citizen of this country.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution Mzee Byanyima has rendered to the people of Uganda as a minister, legislator and the National Chairman of the Democratic Party.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion is seconded by several Members. You can now speak to the motion.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, in justification, I would like to say that Mzee Boniface Byanyima was a man of high integrity and moral authority. He was disciplined and was known for his consistency. He was one of the Ugandan patriots who played a role in Uganda’s struggle for independence.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, following the passing on of Mzee Byanyima on Tuesday, 16 May 2017, President Museveni briefed Cabinet the following day and directed that he should be accorded an official burial. We thank the family and the leadership of the Democratic Party for their cooperation in this endeavour. (Applause)

Mzee Byanyima is remembered for his adherence to principles and speaking out his mind very candidly. This is a character trait that was admired and indeed respected. 

Mzee Byanyima was born in 1920 and he was the great grandson of Kyamufumba Kya Ndagara Rwamigano, the eldest son of Omukama Ndagara, the last King of Buhweju. In his early years, he lived in the courts of Chief Ndibarema in Nsiika in Buhweju.

Mzee Byanyima was among the pioneers of modern education in Uganda. He started his education at Kinoni Primary School and he is said to have completed three classes in one school year. He then moved on to Mbarara High School for primary 4. He was a gifted and disciplined student who won a scholarship to King’s College Budo, where he excelled and joined Makerere University College for a course in education. 

After graduation from Makerere University in 1951, he was posted to teach at Bishop Tucker Theological College, Mukono. His students included the late Bishop Amos Betungura, the late Bishop Eustace Ruhindi and the late Bishop Misaeri Kawuma. 

After a while, Mzee Byanyima returned to teach at Mbarara High School, his old school. His students say that he was a devoted teacher that brought the best out of them. He was known to be good at time keeping and also strict but kind and approachable. Among his many students were hon. Yona Kanyomozi, the honourable Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, Ernest Rusita, hon. Amanya Mushega and His Excellency Yoweri Museveni.

Mzee Byanyima was a lover of music. He taught himself how to play the piano and thereafter, he joined Mr Yudah Nyondo as the second pianist at St James’ Cathedral, Ruharo in Mbarara. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, in 1954, Mzee Byanyima took a sabbatical year to pursue a postgraduate diploma at Exeter University in United Kingdom. On completion, he returned and continued teaching at Mbarara High School.

In 1956, Mzee Byanyima married Gertrude Kabwasingo, a teacher like himself. They lived together at Green Gate at Ruti for 52 years, until Gertrude passed on in 2008. 

As independence approached in 1961, Mzee Byanyima contested to represent the people of Ankole North East Constituency in the Legislative Council under the Democratic Party ticket. He won the election with a landslide victory. He later joined the DP pre-independence Government as Minster of Public Service. In 1962, there was another election, which resulted in the Uganda People’s Congress-Kabaka Yekka alliance taking over government. The late hon. Byanyima was again re-elected to Parliament and served until 1971, when Idi Amin overthrew the Government of the day.

Before the coup d’état, the Democratic Party had been banned two years earlier in 1969. During Idi Amin’s regime, Mzee Byanyima continued to serve the Democratic Party and was instrumental in reviving it after the fall of Idi Amin in 1979. He was a consistent champion of multiparty politics who served as the National Chairman of the Democratic Party for a long time, as I have already said, from 1980 to 2005. 

Throughout his entire life, Mzee Byanyima’s voice and views on social and political issues in the country were always bold and candid. He was unwaveringly straightforward and incorruptible. 

What was the cause of his death? Madam Speaker and colleagues, Mzee Byanyima died of a stroke. We extend our condolences to the family, friends and relatives, the Democratic Party fraternity and the country at large for the loss of this great son of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest Mzee Byanyima’s soul in eternal peace. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Just before the Leader of the Opposition comes in, I will read a few messages; they are not many. 

From the Democratic Party President: “The Democratic Party learnt with deep sorrow of the death of the former Minister of Public Service in 1961 and Member of Parliament for Ankole North East Constituency, hon. Boniface Muyogoma Byanyima. We remember him as our national chairman in the Democratic Party. 

When political parties were banned in 1969, he was among the six DP Members of Parliament who remained in the Opposition. His contribution in the field of politics is, however, not the only part of his legacy. In his disturbingly unassuming way, his life was a moral challenge to corruption and the arrogance of power. He was defined by incorruptibility, consistency and uncompromising integrity.

He served Uganda and indeed the Democratic Party with distinction and leaves a legacy we should emulate. We convey our deep condolences to the Parliament of Uganda through the Speaker.” That is from the Democratic Party.

The Forum for Democratic Change Secretary General, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, also sent in a condolence message: “On behalf of the Forum for Democratic Change, I would like to express our deepest sorrow and condolence to the family of Mzee Boniface Byanyima. 

Uganda has lost a strong advocate, a hero and visionary leader. The nation has lost a strong pillar who understood that education and good governance can help grow the economy and most importantly, improve the daily lives of ordinary citizens. There is simply no replacement for what Mzee Boniface Byanyima represented and what he contributed to Uganda and the world at large.

For his entire life, he chose to live a simple life but principled in matters affecting society. He advocated for the rule of law that intended to improve better living conditions of the citizens of Uganda, and above all was a father who groomed and shaped sons and daughters to useful citizens in this country.

Who recognise and appreciate how consistently he stood for truth and justice in all his life. It is a great loss to the family, DP and the political fraternity. He will be missed by the entire country.”

From the Government Chief Whip on behalf of the NRM Caucus: “I learnt of the sad news of the passing on of Mzee Boniface Byanyima, which occurred on Tuesday, 16 May 2017. 

Mzee Byanyima was one of the important people who played a significant role in managing the transition period during post-independence Uganda. He was a man of principles who spoke his mind all the time. He shall be missed for his enormous contribution to the country. 

On behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus and my own behalf, we share the grief of the family of Mzee Boniface Byanyima and beseech the good Lord to make all of you strong in this trying moment.” 

That is a message from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Nankabirwa Ssentamu. She enclosed - but it is not here - Shs 500,000 from the NRM Caucus. Okay, I now acknowledge receipt of the said Shs 500,000.

3.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Opposition inside and outside Parliament and on behalf of the people of Kasese whom I represent in this House, I rise to second the motion moved by the Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Boniface Byanyima, former MP for Ankole North East Constituency in the Legislative Council.

Madam Speaker, we are here yet again on sad note but I would say not really a sad note because we are celebrating a life. I stand here to celebrate a life that has been well lived. When many of us lose our dear ones, we mourn, cry and weep, but the life of Mzee Boniface Byanyima just needs to be celebrated. We say bye to you, Mzee Byanyima, with mixed feelings. We have feelings of joy and happiness as we thank the Almighty God for giving you to us as a gift. 

Mzee Boniface Byanyima was a special gift to this nation and to the world at large. Like the Prime Minister said, and the many condolence messages from the so many individuals as read by the Speaker have indicated, it is indeed true that we are saying bye to a man of a high level of integrity, a virtue that is now lacking in many Ugandans. Mzee Boniface Byanyima lived an incorruptible life just like the Prime Minister said. However, when you look at your side, you will see many people who are lacking in that aspect.

The gentleman lying in state here was a true parent. He was a parent who not only gave his children the best but also loved them. He loved his children and even though he was a disciplinarian, it was as if they were just brothers and sisters in the home. When you reached Byanyima’s house, you would just see a United Nations heart in him because he received people from all walks of life, irrespective of their status, religion and colour. He was indeed a man with a big heart. 

I got to know Mzee Boniface Byanyima at a personal level in 2000 when I came into close contact with his daughter, the hon. Winnie Byanyima, who is among the political actors that I continually admire. She is one of those who mentored me politically. Winnie introduced me to her father as one of her sisters from the mountains of Rwenzori and she said, “Daddy, here is your other daughter; lost but found.” The man was excited and he treated me as if I were his real daughter in the house. 

In his house, there was always tea. You love calling it African tea yet the milk is from Ankole. It is African milk and the bazungu call it African tea and even here we call it African tea - Ankole tea, if I may call it.

He was a man of rare character. Unlike the politics of today, where people have price tags on their political lives, he did not have one on his political career. Even when goodies where dangled in his face for him to go to a particular government and serve, he believed in what he believed in. He remained steadfast and no amount of money or titles would change what he believed in. Mzee Byanyima, you are a hero and a true believer in truth and justice.

The old man laying here was an advocate of equal opportunities for all. During their time, because of the dictates of the African culture, girls were looked at in a different perspective. However, Mzee Boniface Byanyima broke the ceiling by treating his daughters at the same level with his sons, telling his daughters that even girls can do better. It was no surprise, therefore, when one of his daughters became the first aeronautic engineer in this country, if not in the region. For those who believe in equal opportunities for all, Mzee Boniface Byanyima was a candle.

He was a true educationist who believed in what he taught. Like you have heard, he nurtured many of his students including His Excellency the President of this country. Many of our teachers are doing their teaching service to earn a living and not because they really cherish and love the profession. Mzee Byanyima knew his students by name and the challenges they faced, and he was ready to get involved in making sure his children carried on with their education. That is how he was even able to take on the current President of the Republic of Uganda and many others out there who went through his hands as a teacher and as a mentor.

Mzee Byanyima, you did your part in this country. We remain with the challenge of shaping the political actors of this nation so that they know that people become what they believe and that whenever people look at them, they should see what such people believe even in their actions. That is what he believed in. 

He was a true member of the Democratic Party, to the extent that even when his son-in-law contested, Mzee Byanyima still believed in his DP and said he cannot vote for anyone apart from a person from DP. This is not very common these days; people may be DP during the day but are different at night. (Laughter) They will be FDC during day but be different at night. Mzee Byanyima remained a democrat at night, in the morning and during the day. This sitting is well deserved for hon. Boniface Byanyima. 

Mzee Byanyima believed in each one of us bringing etofali to build this nation. Like the Prime Minister mentioned, he participated in the transition from colonialism to the post-colonial era. He was still ready to participate in a transition from a Museveni regime to another regime. However, it is unfortunate that he has not really participated in this transition from Museveni to another person. He has just seen changes from Museveni to Museveni and from Museveni to Museveni. (Laughter)

As a country, we are losing the brains that should be putting us to order. Not long ago, we buried a former Presidential Commissioner who was a man of unquestionable character just like Mzee Byanyima. We believe it is these elders that we would be going to for counsel. We are losing libraries of this nation. We are losing a calibre of people that could even call the President and say, “Sit here and I tell you how you should behave.” It is unfortunate that very few of those people are living in this country. 

Unfortunately, mzee had a special name for His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda – Tibahaburwa - meaning he would not accept advice. No wonder, whoever advises him is looked at as an opponent or enemy and, therefore, must be behind bars. 

Mzee Byanyima, you have played your part. Your candle will continue to burn from generation to generation because you gave life to many Ugandans that went through your hands. The many that went through your hands have subsequently trained others. We shall always remember your high level of integrity and education that you cherished. He has died thinking the education system of Uganda will be a system that will produce a high calibre of leaders. We would like to thank you, Mzee Byanyima, for setting that example for all Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, like I said, we are here to celebrate a life well lived. Mzee, rest in peace. This world is stage where each one of us comes and plays their part; you have played your part. It was indeed a better part of life that you played. Fare thee well. God gave us and he has taken away; may his name be glorified. Rest in peace, mzee. (Applause)

3.29
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At my age, I would say that the person laying before us is a great example. I have heard from the Prime Minister as well as from the Leader of the Opposition. I have also heard condolence messages from the DP and FDC political parties. What is important to note is that the late Mzee Byanyima was a great man. What distinguished him was that he lived a life of honesty and integrity and he was principled. 

It is a challenge to us, Madam Speaker, as politicians in this House. He served both in Government and in the Opposition. He has gone while we still have the Opposition and Government – the two sides of the House. However, I wonder what he would have done if he was in our House today, where suspicion overrides reason and name-calling is taken as the order of the day.

Madam Speaker, even as I was coming up here, you had to protect me. Where I am seated was by design. I wish I could be Mzee Byanyima one day in this House –(Interjection)– and use the principles -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a solemn occasion. 

MR OBOTH: It is very sad that we are paying tribute to a very principled person; I thought we would be learning, but all he did is in vain. I wish Mzee Byanyima would have stayed a little while to educate the Opposition and the ruling party that we need one another and that even when you do not agree with some person, you have to respect them. (Applause)

A lot has been said about how he remained faithful to DP. That was a choice he made. Can we remain faithful where we are, even when it is hurting, like he did? Can we remain faithful to the cause of this nation even when it is not possible? 

We are paying tribute to a man that has lived for over 90 years and he was principled. I said this when we were seeing off the late Presidential Commissioner, Olwol. He was described as a peaceful person and Mzee Byanyima has also been described as a very peaceful person. People who are peaceful and principled live a little longer. It is a wonder that we keep on fighting each other and we die young. You quarrel with Oboth because he is not agreeing with you and Oboth is not even aware. (Laughter) That is why we develop heart problems. (Laughter)

In this Parliament, Madam Speaker, I am honoured to stand on behalf of the Independents and pay tribute to a gallant Ugandan. I think he lived as a Ugandan first, not as DP. The principles he had were those of a Ugandan. It is a challenge to us, the young generation; we should not make him turn in his grave by living a life where we are something during the day and another during the night. How I wish we would thank the parents of Mzee Boniface Byanyima and his family. As he grew up, nobody would have known him, but his talents, skills and character made way.

The Prime Minister stated that he was consistent. Consistency in life overcomes resistance. I believe he overcame a lot. That is why he was not compromising. Why are we compromising these days? It is because we are not consistent. I am an independent Member of Parliament in this House and I watch both sides trying to do what they call “politics” but it is actually a game. Whoever is on the other side may refuse to accept something just because it is coming from another side. 

We say nothing good can come from Government and we keep on opposing, or nothing good can come from the Opposition and so we continue opposing them while in Government. How I wish that we could define national objectives of this country and pursue them to take this country to a better place than Mzee Byanyima left us.

Madam Speaker, this is my second term in Parliament and I rarely do what I am doing now. I do not like paying tribute in this House or anywhere else because a death of any person anywhere, as one author said, “consumes part of me”; it is a sad reminder. 

To the family of Byanyima, they have lost a father and a relative and to us, he could have been a friend or a political mentor. However, to this nation, he played his part at both pre-independence and post-independence. We thank you, Mzee Byanyima. Continue haunting us all as we think about you and the principles you cherished so that we can be true politicians in this country and provide leadership, not just merely taking a walk. 

May your principles continue to give us no rest until we get more Boniface Byanyimas in this country. May God give you rest. I believe you are a restful person because you have lived life to its fullness. May God grant you mercies where you are. As you go, you are just ahead of us in that journey none of us listening now is short of. We are all in transit; you have only gone ahead of us. We shall meet you there. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I still have two seconders - hon. Ssewungu and hon. Michael Tusiime - and then we shall get the others. I have a list and your names are there. 

Join me in welcoming Erias Lukwago, the Lord Mayor of Kampala. You are welcome. Join me in welcoming hon. Kasamba, our East African Legislative Assembly Member of Parliament. We also have hon. Lokii Abrahams, former Member of Parliament. Let us hear from hon. Ssewungu and then hon. Tusiime.

3.38
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to make my preamble by saying that teachers are always very strong. It is very rare to find a teacher who cannot manage society. That is what we are seeing here. I pray that God gives me that kind of knowledge to steer my party to that level.

Madam Speaker, the Democratic Party has core values and the people who managed to steer this party to where it is up to now - though factually speaking, we have issues that disturb us - were the Byanyimas. The foundation stone and the effort they put into DP is what is still steering the party today. It is very interesting that this party was briefly in government, although some people believe that it has never been in government, but it is still strong. I would like to thank the Almighty God who gave us Boniface Byanyima.

Madam Speaker, as it has been said by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 1962, like it is happening now, Members were bought, and this happens in politics. It is only your conscience that will keep you stable in your party. Can you imagine this strong gentleman from Ankole region not being bribed to cross to the other side of the Government? Even in 1986, when the Government was overthrown, Byanyima never crossed; he remained a DP member. 

Madam Speaker, there was an interesting story in DP about what happened during the registration of political parties. The Democratic Party had a very big war within its members; there were those who were for the registration of the party and those who opposed it. At that time, Boniface Byanyima was the chairperson of the party. I would like to tell you that this strong son of Uganda laying before us managed to move the party through that time. Democrats, what happened to such brains? When do we use such brains to manage conflicts within our party? 

I was very impressed this afternoon when I saw the Government Chief Whip putting on something that is similar to green, which is the colour for DP. Maybe that spirit sometimes comes to us. I always ask myself these things. 

You can be a supporter of a party physically, spiritually, socially and morally and the issue of economic interest comes later. Are you in DP because you support the party? What are the core values that you bring to the party? That is what we should emulate from Boniface Byanyima. If you support DP, are you truly supporting the party? Even though you belong to NRM or any other party, what are the core values you emulate from that party? This is what the man laying before us exhibited in the Democratic Party.

Madam Speaker, I have always stated on this microphone that this country needs a council of elders. Actually, if DP was in power, Byanyima Boniface would have been one of our ministers, as he was in 1961. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how do you use these strong people who are not corrupt and who have information to help you steer the Government? If we had a council of elders in this country, we would not even need presidential advisors. This is because when you talk to these people, the information they give is very useful.

In DP, if there is anyone to whom members went to seek knowledge, it was Boniface. When you got close to him, he would say “I know why you have come here but I will do this and that because of   this reason”. This helped us to reach consensus. That was Boniface Byanyima.

Integrity is not easily achieved and it is not campaigned for neither is it sold. It is a result of your conduct. It is because of your conduct that people will say “this man is a person of high integrity”. You can never say, “I am a person of integrity”. What is your yardstick? It is the population to judge and that is why we are saying Boniface Byanyima was a man of integrity; he did not say this about himself.

As I conclude, I would like to say this prayer to God, which should pass through Boniface Byanyima as he is seated at the right hand of the father: While there, always pray for the DP and tell God that this party is very strong. It has intelligent people. Since you are a God of kindness, please send my knowledge and understanding to the supporters of the party so that the party can take over Government. 

I would like to thank the democrats here, from both sides of the House. Madam Speaker, I wish to send my condolences to the President of DP and the family. We would like to thank Government for offering this official send-off. We appreciate it. We thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for all the arrangements that you have made. We thank you in the spirit of the Democratic Party. We shall always work to see that DP comes into power, emulating our fathers. May his soul rest in peace.

3.45
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME	(NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without any hesitation or reservation, I want to associate myself with the motion that was moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and his polite and factual remarks about Mzee Byanyima.

When I learnt of the death of Mzee Byanyima, I was greatly saddened since he was one of the admirable and dependable elders in my constituency. At the time of his death, Mzee Byanyima lived in Rwizi Cell located in Ruti Ward in Nyamitanga Division in Mbarara Municipality. 

Madam Speaker, as the Prime Minister stated, Mr Byanyima studied from schools in Mbarara in both his ordinary and advanced level, which schools many of us also attended. Right from my childhood, I got an opportunity to know Mzee Byanyima as an educated, focussed, diligent and hardworking person who exhibited love for his country and heritage. The people of Mbarara were honoured to have shared his knowledge and mentorship when he was posted as a teacher to Mbarara High School where he inspired many young people to be focussed in life. I can, therefore, affirm the testimonies of many of his students, most of whom became influential personalities in Uganda partly due to his efforts to get the best out of them.

Madam Speaker, I have closely associated with the family of Mzee Byanyima and I can say with certainty that he was a family man. He mentored and groomed not only his biological children but he had a generous and big heart, which he demonstrated by looking after and nurturing several other children in the community. 

Madam Speaker, during the time of his service as a Member of the Legislative Council representing the people of north Ankole from 1961 to 1971, it is said he truly executed his mandate with honesty and he was very down to earth, approachable and always available to offer counsel to his people. As a Member of Parliament representing the constituency where he was residing, the people of Mbarara Municipality and I shall greatly miss him. We pray that the character and legacy he has left can be emulated by many of us for the betterment of our country.

We thank the good Lord for the gift of Mzee Byanyima to us. We thank him as well for his enormous contribution to the development of our nation. We, therefore, pray for his family and pray to God to provide them with comfort during this trying moment. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the mover and the seconders. Honourable members, now that the movers and seconders have finished, we shall revert to three minutes. Let me now start with Col Fred Mwesigye.

3.50
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise also to join my colleagues and the Prime Minister to support the motion to honour this great African. 

In 1962, I was a P.4 pupil at Kazo Primary School and I saw a very smart young man dressed in a green white stripped jacket and he was campaigning for DP. He was with my close relatives, Grace Ibingira and the late Kabazaire, and my heart felt I should join this smart brilliant young man. Although I was not active in politics, but at least I admired this great African. From that time, I continued admiring him. I was a member of DP until I joined Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM) when we went to fight for democracy in this country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Government for honouring him because he deserves it. On behalf of all the people of Nyabushozi and on my behalf and my family’s, I wish to express my deepest and most sincere condolences to the family, loved ones and the people of Nyabushozi, Ankole and Uganda at large during this difficult time.  

The country mourns with the members of the family, but at the same time celebrates the extraordinary life of this remarkable elder who devoted his life to peacefully protecting and serving his country. We should all emulate this legacy and stand as examples in pursuit of the principles he stood for - progress for his country, patriotism, nationalism, peace and justice.

Mzee Byanyima, may God rest your soul in peace. God bless you and God bless Uganda. Thank you.

3.53
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in mourning our mzee. Some of us were born in the 1980s and 1990s but if we check around for people with whom we can form a party and say, “DP egumiire” for example, you will see a few people with that kind of foundation. I am even concerned about the few we see. 

We have been mourning people here who some of us just hear about when they come here, unlike Mzee Byanyima. Recently, I was with his son, Anthony, who is my friend. He happened to be here a month ago and I asked him if his father wrote a book so that we can know his thoughts. He told me they were working on it. 

Most of our elders and role models are dying without anything documented about them. We do not have their thoughts. Mr Prime Minister, Government should take the initiative to finance some of these elders or come up with a project where they can put down their thoughts, which will guide people like us who never got an opportunity to associate with them when they were doing these historic acts. 

Madam Speaker, some of us will always read about such great people. I believe it will help shape some of us to be role models for some other young people. With that, may mzee’s soul rest in peace.

3.55
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As an old boy of Mbarara High School, where I spent six years, I was lucky to attend a school where mzee had built a good foundation. I associated with some of his children and the people he mentored. 

I remember in 2001 when the honourable engineer Winnie Byanyima came looking for votes to contest in Mbarara Municipality; I was in senior 5. Due to the relationship Mbarara High School had with Mary Hill High School, which she attended, I commanded my colleagues, the fellow students, and we pushed her car for about 4kms when the engine was off, to demonstrate that relationship.

As old boys of Mbarara High School, even on our platform, we are not saddened by the death of mzee because he has served his purpose. We feel that he has gone to rest and indeed, we should celebrate the good time and deeds that he has done for this country.

Finally, there are certain occurrences that happen for good. I see now we are having very many different families together - those who used to be together previously and have again come together because of the death of Mzee Byanyima. I would like to imagine that this can be a good beginning for those in Government and those in the Opposition to come together. From the look of things, I believe that we can start from here and become one again, and that would create good leadership and would probably make mzee’s spirit happier. I am sure we are all working for the betterment and togetherness of Ugandans. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.57
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Butaleja District and Bukedi sub region, I would like to celebrate the life of Mzee Byanyima. Mzee Byanyima was born in the same year as my grandfather, the late Dan Hirya Mubene. Therefore, I have no doubt that he was also my grandfather.

I also celebrate his life because he was a very good mentor. The Leader of the Opposition said that he had a special name for His Excellency Y.K. Museveni. This showed that he could handle stubborn and bright children as well, and this is clear from his fruits. For the 20 years we have had Y.K. Museveni, he has been exemplary just like his mentor. (Applause)

I would like to say that as leaders in this generation, we must borrow a leaf from the life of Mzee Byanyima. Just as we have heard, his CV speaks for him. What will people speak about us when we are in that casket? At times as politicians when we are at burials, we fail to find what to say about some people. We fidget around with words to speak about somebody. However, this is a lesson to us leaders who are here today; we must make our lives useful to this nation so that those who will give speeches at our burials do not face a hard time to find what to say. 

I would like to say that to the family of the Byanyima’s, just like others have said - My grandfather used to tell me to study hard and be like engineer Winnie Byanyima. I am proud of you; you have made us proud as women of this country. However, I would say that what is important now is for you, the children, to carry on the legacy of your father so that his candle continues to shine in this country.

I would like to dedicate to you as a family Psalms 23, which says, “The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want”. May the soul of Mzee Byanyima rest in eternal peace.

4.00
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Otuke whom I represent, I want to extend our condolences to the family. 

As people were reading the history of mzee, I deduced two things. In this world, people can be known for two things and one of them is their character. You can be known for your good character and whoever hears your name and your character will either have their heart at rest or tremble. I am happy that because of the life that mzee led, whoever hears his name can have their heart at rest and not tremble. 

Some weeks ago, we had the body of another mzee who was my clan head and he had a similar character. Whoever heard of his name and character had their hearts at rest. When you hear of their education background, all these were educationists. This means that 70 or 80 per cent of those who led this country in a very good way and with integrity had a teaching background. 

As a representative of teachers - I am one of them - if this was a church, Madam Speaker, I would have prophesied that the next President of this country must be a teacher so that we can maintain our integrity - (Interjections) - We have been wondering what to do to ensure that the legacy of such remains. In most cases, we say good things about our people when they die, but - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a solemn occasion, please. 

MS SYLVIA AKELLO: We say good things but there is always nothing that stays for remembrance. I know when his body goes to Mbarara, they will talk of having either a university in his memory or they will talk of a monument or something of that kind because he was a cultural leader. I pray that as Government, we support that so that even those who are not yet born can hear about mzee’s name and their hearts will remain at rest just as we are while talking about him. Thank you very much.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Perhaps once in 100 years, a man like the late Byanyima comes along; a man whose capacity to persevere and dare without pain and anguish makes him distinguished.

I have known the late Byanyima since I became active in politics and perhaps I should apologise to you for the unkind songs we used to sing about the DP when we were young. (Laughter) However, every time we met, he knew I did not support DP but he felt duty bound to give me advice. He always advised me to support not the Democratic Party but to support Uganda. (Applause) I would like to tell all and sundry that I do not support NRM; I support Uganda -(Applause)- and ipso facto because NRM supports Uganda, I support NRM. (Laughter) 

Ladies and gentlemen, I am beyond Uganda; I support Africa. I am a Pan-Africanist. I am an African first, a Ugandan second, then NRM third and everything else follows. That was the ilk of the late Byanyima; that was his mould. He believed in unity and fairness. That is why he always tendered his advice so that we could make this country better than it is. That should be the calling of everybody who thinks they have got something to contribute to the making of this country.

We choose to live asunder. Much as we are ideologically different, to be of opposite opinion does not mean that we have got to be subversive. Opposition is not subversion and that is a lesson the late Byanyima learnt and professed very well. We can live together and disagree, but we must not tear the edifice that is Uganda down. It is our responsibility to uphold this country. We can choose neighbours and friends but we cannot choose relatives. Flung together in this body politic called Uganda by history and circumstances, we must uphold it and tolerate each other. (Member timed out)

4.07
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buhweju where the late was born and raised, I would like to support the motion and deliver a condolence message from the people of Buhweju.

Madam Speaker, the history of Mzee Byanyima in Buhweju is very strong in the villages of Kamuhiga and Rushayo where he grew up. A lot has been said about him and anybody who went through his hands and did not become exemplary was very hard hearted. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I have come to learn that you do not have to follow people because they are many, but once you know that you are doing the right thing, even when nobody is following you, you will still go on. At some point, he was the only Opposition Member of Parliament in Ankole, just like me. 

To him, truth and justice was not just a slogan but a way of life. We have very many slogans; some people talk about “one Uganda, one people” others talk about “truth and justice” and some do not know but they say, “no change”. (Laughter) What is very important for me is to live what you believe in. He was not a political chameleon. Some people are green today, tomorrow they are yellow and then they go back and in five years, somebody has been part of five political parties. Mzee Byanyima was very consistent.

Somebody said, “I am seated where I am by design”. I would like us to emulate the late old man so that you sit where you are seated by conviction and you believe in what you are, in what you say  - (Member timed out.)

4.10
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bugangaizi East, I join colleagues to pay tribute to Mzee Byanyima as we thank God for his 97-year journey on this earth.

A lot has been said about the late hon. Mzee Byanyima, but I would like to put across one major issue. The generation of Mzee Byanyima and Mzee Hunter Olwol, who died recently, was a blessed one, unlike today’s generation that appears to be confused. In their generation, they ate natural foods and they would take herbs to cleanse themselves even when they were not sick but just to remain healthy. Their family planning methods were natural, unlike today’s generation that is totally confused. That is why they have lived for long. Most of us might not reach those years like Mzee Byanyima - but I will. 

Today’s generation lives artificially. We are eating artificial foods and our family planning methods are artificial. Maybe that is why many women these days give birth through caesarean operations. Of recent, some girls even go to the suburbs of Ndeeba in Kampala to enlarge some of their parts. Those injections are not healthy. I think we need to get back to the roots of Mzee Byanyima because they were living a natural life and they were healthy.

Honourable members, the generation of Mzee Byanyima was very wise and we can also better ours - (Member timed out.)

4.13
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The late Mzee Byanyima taught with my father, the late Mzee Kosiya Rwarukurukuru, at Mbarara High School. They were in DP together. By then, my father was a deputy to Tarsis Kabwegyere, a very strong DP member.

Mzee Byanyima was a very principled man who stood by his beliefs despite all odds. He was sincere and honest with high integrity. With that, he won admiration of those that knew him as well as the wrath of those who envied him. His legacy lives on in his children, as you see them, especially his daughter, Winnie Byanyima, who is also my role model. She is the reason I am standing here –(Interjections)– Where is the husband? Honourable Colonel, you are welcome. (Laughter) 

His qualities, as I said, are exhibited in his children. My appeal to this august House is that as we pay tribute to Mzee Byanyima, let us strive to emulate his distinguished service to this nation and ensure that his contribution in building our nation is successfully accomplished. 

Mzee Byanyima was my father-in-law because my eldest sister was married to his first son, if I could call him so, the late Lt Col Napoleon Rutambika. I would like to take this opportunity to thank one family member, Edith Byanyima, for looking after Mzee Byanyima. I know through thick and thin, you have been there and you have looked after him well while others like Winnie Byanyima have been away in America on official duty. Edith, I would like to once again thank you very much for being there and looking after Mzee. May God bless you and may the soul of Mzee Boniface Byanyima rest in peace.

4.16
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family and to the greater family of the Democratic Party for the loss of a great nationalist. 

Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that if I do not complete within time, I request you give me extra time to make some important points.

THE SPEAKER: Just read the highlights. 

MR AKENA: These are the highlights, Madam Speaker. I concur with everything that has been said about Mzee Byanyima. The members of the Democratic Party alluded to his integrity, principles and some even went ahead to say that in this day and age, those principles are lacking. 

However, there is an important point, which many people are not aware of; the late Mzee Byanyima and my late father remained good friends despite being of different political sides. They remained in communication in both good and bad times. Throughout that, the late Gertrude Byanyima was the western regional head of the Uganda Schools Supplies, which was a subsidiary of the Milton Obote Foundation. 

What bound them was their commitment to education. Despite having different political views, they agreed with one another on the importance of education. Where there was an opportunity to further education, they were united. 

As a nation, we need to be able to look beyond some of our political issues. In this day and age, if such cooperation was happening, the statements as we have already heard in this Parliament - People say, “Byanyima has been bought”. He was never bought; he stuck by his principles, but there is a greater good which needs to be pursued.

I would also like to bring up an important aspect and here, unfortunately, I have to take my good friend and elder brother, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to task. What happened in 1969 was not captured adequately, and this is something which both the current and future generations need to understand fully - the situation Uganda found itself in. Fortunately, we had great nationalists like Mzee Byanyima to keep this nation together. 

In November 1969, the first President of Uganda, Sir Edward Mutesa, passed away in London. On the death certificate, the cause of death was alcohol poisoning. To this day, there are those who do not believe that but take it that the alcohol was poisoned. In December of the same year, coming from a delegates’ conference in Lugogo, the Executive President of Uganda that time was shot in the head just two inches below the temple. While he was recuperating in Mulago Hospital, unable to speak, there was an emergency Cabinet meeting. It was in that Cabinet meeting whereby a statutory instrument was issued which stopped political activities for six months. 

With the circumstances from the very death of Sir Edward Mutesa, there was absolute tension in Uganda, especially around Buganda. Immediately thereafter, the President survived an assassination attempt. There was a great chance that Uganda could be torn apart. However, the issue which I am stressing is that if Uganda is to undergo such great shocks, do we have amongst us great nationalists who can look beyond our political party differences and see the greater good of Uganda. That is the example that Mzee Byanyima leaves us with. 

Often, when I would go to Mbarara, I would be a visitor in Ruti in the home of Mzee Byanyima. I was always welcomed and treated very well. We must be able to look beyond our political differences and struggle for the greater good of Uganda. I agree with hon. Otafiire; let us put Uganda first, even though I remain a committed congressman throughout. May the soul of Mzee Byanyima rest in eternal peace.

4.22
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to associate myself with the motion as moved by the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, between 2000 and 2009, I went to Ruti with the late Anthony Wagaba Ssekweyama. By that time, Ssekweyama was attempting to be the president of the Democratic Party. If you would like to understand the character of the gentleman that we are paying tribute to, it is that moment that defines his character. 

We were welcomed in his home by his wife, the late Gertrude Byanyima. Before we could sit down, Mzee Byanyima appeared from a small room and greeted the late Ssekweyama and he said, “I know why you have come here. You want to become the President of DP but I will not support you and I will not vote for you and I will ask people not to vote for you.” His reasons were that he would not accept anybody to take over from Dr Paul Ssemogerere, who is a catholic and a Muganda. If the next president is to be a Catholic, he said you go to Gulu for that young man. However, if he is to be a Muganda, go to the Mayor, Ssebaana Kizito. He then invited us to have tea and asked that we do not discuss the subject further as it was a done deal. That was the character of the late Byanyima.

Any attempt by the late Ssekweyama to open that conversation met a huge roadblock. The late Byanyima further requested us not to stay in a hotel. He offered his home for us to reside in as we conducted our campaigns but he said, “Just know that I will not support you”. 

The next time we interacted with him, he was the chief guest at our anniversary of the Uganda Young Democrats. He used the word “impeccable” and said, “As young people, learn to be impeccable and have an impeccable curriculum vitae”. He further said that the disease in the country was so critical to the core that you hardly find people who are impeccable. He said that he had interacted with the political elite of this country and that there is a crisis; everyone he interacted with lacked that small ingredient. 

Therefore, as we pay tribute, can we summon the courage and become politically impeccable. It is a huge word and during the dinner, we wanted him to explain what it meant and he told us the stories, which hon. Akena has just informed the House about, but in a different version. Honestly, I heard a different story but I will not go into it –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute and also to add my voice to the motion that has been raised by the Prime Minister.      
                  
On behalf of the people of Amuru, allow me to convey my condolences to the family of the Byanyimas. Unlike the previous speakers, I will not claim to have met or spoken to the late Mzee Byanyima. However, in my culture in Acholi, we say that if you want your funeral to be full, have many girls, and this is a real testimony. Mzee does not have many girls - I see Edith and Winnie - but he invested in them. 

This is really what has made me get up here and say a big “thank you” to Mzee Byanyima. Imagine this is somebody who was born in 1920; we have men these days who were born in 1950 but they still do not think that a girl must go to school. I think this is a big challenge to us, to the men who are here and to the men in Uganda. As a woman, I am proud of Mzee Byanyima. 

I know he has left a big void in the family. I know words like, “You are celebrating a life well spent” have been said here, but something that is not very easy for me to overcome is death. I believe that however old somebody is, that person still has something to do in society. I know that as a family, even at the age of 90, you would always walk to him and ask him for advice. This will be no more. However, I pray you find solace in all the beautiful words that have been said today and that you will allow him to rest in peace. This is my word to you as a family. May God bless you and may his soul rest in eternal peace. Amen. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As hon. Nandala-Mafabi comes up, I have received a letter from the NRM Secretariat and I will read it:

“The National Resistance Movement Party learnt with pain the death of Mzee Boniface Byanyima, which occurred on Tuesday, 16 May 2017 at Nakasero Hospital. 

We thank God for the life of Mzee Byanyima. He was one of the key pillars for the formation and stability of political parties in Uganda, and more so the Democratic Party. He stood out as a principled and trusted leader who weathered the trials and tribulations of the tyrannical regimes of the past. 

We equally thank him for the guidance and mentorship that he offered to many of the members and leaders of the various political parties in Uganda today. Mzee Boniface Byanyima’s life is a life full of testimonies to the many political practitioners and observers. We learn from his illustrious life that political disagreement does not mean hatred. He taught us that we can disagree politically and yet remain friends.

Mzee Boniface Byanyima’s house was open to many. We have learnt that he kept in close contact with the families of his close comrades whom he served with at the Democratic Party; for example, he remained close to the families of the late Alexander Latim, who was a fellow member of the Democratic Party, a politician from Acholi. 

For all his contribution to the foundation of democracy in Uganda, we thank him and pray that his soul finds favour before the juries of heaven as he embarks on his journey to eternity.” 

It is signed by Richard Todwong, the Deputy Secretary General, National Resistance Movement.

4.30
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to pay tribute to Mzee Byanyima, whom I never met at close range, but I met his children and I have worked with them. 

I discovered that if you see an ill-mannered child, then you know that his mother and father are probably ill mannered but if you see a good-mannered child, then you know they are from a good family. I have worked with hon. Winnie Byanyima from 2000 and I know that you can rely on her word. She never changes, she is a person of integrity and I have heard from here that her father was also of that nature. 

I have also heard that the President of Uganda was kept and raised by Mzee Byanyima. I have also heard that when he was in Parliament, he spoke for Uganda and even hon. Kahinda Otafiire has said that Uganda comes first. This leads me to the conclusion that when we come here to Parliament, we become Members of Parliament for Uganda not Members of Parliament for our local areas or Members of Parliament for the ruling party or any party such as NRM or FDC. When doing our work, we are doing it for Uganda. 

I feel that sometimes our colleagues overreact when we ask them questions like “Why has the State House budget increased?” They always claim, “that person is against the President”. Please, we are doing it for the people of Uganda. If we all believe that the late Byanyima, who lies before us, talked for Uganda, from now on we should also start speaking like that. 

I even heard my brother, Col. Fred Mwesigye, claim that they went to bring democracy and whatever they went to fight for, but instead, they have swallowed whatever they were supposed to bring. They have now turned this country into one full of thugs and corruption. They have taken away what should be there. In fact, Uganda is now managed by a handful of people and mafias instead of being managed for the people of Uganda –(Member timed out.) 

4.33
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion presented by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late Boniface Byanyima. 

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Boniface Byanyima worked closely with my elder brother and they sat in this House together; while he represented Ankole North West Constituency, my brother represented Ankole South East Constituency. However, they did not hold the same beliefs. The late Byanyima, who is laying in front us, belonged to the Democratic Party and my brother was of the Uganda People’s Congress. However, that did not stop them from working together and cooperating for the sake of Uganda. We are very proud that the input that was led by Mzee Boniface Byanyima in achieving independence for Uganda did not ignore his native region of Ankole in terms of prosperity. 

I will not have the opportunity to speak in Ruti but if I had it, this is what I would have stated: Mzee Byanyima played a very significant role as a peacemaker. When the people of Ankole were divided along ethnic and religious lines, he played a very important role in uniting them. Ankole would probably not be as it is if it were not for the efforts and the candid support people like Byanyima gave to the leaders of Ankole at the time. We shall miss you. 

As some Members have said, what is important today in Uganda is not to belong to a political party or a religion. Ugandans need to emulate people like Byanyima; we need to devise a peaceful mechanism to promote peaceful co-existence for the development of this country.  These were people who were selfless. They did not have any greed for self-aggrandisement. They are a family that we are proud of in Ankole because they have lived moderately. The positions, which the late Byanyima occupied – (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak about somebody I know – 

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, allow me to introduce hon. Richard Todwong, the Deputy Secretary General of NRM and hon. Ibi Ekwau who was a Member of the Ninth Parliament. They are here to witness the proceedings.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. I believe that my three minutes now start running. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak about somebody I know, and this is the chairman of my party and my client who gave me work as a young person from law school. I would like to thank Government for according him this official funeral. I now would like to believe that if we were in Government, we would have done much better. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about my chairman and his principles. I would like to take it on from there. Those that are talking about a principled life must live a principled life. I would like to thank the President who visited the family and comforted them yesterday. He told us stories about the late Boniface Byanyima as a champion of modern agriculture in Ankole region. 

One of the issues I was handling for the late Boniface Byanyima was to do with his ranch. Who grabbed the man’s ranch? Has he been paid or this is how Ugandans pay those that do good for them? Those that opted to distribute his ranch had a very fundamental argument of equitable sharing of resources. Today, they have much more, which we are not sharing with them. 

Two, about the contribution of hon. Byanyima in the field of education, I thank him through his family. Today, as we celebrate his good life, we are not celebrating good schools in our country. The schools have gone to shambles and tatters. I know he is grieving in this casket. A lot has been destroyed; talk about democracy, human rights – things that he stood for in this Parliament. We have people rotting in Nalufenya. Is that how we celebrate a good life? 

I would like to thank him for raising his children – good children - and a lot has been said about them. Let us go back and reflect on how many times we have been battering his children on the streets. I am the Minister for Justice on the Opposition side.  Is that how we do justice to men and women in this country and then we stand here to praise good men? I think it is an insult to good men when we praise them on the microphone and we talk about emulating them without emulating them. (Applause)

He taught me as his lawyer. You would draft a document for him and he would come with his red pen and his wonderful late wife and they would edit and start giving you marks. One day, I had to ask them why they did not do it by themselves. He said, “You know that I am a teacher; so, I am teaching you how to write good English.” I am grateful to the old man. 

I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to celebrate the life of our chairman. As a party, we shall miss him. The only thing we can do is to invite his children back to the party, to come back from political exile. (Member was timed out.)

4.41
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the family of Mzee Byanyima. 

He was among the first Ugandans to embrace education in this country because he was a teacher at a time when many teachers in this country were British or Indians. I would like to salute him for what he did for this country at that time. This explains why his daughter, engineer Winnie Byanyima, is the first Ugandan engineer in the aviation industry - an aeronautical engineer. 

He cherished education just like we, the people of Rukungiri. This explains why when we were looking for the best educated and most beautiful lady, we run to him and he gave us engineer Winnie Byanyima. (Laughter) I would like to thank my former President, Col Kiiza Besigye, for leading us, a team from Rukungiri, to go to Mbarara. We are with her and she is happy. 

Mzee Byanyima was a principled man who was always willing and ready to advise others. Imagine a person standing in front of our current President and telling him, “That is bad or good; you are not an easy person.” We, therefore, would like to thank him for what he did. Now that he is gone, maybe Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, be prepared to do that job. I do not know what you are doing right now but you should help us because we know him as a person that is not easy to advise.

He was also generous especially in helping the neighbouring communities of Ruti. Those people, who are from Mbarara, like hon. Tusiime, know this. Like my colleagues have said, Mzee Byanyima has been described by many in this country as a selfless man and a politician who loved his country and fought for the rights of the Ugandans. I would like to support what hon. Sseggona said; in 1986 – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, use half a minute for the “muko”.

MR MUGUME: He openly blamed Government for grabbing his ranches in Kiruhura and other parts of the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many of you want to contribute; should we reduce to two minutes? Is that okay? Let us do two minutes so that everybody can speak.

4.45
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Thirty years ago, I dreamt of being a Member of Parliament - that was in 1986 - when I saw President Museveni swearing in as a young man. I admired him and I said to myself that I should be a leader.

In 1994, I was the head prefect in Manjasi High School. We lost a student who came from Kitagata and as a head prefect I had to accompany the body. The father of the student was a strong DP member; the late Byanyima was there and I sat near him. There was some young man who wanted to contest for the Constituent Assembly and Parliament and I think he was getting advice from mzee. I heard mzee saying that the best weapon to win is by having politics of no hatred, speak your manifesto and that is all and after elections, work together. Secondly, he said that the best weapon was to help your enemies or woo them. That is what I picked from Kitagata and it got stuck in my mind. 

When 2016 was nearing, that is what I applied. I remembered what mzee had advised the young man and applied it exactly - (Member timed out.)

4.48
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I will not repeat what has been said about Mzee Byanyima being an icon of integrity and good governance. 

However, I would like to thank him for one thing, which I have been a beneficiary of, just as other people, and that is for being a champion of women’s rights in this country. At the time when he sent hon. Winnie Byanyima to study, there were very few women as role models. Growing up in Mbarara as young girls, we were not short of role models because we were aware of the works of the Byanyima daughters. He did it as a parent and a committed one. How I wish that all the fathers in this country, including those in this House, could take time to mentor their daughters because such daughters always turn out well.

Hon. Byanyima, I am one of beneficiaries of Forum for Women in Development (FOWODE) training young women leaders, and I know it had a lot of impact on me and other young girls. I have also recommended other girls to get that training. Therefore, without repeating many of the words that have already been said, I join others to pay tribute to our mzee, our icon not only in Mbarara but Uganda as a whole. 

Honourable members, issues of integrity and good governance are personal decisions. They have no party –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I bring condolences from the people of Kashari North, which is part of the area hon. Byanyima represented in this House. I would like to specifically bring condolences from my old mother who is now 91. The late was her candidate and every general election she keeps asking me what happened to DP.

I would like to thank God for keeping Mzee Byanyima for 97 years. To be a politician at that time before NRM came to power in 1986 was not easy. Very many people died, even his colleagues; hon. Mwesigye mentioned Grace Ibingira who was arrested and spent five full years in prison. Therefore, we must thank God because a man of his calibre did not go to exile and was not killed by Government at that time. We should also remind ourselves that those problems where many people died started with the crossing of the Floor from that side to this side. Unfortunately, the one who led the crossing, Bataringaya, was killed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you on this note specifically; some of our colleagues are not here because they are in Jinja visiting Nalufenya where torture houses are coming up. I would like to appeal to my colleagues and people in authority to respect other people’s peace and lives so that we do not go back to where people had to go to exile and some died. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.53
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Kashari South, which was part of the constituency of the late.

I would like to say that we have lost a parent, a teacher and a mentor. My first time to see Mzee Byanyima was in 1987. For those who come from Mbarara and those who know the history of Mbarara High School and Ntare School, there were always games, which were called wars or fights. I was one of the commanders of those games and students from senior one to senior five were suspended but as candidate classes, we remained behind.

They called the candidates from Mbarara High School and Ntare School and we met in a playground called Kakyeka. One of the people who were called to talk to the candidates was Mzee Boniface Byanyima. After the meeting, he said he wanted to talk to the leaders. He cautioned us that if we wanted to be leaders, we must be disciplined. He said, “If you want to join the army, the barracks is near, go and join.” He told us to do the right thing at the right time; time for studies should be for studies and after that, we could join the army. I would like to appreciate him for that; because of that caution, I became disciplined and I am now a leader and I am happy for that.

I would also wish to tell my brothers from the DP side that it is because - (Member timed out.)

4.54
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the House in paying tribute and conveying my condolence message to the family of the late hon. Boniface Byanyima. I also bring condolences from my former Member of Parliament, hon. Dick Nyai, who was a friend to the late. When he heard of this news and this special sitting, he requested me to pass on this message and to have it on record.

Madam Speaker, as a young man, in the late I see a just man and indeed, he led a just life. We can see it from the records of Parliament, his family, the children he has left behind and everybody who has spoken speaks of a man who led a diligent life.

Madam Speaker, what do we learn and what do we take home, particularly we the young politicians, at a time when you introduce yourself as a Member of Parliament and you hear people murmuring? What can we learn at a time when you tune to radio and you hear the comments people make about Members of Parliament? I think there is something we can do differently.

We are to blame; as Parliament, as leaders, we have not lived the lives of politicians who should be emulated. Of recent, we have been making news on extorting bribes. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we should not just sit here; we have work to do to change –(Member timed out.)

4.56
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my condolences and that of the people of Kira, who I represent here, to the family of Mzee Byanyima. 

Hon. Otafiire said he is for Africa and Uganda. Maybe he forgot that this Uganda is a cocktail put together by the various tribes at independence. It was possible because this country was blessed with honest people and people of integrity like Mzee Byanyima who we are now mourning. If we were to form this joint venture called Uganda today, with the sort of leaders that come from various areas including that area of Mzee Boniface Byanyima, I am not sure if we would be able to form that joint venture. 

Mzee Kategaya – May his soul rest in eternal peace – said a Munyankole man does not turn on his words; he only turns in bed. There are Banyankole people these days who turn on their words. We would like to thank Mzee Byanyima for being a true Munyankole. (Applause)

We have lost a stock of the pre-independence and independence leaders. I remember advising my good friend, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda; now that the Mzee Byanyimas, the Maumbe Mukhwanas and Wachas have gone, you need to take your seat at the bench of elders so that when I have trouble with hon. Tusiime who represents Mbarara Municipality, I can come and report to you. However, if I have trouble with you, where do I go to report now that Mzee Byanyima has gone? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this motion has been moved by the Prime Minister and supported by the Leader of the Opposition. I am looking forward to a day when we will not only unite in mourning people, when Dr Rugunda will move a motion here for the restoration of term limits and it will be supported by hon. Winfred Kiiza, the Leader of the Opposition. (Applause) We should not unite only when we are sending people away, and that is the only time we have a motion moved by the Prime Minister and supported by the Leader of the Opposition. 

Relatedly, we should also learn to appreciate people before they pass on. Gratifying them when they are dead is bad manners. I have never heard those who are responsible for issuing medals, those who have made –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I join the House in supporting the motion. I would like to, in a special way, thank the Prime Minister for moving this motion. I would have wished the Government Chief Whip to have whipped the Movement side appropriately so the House would have been more properly constituted.

Madam Speaker, we are indeed celebrating the life of Mzee Boniface Byanyima. I used to refer to him as my dad. Indeed, in the presence of his daughters, he declared that I was his daughter because I was as courageous as he was and he would have wished that Winnie was like me. He would rebuke Winnie in our presence, telling her off and saying, “You are on the wrong side of politics; shut up when we are talking”. My sister suffered but she is a survivor and always survived. (Applause)

The first time I had a long chat with Mzee Byanyima, he shocked me. I do not like to be ambushed. He ambushed me by saying DP is the heart of democracy in Uganda. When he was saying that, he knew that I was the de facto leader of UPC and I was trying to rally DP behind the struggle to return multi-partyism. He put it straight in my face that DP is the heart of democracy in Uganda. I looked at him and asked, “Mzee, why do you think DP is the heart of democracy in Uganda?” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the elder. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, people keep forgetting that I am a commissioner. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But you are also an elder. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, I am also an elder. Madam Speaker, this is something Members need to know. He reminded me and said, “Look around the House, the seats and carpets in Parliament are all green. Why do you think they are green?” This is a question he has died before explaining.

Finally, Madam Speaker, this man needs to be remembered for his consistency. The Democratic Party has had three fatal fractures in recent history. The first one was when DP massively crossed to UPC. Mzee Byanyima remained a DP member and on the Opposition side. Even when people said UPC abolished multi-partyism, I have always quoted Mzee Byanyima as a testimony to prove that UPC did not ban multi-partyism because he remained on the Opposition side with Mzee Alex Latim and Gastari Odaa who later also crossed.

Even when DP gave their best politicians to the NRM as the first crop of ministers, Mzee Byanyima remained strong in the Democratic Party. Little did the DP know that this was a tactical move to really touch the very heart of the party. I pray that DP will nurture their wounds and come back and remain strong so that we can push the issue of democracy forward. 

Finally, I want the Prime Minister to remember the last cry of Mzee Byanyima. He told me personally that he is surprised that his own son – President Museveni – would allow him to lose the value of his farm when he is a president. I had wanted to take it up but he said, “No, leave it to me”. If this matter is not resolved, Mr Prime Minister - I know he is not there but his spirit lives on. I would pray that this matter is resolved and that will be our pride. God bless you. (Applause)

5.05
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister. The reason we always speak on such occasions is so that we learn lessons. There are people who know, those who are young and those who may not have had any experience at all.

Madam Speaker, every politician must make a political pilgrimage. When I came to the Sixth Parliament, we went to Ruti with hon. Winnie Byanyima and that was the first time I met Mzee Byanyima. He asked me which constituency I represented and I told him. He reminded me that that was the constituency of his friend, Alexander Latim. 

He asked me where I was going to sleep in Mbarara and I told him I would sleep in a hotel. He rebuked me and told me, “That is why you fail, you leaders of today; for us we used to sleep in homes”. He said that whenever he went to Gulu, he would go and spend the night with Alexander Latim and whenever Alexander Latim went there, that was his room. He told me that as young people, we should learn to forge nationalism. I picked a lesson from him that this country’s leaders need to do a little more. He was a nationalist.

The second thing he talked to me about was the situation in the north. Madam Speaker, he said he met the President when he took over Kampala and he even pointed out where the President sat in his compound – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please use half a minute to conclude.

MR OKUMU: He said he requested the President not to mistreat the Acholi people when he crossed the Nile because the Acholi are good people. However, the President never listened to him; he abandoned ship and committed a lot of atrocities in northern Uganda.

Finally, as we say in Acholi, “a name is better than wealth”. I would like to tell the family that the greatest thing their father left for them is his name. He has not left wealth or money but his name will live on. Madam Speaker, I remember in the Sixth Parliament, one of the Members of Parliament called Byanyima visited Gulu. People mistook him to be a son of Byanyima and he was treated well. (Laughter) A name is a name. I think mzee lived well and left a good name and that name is greater than whatever wealth may have been acquired through crooked ways. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Wamanga-Wamai comes up, let me introduce hon. Joseph Kakooza, a former Member of Parliament. He is in the gallery. You are welcome. 

5.09
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to convey sincere condolences to the family, friends, relatives and in-laws, especially Dr Kizza Besigye, who is seated there. Please, receive our sincere condolences.

Madam Speaker, we are mourning a great man. He was a principled person who fought for democracy but wherever he is, he is mourning because there is no democracy in this country. He was a principled person who stuck to his values. He was a man who never accepted khaki envelopes. He remained simple and fought for his ideas.

Madam Speaker, we are losing such people. What will happen to this country? Wherever Mzee Byanyima is, he is happy because he educated his family; the children got an education. The other day I was in Washington and Winnie was speaking at the World Bank. Everybody appreciated it and after the meeting, they rushed to greet Winnie Byanyima. I think it was a great thing Mzee Byanyima did; to leave your children comfortable, the best thing you can do for them is to give them an education.

Madam Speaker, many have spoken but we have not emulated what he fought for, including the President of this country who lived in his family. He was advised but he never took the advice of the late Mzee Byanyima seriously. Now, who is going to advise the President if he cannot listen to such people?  People like Wacha Olwol passed on. The elders are going. What will happen to this country? 

May Mzee Byanyima rest in peace. We appreciate what you fought for. We are going to continue fighting for democracy in this country. May your soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to stop at 5.30 p.m. 

5.11
MS SHEILA KABAIJE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our elder, parent and great leader, Mzee Boniface Byanyima.

First of all, I would like to extend my sincere condolences on behalf of the people of Kiruhura, who he once represented as a Member of Parliament. Also, being the Member of Parliament for Kiruhura, I would like to thank him for being a great example and great leader.

Madam Speaker, when I joined Parliament as a new Member, I took time to read the Hansard of this august House. Like many new Members of Parliament who need some orientation, mentoring and guidance, I got a lot from what was written about his work. I was pleased to learn that he was such an excellent legislator and a good representative. He spoke about things that concerned Government and the people he represented. 

Since we do not have much time, I will pick out one of the areas that concerned me very much, having been a civil servant. Mzee Boniface Byanyima advocated for equal access, welfare, good working conditions, benefits and promotions in the public service. He continuously spoke against discrimination of any kind. I am not going to give details of –(Member timed out.)

5.13
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Mzee Boniface Byanyima. I would like to convey condolences to the family from my father, who was his personal friend. He was with the family in the morning up to lunch time. He did not manage to come to the House but you know what he thought about him. He was an old Budonian like him and I. We thank him very much for that friendship.

Madam Speaker, this is a generation that is getting extinct. Before him, we lost the late Wacha Olwol, Prof. Odonga, among others, and there is a lot that we can learn from them. These people were encyclopaedias of wealth and knowledge. Their time was very different from ours. We thank God for their advanced age because at 97 years old, we celebrate his life; we do not mourn him. 

Madam Speaker, he has indeed accomplished his task. He has fought the good fight and won the race. We would like to thank the family for keeping together. We would like to ask the family to remain as one unit and emulate the good that their father did. A lot has been said positively about him; uphold those values.

Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage all of us with aged loved ones to get them to write about their achievements and their lives. We lose a lot by letting it pass and going without any record. The values have been honesty, integrity, being outspoken or bold, being an educationist, a farmer and so much more. Can Government find a way of encouraging us to put together what we can learn from these elders? It could be written or audio but we need these records. I would like to thank him for what he did and also thank him for upholding the values –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Byanyima. 

Madam Speaker, I am prompted to rise after listening to the late’s life history. It gave me a bit of nostalgia about my own father because I find a lot in common between the two. My father, the late Adrian Oriokot, was born in the same year as mzee, in 1920. They were both teachers. My father was an ardent member of the DP and a member of the LEGCO. They sat in this Parliament in the same year. He was also a rancher up to the time he died and he was a proponent of gender equality. Therefore, I find a lot of similarities between the two. 

My daddy passed away in 1993, but I just thank God that the qualities mzee had that are being spoken about now were also in my father and in the late Wacha Olwol, who we said bye to a few days ago. I thank God for the gift of that crop of leaders who are now leaving us. The leaders who, as many have said, were incorruptible, disciplined, principled and had all the good qualities that you can talk about - (Member timed out.)

5.18
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. On behalf of the Sebei sub region and on my behalf as a teacher, I am really touched by the death of Mzee Byanyima. I must say I never came close to him, but I would like to say the person laying before us was disciplined throughout his life. Today, we are losing very important people at a very tender age, but if Mzee Byanyima was not disciplined, maybe he would not have lived for these 97 years. That calls upon all of us to emulate the way of life he lived.

Secondly, I would like to say that behind every successful man is a successful woman. I must also take this opportunity to thank the family of Mzee Byanyima for helping maintain his health and supporting him in all ways in his work. Friends of mzee, you have mentioned how he mentored and guided many of you, please keep in touch with his children to show your support and make sure what you have - (Member timed out.)

5.20
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I associate myself with the kind words the honourable members have spoken about my father, the late Boniface Byanyima. However, maybe out of need to justify certain things that were done at a certain stage, some people have spoken things which are not accurate about the late Byanyima. I have revised the last interview the late gave to the press on 12 August 2012. When you read that interview, you will get to know the feelings of the man that lies here before us. 

Madam Speaker, coming together to do bad things is not unity; it is conspiracy. The late Byanyima never conspired with anybody against this country. Let him not be praised for having worked with certain people he refused to work with. In that interview, he said he refused to work as a minister three times, under Obote, Amin and Museveni. Therefore, let us not just say this man wanted unity. He only worked with others when they were doing good things for this country. When they were doing bad things against this country, he refused to work with them. 

The late Byanyima said in that interview that he will never forgive Mr Museveni, and for that matter NRM, if they do not restore his ranch. He has died when the ranch has not been restored and you stand unforgiven. (Member timed out.) 

5.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago District and on my own behalf, I would like to condole with the family of the late Mzee Byanyima who lies before us this afternoon. 

Madam Speaker, as I was trying to catch your eye, hon. Okumu was teasing and asking me why I wanted to speak and what I would say given my age. I actually promised I would report him to you and that is what I am doing. (Laughter) In Acholi, when a great elder dies, a drum is sounded. When the drum is sounded, people from far and wide run to the drum because they suspect an old man has died. The people who come are mostly grandchildren. My late grandfather was born in 1923 and so he was the late Byanyima’s age mate. That means I am a granddaughter to the late Byanyima and that is the reason I have to speak and bury him.

Madam Speaker, I have not had interactions with the late Byanyima like other young people stated here. However, through his aspirations, through his speech and his urge to have good governance in this country, as a young Ugandan I really admired the personality of Mzee Byanyima who lies before us here. A lot has been said about him and I know he was a man of integrity and very many good things, but the inspiration he gave some of us in terms of the - (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Boniface Byanyima, the former chairperson of the Democratic Party. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. This is a solemn meeting; please respect the democrat. 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family, the DP fraternity and all Ugandans for the loss of our beloved Boniface Byanyima. 

I have learnt two things from him. First of all, he lived a challenging life. Politics is about challenges amidst family matters, but the late Boniface Byanyima has left his family united amidst all the problems in politics. I know President Museveni grew up in the same family, which later on was joined by Dr Kizza Besigye, but the two people do not look each other in the eye –(Interjection)– I know this because Dr Besigye and President Museveni are on different sides.

Madam Speaker, from the old man’s family, I have learnt a lot. You can only see the value of education in the family of Boniface Byanyima –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the limitation of time. I bring condolences from Masaka Municipality to the family and to the democrats as well as the entire nation for the loss of this great son of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, if I only had time, I would have enumerated the kind of lessons I personally learnt with colleagues in our formative years as young democrats from this great son of Uganda. Let me just state this: in the 1960s, during the making of Uganda, the deceased and others were in their 40s but this was a generation that dared to dream. They dreamt and they had aspirations for self, children, present and future. They dreamt and shared their dreams. I am afraid I am not sure that we still dream or instead hallucinate, and we have replaced aspirations with appetite. It worries me as a democrat; I do not know whether we can still dream beyond what we aspire to achieve as individuals. 

We shall certainly miss him as a teacher. He was lucky because he taught when teaching and teachers were respected and the profession was noble. As a political leader for his people and the country, he was lucky to serve when politics was a calling of honourable men and women. We have a serious deficit of these facing this fair land. Of course, as a democrat, we can only pray that in our time, we work hard to restore the kind of values he loved to see in his party and country, and use this time before we lay him to rest to reflect on our failings as aspiring democrats and as Ugandans, and try and reflect on fairness, truth and justice.

Just yesterday during a by-election in Toroma, I saw on television a group of party supporters clobbering one young man. When I asked the reason why they were doing that, they said that he was interfering with their peace. I am not sure whether he is alive but I almost blacked out as I watched that beating. With this still happening, Byanyima cannot rest in peace. That is not the Uganda he dreamt of and the kind of fairness he thought we would engender in our polity. Unfortunately -(Member timed out.)

5.30
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to bring condolences from Soroti District, on my own behalf and my family. It is indeed a pity. 

I would like to reiterate the issue that has been talked about by many here about the compensation. It is reported by the Auditor-General. If this Government can only - That is one of the things you cannot dodge because it is already in black and white. We need to work on it and make sure it is compensated. 

Madam Speaker, many have alluded to the fact that the late mzee was a teacher. I am a daughter of a teacher and when I compare the generation of teachers then and those today, there is a big difference. Why is that difference there? How were the teachers of that time trained and how are our teachers today trained? The teachers of that time imparted their training not only to their students but also to their children. Why is it that there is such a disparity between the same profession at the time of the Byanyima’s and now?

Madam Speaker, many have said he has left a good name and indeed he has. I want to say here because of his good name, people will praise his children and his grandchildren. The Bible says the sins of a parent will haunt his or her children for three generations. I want to say today the sins you commit today, the harm you cause to people today will haunt your children in the future. For some of us, people will shut doors to the faces of our children but if you leave good names, people will open doors -(Member timed out.)

5.32
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese); Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and please forgive me for my hoarse voice. My deepest condolences to the family and to my leader, Dr Col Kizza Besigye.

Madam Speaker, the whole country knows Uganda’s story is incomplete without mentioning Mzee Byanyima for the following reasons: One, for him being the glue that kept DP together; two, he was the soul of Ankole; and three, he was the lion of Uganda just as Jesus was the lion of Judah.

Madam Speaker, I have seen that we are celebrating, but we are doing so for a reason. There is something yet to happen; he has left a miracle prepared to happen. You know that certainly, we look forward to a first woman president and I have a dream list. On top of that list is you, Madam Speaker; number two is hon. Winnie Byanyima, the daughter of Mzee Byanyima; number three certainly is our Leader of the Opposition; and number four is hon. Osegge. 

Yes, rest in peace but I think there is something fundamental about his death. We need to focus on the country more than we focus on ourselves or our parties. However different our views might appear, it is very important to know that we are Ugandans and we need to work for Uganda. Rest in peace hon. Byanyima. Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have been here for over three hours and 35 Members have contributed to this motion. I would like to put the question that the question be now put?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the programme is as follows: Tonight, there is a vigil at their home in Muyenga. Tomorrow, there will be a service at St Paul’s Cathedral Namirembe starting at 9.00 O’clock and thereafter the body will be taken to Ruti in Mbarara. There will also be a vigil in Mbarara. On Sunday, 21 May, there will be prayers at their home in Ruti starting at 10.00 a.m. and burial will be at 2.00p.m.

The Parliamentary Commission has provided two buses to enable Members go and pay their last respects. The buses will leave from here at 8.00 O’clock in the morning on Sunday. Those who need to go to Mbarara should contact hon. Ssewungu. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the House do approve a motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Boniface Muyogoma Byanyima as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I direct the Clerk to extract the Hansard and send it to the family together with the tribute. 

East African Community Anthem.

National Anthem.

 (Exit of the late Boniface Byanyima)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as indicated, the House will resume again on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. However, you may recall that yesterday this House debated and adopted the motion urging Government to extend the deadline for the registration, verification and validation exercise of the Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) cards in Uganda. The representatives of the people and the front bench largely agreed with this resolution. 

I am shocked to learn that the minister in charge of ICT, hon. Frank Kagyigyi Tumwebaze, Member of Parliament for Kibale East County in Kamwenge District, in total disregard, disrespect and disdain of this House’s resolution, has insisted that unregistered SIM cards will be switched off at midnight. This is an affront to the people’s representatives and the country and is unacceptable and cannot go unchallenged. (Applause)

Honourable members, the Executive had their opportunity to present their contrary arguments, if any, in this House yesterday. This was a substantive motion, which was on the Order Paper. If the Executive had any reservations on this matter, even after the resolution was made the minister should have had the courtesy of coming to present a statement to this House on his objection to the resolution made. 

Honourable members, you must be aware that hon. Tumwebaze is not a regular attendee of this House. Ever since the issue of registration started, he has not had the courtesy to brief the House and the country. He does not even give himself time to hear the difficulties people are going through, through their representatives. 

Honourable members, I am proposing to present this matter to the rules committee. I am citing him for contempt under Rule 211 of the Rules of Procedure. (Applause) We cannot accept this disregard of peoples’ voices, challenges and problems; it is a high level of arrogance. On Tuesday, I will present this matter to the rules committee so that they can invite him to explain himself to this House. Thank you very much. (Applause) House is adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 May 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
