

Thursday, 17 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by wishing our Muslim colleagues in Parliament and in the country a successful holy month of Ramadhan. Today is the first day and as I indicated on Tuesday, in respect to them we would not want to sit beyond 6.00 p.m. today. Therefore, let us try to work very quickly so that we free them to go and perform their rites. (Applause) 

Honourable members, we have a few matters of public concern.

2.42
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance following the reoccurrence of landslides in Bududa District. The affected subcounties are: Buwali, Bubiita, Nakatsi, Bushika and Nalwanza in Bududa District. It rained heavily on 15 May 2018 and the people in this area are at high risk following the heavy rains because the crack has widened and deepened. This is a big security threat to our people. 

We would like the Office of the Prime Minister to brief the people of Bududa on the progress of resettlement. Our people were registered a long time ago but they are wondering why they are not being relocated. What is the problem with the land that had been acquired? This year, you came to Bududa, registered people and promised to take them to Bunambutye. Is there a problem in Bunambutye? 

This issue cuts across the Elgon region. Let me give an opportunity to my colleague from Manafwa to say something because we have a similar problem and we need urgent intervention.

THE SPEAKER: I was going to give her an opportunity.

MS KHAINZA: Is she going to get her own opportunity? Thank you. We pray that our people are urgently relocated and that the Office of the Prime Minister avails temporary measures like food and non-food items so that our people can settle in the trading centres as we await the long term plans. Emphasis should be put on the issue of re-settlement. Our people are wondering what plans Government has for them because for a long time, Government has not paid attention to them. 

You have completed the mapping; do you just take this information for statistics in your offices in Kampala or do you feel the plight of the people in the Elgon region? This crack runs across the Elgon region, so we want our people to be urgently relocated and taken care of so that their livelihoods are changed. We are tired –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Manafwa because the issues are related.

2.44
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Last night, I got information from Manafwa District that two of our subcounties have been affected by a very big landslide, which has taken down 20 homesteads with several houses in each homestead. Fortunately, no life was lost but houses, heads of cattle and plantations of coffee and matooke were lost in this landslide. 

People are wondering what they are going to do next because there was a time when we appealed to the Office of the Prime Minister in 2014 but nothing came out of it. Members of the 20 homesteads have no shelter, blankets or anything. Since hon. Ecweru is here, my humble appeal to him is that we need emergency intervention because people are homeless and they do not have anything to live on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Namisindwa is also prone to floods.

MS NAMUKHULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that Namisindwa is even worse than what my comrades have mentioned. A village called Buwandyambi in Namisindwa Town Council had its two bridges washed away and five houses razed. Luckily, we did not lose any lives but we have lost crops. 

We also have an issue in Bunamulunyi in Mukoto Subcounty where we have had landslides as well. This crack is widening but we are not being helped. Worse still, there is somebody who came in a Government vehicle and informed these people that they had been compensated and that Government does not know that they are still doing there. I am wondering who has compensated them and where Government had planned to take them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The minister will answer.

2.47
MR KIGOZI SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance concerning Ambassador Maj. Gen. Matia Kyaligonza who resides in Mutungo Central Cell, Mutungo Ward in Ndejje Division, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality. This General is a disgrace to this nation.

THE SPEAKER: No, please simply talk about what has happened.

MR KIGOZI: Four days ago, he beat up an old lady, Nalongo Maria Nakaweesa, of about 70 years. She inquired why the General was diverting rain water to her compound and efforts to talk to him only resulted in a beating. This incident attracted the press and the next day, he beat up Dan Kizza who he accused of talking to the press. Dan Kizza is now in serious condition in Safe Life Health Centre in Mutungo and the case has been reported under Ref.18/12/05 of 2018 at Mutungo Police Post. 

Last year, he beat up a municipal councillor, Grace Kyamulabi, among other victims and that councillor is now bedridden with a serious heart problem. Grace Kyamulabi is also the secretary for gender at the municipal council. It is also alleged that he or his associates beat up a casual labourer who later died because he suspected –(Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our rules are clear. The honourable member is talking about somebody of high integrity in this country and this person is not here to defend himself. Is the honourable member in order to disregard the ambassador and discuss whatever is happening in his area of residence as if it is a matter of national importance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue is not new. We have been receiving complaints about land disputes in relation to that gentleman and his neighbours. I think that is what he is raising. We just need to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to follow it up and see to it that the citizens get their proper rights addressed in relation to this case.

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is one other important issue that is happening right now. Apart from beating people, as I was saying, one person has been reported dead after the beating. 

Another serious issue is that he is blocking a road that is an access road for several other people. He wants to put a quarter guard so that people do not use the road. When I went there yesterday, I talked to the people constructing and they actually admitted that he is constructing a gate on a public road that is serving other people. I think that is against the laws of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the concerned people in Government take up this matter seriously in order to save the people from suffering because this General is a menace to the people of Mutungo. I would like to tell you that if nothing happens, people are going to take the law in their hands, which would be very bad for this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish what is going on at Mutungo Cell, Ndejje Division in Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality and give us an update.

2.52
MR JOSEPH SSEKABIITO (NRM, Mawogola County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance related to land issues.

Madam Speaker, in the books of Uganda, there is what we call a forest reserve and it is true that there are areas that are gazetted as forest reserves. I would like to report to this august House that I come from two parishes that cover the area of Buyaga Forest Reserve. The two parishes are Kasambya and Lwebitakuli. The two parishes have a population of 21,700 people with 3,446 homesteads and 6,000 plus registered voters. The land that is called a forest reserve has been occupied by Ugandans since 1928.

Madam Speaker, what has sparked things off is that on 3 May 2018, three men came to my constituency in a double cabin pick-up, registration number UG 3498H. It is unfortunate or fortunate that it had the letter “H”; I do not know whether it is an official vehicle of Parliament or of the Auditor-General –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could use two minutes and go straight to the issues. What is it that you want the Government or the House to help you with?

MR SSEKABIITO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The message was that they had come to count these people, register them and thereafter, the Government would be ready to relocate these people.

Madam Speaker, there is no forest reserve in that area. What is there is a settlement area full of Ugandans. I pray that this place is gazetted as a settlement area. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Hon. Bahati, can you help us? Is the Government taking note of the multiplicity of evictions and displacements? It has become an epidemic. Minister, can you say something about the issue of Mawogola?

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, to be fair, we will take up this issue with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and first get in touch with the Member. However, we shall also move into action to address the issues being raised and report back to the House on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, last week Parliament made a decision to relocate an army general, who doubles as a minister, from Nommo Gallery. I have recordings of an interview conducted by CBS Radio with him insulting the person of the Speaker and belittling Parliament because of that decision. This matter is related to land. 

The minister, by the name of Gen. Elly Tumwine, was insulting the person of the Speaker, attacking the character and image of the Speaker and belittling the Parliament of Uganda, where he is a Member. I have recordings of that interview.

I would like to know whether it is not procedurally correct, first of all, for him to be compelled to make a statement and if this House is not satisfied with the statement, the matter is referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for further investigations. Thank you very much.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, this matter is very serious. The said General was quoted as saying that Parliament is not doing its work properly and that we are part of a group that wants to steal Nommo Gallery. He said that Parliament is in cohorts with a group of people who want to go and steal Nomo Gallery, and this is a person who has been in Parliament since 1986.

Madam Speaker, you stated very clearly the other time that we have been budgeting for Nommo Gallery yet it is appropriated to one individual. Rather than the Member coming here to explain to Parliament, he is going round the country not just attacking you but attacking Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that this is a very important matter and we cannot allow one of us to belittle not just the Speaker but the House as well.

MR MUGEMA: Madam Speaker, the previous day, I read in the New Vision, I think on page 13 or 14, an article in which the same General was quoted as saying, “They have never come to listen to me.” He literally said it in his language, which I am not well versed with, but he intimated that, “Towuliliiza gwa kawala nga tonawuliliiza gwa kalenzi.” 

This is the same General we assisted recently when we made several contributions to him because he was poor. We contributed for him to make his function colourful and now he is belittling us. Maybe he should refund all the contributions we made for him. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had lunch with Gen. Elly Tumwine in the canteen. I do not know if the culture of this House has changed regarding; there is the convenience the Commission has given us to have lunch so that we can walk into the plenary thereafter, but people choose to have lunch and go away only to come back for the next meal. (Laughter) 

That aside, Madam Speaker, the public has been greatly debating on social media how one individual can abuse the institution and walk away. I was of the opinion that the General should be invited to make a personal statement on the Floor of the House. 

I say this because the system of democracy ushered in by the NRM is not working. Gen. Elly Tumwine is a Member of Parliament - the Legislature; he is a member of the Executive because he is a minister; and he was the Chairman of the General Court Marital, meaning he was in the Judiciary. How can one person be in all the arms of Government yet we are talking of the principle of separation of power?

Madam Speaker, I know that your personality and the institution were attacked. You happen to be in that Chair and there is no other way. I would request that you create time on the Order Paper for Gen. Elly Tumwine, with his million dollar ideas, to come and make a statement to this institution. If he is a true General, he should come here instead of eating food and going away.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was waiting to finish the reports of the budget. I have also been reading the nonsense that is in the press. Certainly, he will be required to come here and explain himself to this House. I believe a number of these issues may have to go to the Committee on Rules, Privilege and Discipline. As soon as we finish the reports of the budget, he will be put on the Order Paper to come here and make a statement. (Applause) 

3.01
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the security situation on Lake Albert.

My sources told me about an attack last Friday and Saturday at the landing sites of Kaiso, Kijangi, Mbegu and Kiryamboga in Buseruka Subcounty, Bugahya County. This was confirmed by the Red Pepper newspaper of today, page 8. I have personally visited the area and I can confirm that these incidents occurred.

The attackers are said to have fled to Jo Landing Site in Ituri Province in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). They ran off with fishing gear worth over Shs 100 million and they are demanding a charge to return the items to the rightful owners. These attackers have been identified as Congolese soldiers.

This raises the following questions: How safe are our water bodies even with the presence of the Marine Police, which seems pre-occupied with safeguarding fish rather than the people in the said fishing communities? Secondly, what safety measures and assurance can we get that during oil production, since this is happening in the Albertine Graben, such incidents will not occur?

My prayer is that these incidents are fully investigated and interventions and assurances are made since these acts keep occurring along Lake Albert. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister for Security or the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs or the Minister of Internal Affairs to take an interest in the issues on the border with Congo and come back and report to us on Tuesday next week. In the meantime, give security to the citizens of the country. 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, last week Cabinet received a report that had been complied by my technical people on all the emergencies that have afflicted the country since the onset of the rains. Cabinet directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to quickly mobilise resources to address all the emergencies that have been occasioned by the rains in the country. This is because there are no resources to address these present challenges specifically. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I discussed this issue yesterday and he promised that by this afternoon, they will be communicating to the Prime Minister. My hope is that since the minister is here, maybe he could be having that communication. Madam Speaker, once we receive that communication, we should be able to address particularly the plight of the citizens who are displaced in Bududa and are living in churches and with well-wishers.

We have all the records across the country with particular emphasis on Mount Elgon, which has been a problem. We are also aware that the –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Made Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister, hon. Musa Ecweru, my good friend, sits in Cabinet where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also sits. Members of Parliament are under pressure and they bring the concerns of their people who are living under trees. 

Is the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness in order to conduct himself like a disaster and tell this Parliament that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should respond on the Floor of the House as if they do not sit together in Cabinet? Members want solutions. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please give some hope to the Members. The rains started long ago and the destruction has been going on; it is not new, and it is affecting district by district.
 
MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, there is no minister for disaster but there is a Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. I would like to request that - (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the usual predicament our people face is predictable because every year when torrential rains being to pound, you expect these natural calamities. I would like to remind the House that on 15 March, when this House was adopting a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate abuse of refugee funds by officials from the Office of the Prime Minister, this same minister requested the chairperson to separate the two issues - refugee funds and Internally Displaced People (IDPs) from Bududa, their relocation and eventual resettlement.

He was allowed by the Chair to come with a comprehensive statement here. However, it is now more than two months and the same minister has been very elusive; he makes it impossible to get him. Now here he is, loading the matter over to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring a statement. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you going to do about Bududa, Manafwa and Namisindwa? Next week, you will be required to bring a statement.

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, after here I will go to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and cause him to avail resources. I do not want the House to imagine that we can do anything without the support of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Without the minister, we cannot proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item No.3.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

3.09
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me an opportunity to present a personal statement on a very depraved statement made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

This is a personal statement regarding the defamatory and malicious allegations made against me by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi on misappropriation of onion seeds for Bugisu Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The honourable member is raising a matter against a Member of this House who is not in the House. Is it procedurally right for him to make a statement when hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not in the House to answer?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is aware that the House is sitting from 2 o’clock. 

MR WOBOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and I will proceed with this statement. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for according me an opportunity under rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to give a personal statement. 

I rise to give an explanation on allegations contained in a letter authored by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi in which he states that I received onion seeds on behalf of Members of Parliament for Bugisu subregion from the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and misappropriated the same. Most disturbing is that he went ahead to put the same allegations in the Monitor newspaper of today. You are at liberty to look at that paper, page 8. 

I would like to categorically refute these allegations as baseless and only an extension of grudges arising from the last elections held in Sironko. It is not only malicious but also fabricated to destroy my otherwise good reputation. (Laughter) I would like, therefore, to set the record straight as follows:

On 13 December 2016, I wrote to His Excellency the President and among other issues, requested for his personal support to coordinate with NAADS for the provision of onion seeds for Bugisu subregion, particularly for Budadiri East. I was later informed that my request had been considered and that the honourable Dr Goretti Kitutu would coordinate and ensure that other constituencies in Bugisu are included.

On 21 July 2017, the issue of onion growing was again raised to His Excellency the President by Bugisu Members of Parliament, through hon. Ignatius Mudimi who is our chairperson. Dr Kitutu met NAADS officials and a decision was taken to give all members of Bugisu Parliamentary Forum some onion seeds for onward distribution to the farmers. Each Member was individually called by NAADS to pick his or her share of the onion seeds from Simlaw Seeds Company (Uganda) Limited in Industrial Area. As secretary to the Bugisu Parliamentary Forum, I equally communicated to all my colleagues to note the same and indeed they were informed. 

All members of the Bugisu caucus should have by now picked their seeds from Simlaw Seeds in Industrial Area. If for any reason a member has not picked his or her share of the seeds, how can I be held responsible? 

In the latest information – (Hon. Mudimi rose_) - I will give way for information, hon. Mudimi –

THE SPEAKER: No, the statement under rule 54 is not subject to debate. Make your statement and sit down.

MR WOBOYA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. In my latest communication with hon. Nandala-Mafabi in which he threatened me with Inspector General of Government (IGG) and police investigations, I calmly replied and told him to proceed to Simlaw Seeds Company (Uganda) Limited and pick his share of the onion seeds. I do not know the criterion followed by NAADS officials in allocating different quantities to different beneficiaries. If this was a matter of concern for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, he is at liberty to contact the NAADS secretariat.

I am neither the custodian nor the store keeper of the said seeds. My role was simply to lobby for my people and communicate the same to the rest of my colleagues. (Applause) 

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that I did not play any role in the allocation of the said seeds, other than picking my share from Simlaw Seeds like the rest of my colleagues. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi should therefore substantiate his allegations against me and offer an apology to me and the people of Budadiri East by withdrawing his letter and writing back to the IGG and Inspector General of Police (IGP) clarifying his falsehoods.  Otherwise, I will be left with no option but to institute legal proceedings against the hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Attached herewith is the said malicious letter for your consideration, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as I have indicated, the statement is made under rule 54 so there is no debate on it. However, what I can say is that hon. Nandala-Mafabi addressed me on that issue as well, among other people.

3.18
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Our country is going through a lot of difficulty because of road accidents. These road accidents have claimed some of our colleagues. Even as I speak, one of our colleagues is hospitalised. 

We formed the Parliamentary Forum on Road Safety to get Parliament to join in this cause. As I speak, you can see in our parking yard, the remains of vehicles. I did not want the honourable members to be shocked, but when you pass there you will know that this is an issue of national importance.

I request honourable members to turn up in big numbers tomorrow and join the national campaign where we are going to address this fatal calamity that is denying us life but also costing our economy. We lose a lot and those who die are the ones who are really trying to earn a living and contribute to the economy of the country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019  

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, as we debated, you pronounced yourself clearly on the contentious issue concerning education and the list of schools that were benefitting. You asked the Minister of Education and Sports to put us in the know of what is happening and which schools are benefitting today as we begin business.  

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of State for Education and Sports, who has come with a briefcase full of the lists of those schools, to first inform the House regarding which districts, regions, constituencies and schools are benefitting from this grant? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the information? If you do, can you upload it first onto our system?

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Members are aware that most civil servants have been summoned to Jinja for a workshop. In order to update you as I had promised, I have typed all the concerns raised by Members and I am waiting for my technical people to compile them and see which ones should go for financial years 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. Next week, we shall come with those details. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, present it on Tuesday so that Members can be at peace about the schools in their constituencies. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have a delegation of 21 ladies and gentlemen from Kagoma County in Jinja District. They are represented by hon. Walyomu and hon. Katali. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.22
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Robert Migadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the minutes and the report of the committee on the Table. 

Madam Speaker, the ministry I am referring to has nine votes:

    a) Vote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) Headquarters;
    b) Vote 121 	– Diary Development Authority (DDA);
    c) Vote 125	– National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank(NAGRC & DB) ;
    d) Vote 142	– National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO);
    e) Vote 152	– National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS);
    f) Vote 155 	– Cotton Development Organisation (CDO);
    g) Vote 160 	– Uganda Coffee Development Authority(UCDA);
    h) Votes 501-850 – Local Government Agriculture and Commercial Services;
    i) Vote 122 – Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA)

Madam Speaker, agriculture continues to stand out as one of the key sectors -

THE SPEAKER: Did you say KCCA is part of your docket?

MR MIGADDE: Yes, as we shall observe later in our report, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, agriculture continues to stand out as one of the key sectors and contributes about 69 per cent of the total labour force. It remains central to poverty reduction. The sector contributed 24.7 per cent of the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in financial year 2016/2017. Indeed, Vision 2040 identifies agriculture as one of the key opportunities in harnessing and strengthening Uganda’s economy.

Madam Speaker, the committee had a chance to look at compliance to the National Development Plan II (NDP II) and the agriculture sector scored 50.9 per cent in terms of compliance. The low performance was due to the fact that out of the 56 projects prioritised in NDP II, only 37 of them are in the Public Investment Plan, which is 66.1 per cent, leaving 19 projects out.

Compliance with Gender and Equity Requirements

The agriculture sector ministerial policy statement was examined and found to have objectives that address gender and equity concerns. The respective sections of the ministry and agencies’ ministerial policy statements obtained scores of 79.3 per cent for MAAIF; 61 per cent for NAADS; 57.7 per cent for DDA; 56.7 per cent for NARO; 55.7 per cent for NAGRC & DB; 55.7 per cent for CDO; and 54.7 per cent for UCDA.

Madam Speaker, some of the key critical unfunded priorities that are still a challenge to this ministry include the issue of pests, vectors and diseases. It should be noted that the annual loss in priority crops due to pests and diseases is estimated at between US$ 35 million to US$ 200 million for bananas; US$ 60 million to US$ 80 million for cassava; US$ 10 million for cotton; and US$ 8 million for coffee, according to the agricultural risk assessment study by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).

The ministry will require Shs 12.5 billion to sustain the fight against the fall armyworm. Currently, the ministry has only Shs 2.5 billion, creating a spending gap of Shs 10 billion. Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that the armyworm is still ravaging this country even as we talk.

For livestock disease control, MAAIF is making attempts, through NARO, to ensure that vaccines can be acquired within the country to solve the issue of tick resistance. 

Observations and Recommendations

Agriculture Sector Budget Allocation

The committee commends Government for the increased allocation to the agriculture sector in terms of volume - that is Shs 735.839 billion for financial year 2016/2017; Shs 865.202 billion for the financial year 2017/2018; and Shs 862.92 billion for the financial year 2018/2019 as projected. However, the allocations are still far below the Government’s reaffirmed Malabo (African Union) commitment, which was to allocate 10 per cent of the national budget to agriculture. The allocation is also lower than the NDP II costing of Shs 1,080,000,000 as per this year. The committee noted that despite the allocations still falling below our commitments, the releases are even lower. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should address the constraints that affect the release falling below the amount appropriated and look for strategies to increase funding to the agriculture sector, a sector where the country has enormous comparative advantage.

The committee further recommends that the agriculture budgetary allocation should not fall below the costing of NDP II in the subsequent financial years.

Distribution of Tractors

The committee noted that the first batch of tractors, which were 40 in number, were procured and went to one subregion except for Ssembabule. They went to Ankole in the districts of Mitooma, Sheema, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Ntungamo and Kiruhura. The committee notes that this is unfair to other parts of the country whose land is suitable for mechanisation too. The committee was informed that the agriculture mechanisation policy, strategy and tractor hire guidelines have been developed by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

The committee recommends that the second batch of tractors, which are 110, should be equitably distributed among the remaining regions, that is, northern, eastern and central regions. 

Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) 

Madam Speaker, you were inquiring whether KCCA is one of the voted sectors. The committee notes that KCCA has been allocated Shs 6.65 billion for financial year 20l8/2019. However, during the committee’s interaction with KCCA officials, it noted that the funds being allocated to KCCA for agriculture have been diverted. In financial year 20l7/2018, for instance, Shs l2 billion was used to purchase Usafi Market and those funds have no impact on agriculture and therefore are not value for money. The committee also noted that KCCA is duplicating mandates of other agricultural institutions and hence, allocations are being put to waste. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 5 billion for KCCA for agriculture be reallocated to critical needs of the agricultural sector. 

The committee further recommends that the remaining Shs 1.65 billion for KCCA be retained to improve urban farming but with better modalities of managing it. When I talk about urban farming, I am professionally an urban planner and I know what it means if it is well managed.

The National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank 

The committee noted that NAGRC land has been encroached on by different squatters across the country. In addition, the committee notes that NAGRC has no capacity to utilise the land that they own. The state of ranches like Aswa, Maruzi and Nshaara is appalling. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries adopts a Public Private Partnership (PPP) approach in the management and utilisation of the ranches since they lack capacity. Further, the committee recommends that Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries sorts out the issue of land ownership with local governments to enable NAGRC & DB carry out its mandate. Madam Speaker, we have petitions over the state of ranches, which we shall bring to Parliament at a later date to emphasise that.
 
National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) 

The committee observed that NARO has remained underfunded and is operating using donor funds, even for paying salaries. This may lead to these partners influencing research carried out by the organisation. We have the Bio-safety Bill and it is not easy if donors are the ones paying salaries.

The committee observed that NARO land is being grabbed across the country and this has affected the activities of NARO.

The committee also notes that there are a lot of technologies developed by NARO that are not being utilised by farmers.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development funds the research component in NARO and provides funds required to equip and facilitate the gene bank.

The committee further recommends that Government takes interest in the land grabbers and they be penalised. The committee also recommends that NARO surveys all its land.

The committee recommends that Government should fast track the formation and operationalisation of NARO Holdings Company Limited to ensure that the technology developed reaches the local farmers.

Extension Workers 

The committee noted that there are inadequate agricultural extension services across the country, mainly attributed to the low extension worker to farmer ratio of 1 to 1,800 yet the recommended ratio is 1 to 500. This has undermined the role of extension services in agriculture leading to poor and low yields and hence making agriculture less productive. Besides, the recruited extension staff have not been well facilitated to enable them perform their roles. Madam Speaker, extension staff were recruited, they receive an allowance for fuel but they do not have vehicles or motorcycles. Therefore, you wonder where that money goes.

The committee recommends that Government allocates more funds, amounting to Shs 25.75 billion, to support additional recruitment and facilitation of extension workers. We are not talking about money per se but locomotion, that is, motorcycles, vehicles and boats for the sake of Buvuma. That is proposed for financial year 2018/2019 for effective extension service delivery.

Pending Legislations 

The committee notes that there are still a number of legislations in MAAIF that remain undeveloped or in draft form. Examples include the Organic Agriculture Policy, the Seed Policy, the Coffee Bill, NAADS (Amendment) Bill, Meat Production Bill, regulations for the Plant Variety Protection Act, 20l4 and regulations for the Plant Protection and Health Act, 2015. We passed those two laws in the last Parliament but as we talk, the policies and regulations are not yet in place. We also have the Phytosanitary Policy, the National Fisheries Bill and the Livestock Policy. 

The committee recommends that MAAIF fast tracks all the pending legislations in order to enhance performance of the agriculture sector.

Agricultural Statistics 

The committee notes that whereas Government continues to plan and allocate funds for agriculture, the actual numbers of farmers, type of crop by output, actual surplus of crop, etcetera, are not known, which leaves gaps in effective planning. 

The committee recommends that MAAIF expedites the process of acquiring good and reliable agricultural statistics for the country in order to ensure effective planning for the agricultural sector. If we were to go to MAAIF and ask how much was harvested last year from the seeds of maize that were given out, there is no answer; there is only a scientific estimate.

District Farm Institutes 

The committee was informed that some of the district farm institutes have been converted into zonal agricultural institutes. 

The committee recommends that these zonal agricultural institutes be made fully functional in order to play their original role of farmer training and knowledge transfer. Those who have been around for some time know this.

Water for Agriculture 

The committee was informed that the National Irrigation Policy was adopted by Cabinet while a national irrigation master plan is still being developed. So, we have a policy but we have no plan.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in collaboration with Ministry of Water and Environment expedites the finalisation of the national irrigation master plan.

Revival of Cooperative Societies

We amalgamated our report with that of the shadow minister, who is equally a strong proponent of this. The committee observed that in the 1960s and 1970s, cooperatives were the collective bargaining voice of peasants. Cooperatives are important because they ensure provision of farm inputs, bargained favourable prices and assured market opportunities. These are economic terms which are known to very many of you. 

The committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should work with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and sector players like Uganda Cooperative Alliance to ensure that activities for cooperative development are harmonised to enable farmers have better bargaining power for credit, markets, prices of inputs and agricultural products among others.

Governance and Coordination in the Sector

The committee observed that the agriculture sector continues to suffer from more than two decades of poor governance and lack of coordination. The spending priorities of the sector are spread across numerous votes with no clear coordination mechanism; for example, NAADS, Cotton Development Organisation and Uganda Coffee Development Authority are all in one way or the other involved in distribution of inputs. The ministry is also silent about the operations of Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) - how it is linked to the different votes and what it has achieved to date. 

The lack of coordination and the resultant potential duplication potentially explains the current failures within the sector. The committee recommends that governance of the agriculture sector be reformed, focusing on strengthening the role of local governments in implementing agricultural development programmes while strengthening the policy coordination, oversight and standards setting.

Agriculture Sector Financing

The committee noted that mobilisation of affordable financing for agriculture has remained a consistent problem stated in every relevant policy statement of Government. Numerous public and private schemes have been initiated and implemented over the last five years, particularly in the financial year 2016/2017. However, these schemes have not had a positive impact on the agriculture sector. 

The committee further noted that the agriculture sector, like any other business, requires insurance against risks.

The committee reiterates its recommendation that Government establishes an agricultural bank so that the agricultural credit facility currently held in Bank of Uganda and other commercial banks is extended to farmers, in order to solve one of the critical bottlenecks to enhancing agricultural transformation in the country by developing and deploying appropriate agricultural finance. A lot of money goes through there but the beneficiaries are mainly processors like GM Sugar Factory, Kakira. It was meant for mainly value addition but if the farmers do not provide the necessary produce, there will be nothing to add value to.

The committee further recommends that agricultural insurance should also be provided to protect farmers against effects of agricultural risks. The committee further recommends the amendment of regulations governing the agricultural credit facility scheme from the current one, which tends to benefit large scale agricultural processors as opposed to small holder agriculturalists.

Post-Harvest Handling

The committee observed that farmers in Uganda are prone to post-harvest losses due to inadequate handling and storage practices at household level. Farmers lose more than 30 per cent of their crops every year to insects, pests, mould and moisture. Currently, the price of maize is still at Shs 600 and below but another harvest is about to come in.

There are no refrigeration facilities and silos to ensure safe storage. If unfavourable weather conditions occur, particularly lack of adequate sunlight, then losses are heightened. This adversely affects household incomes and food security.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries works together with Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We are aware that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has provisions for silos although we do not know where they are. When the committee was discussing this issue, we noted that there was one silo in Masindi and representatives from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives even attended its launch but this was a private initiative although the ministry was highlighting it as part of their achievements. (Laughter)

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries sensitises and trains farmers so as to equip them with good post-harvest handling skills to enable them maximise profits from their produce. At times it may only require sensitisation. 

National Agricultural Advisory Services/Operation Wealth Creation Programme

The committee observed that the Government acquired a loan to finance the e-voucher card system or co-funding for the distribution of inputs to farmers whereby allocation to farmers will be made through an online system. There was a loan, which was approved here for this. Farmers will use tokens to pick inputs from logistical hubs or approved suppliers within their regions and will be required to contribute a percentage of the price of the inputs. This will reduce wastage of resources. For those who have benchmarked, we are aware that this has worked in Nigeria, Botswana and some other countries.

The committee observed that a lot of money continues to be wasted in purchasing inputs distributed under a top-down approach, with so many district local governments having no say in the inputs to be distributed in their respective districts. The committee has moved around different districts and in some areas they brought seedlings before the local governments saying they had never requested for mangoes or citrus seedlings. 

There has also been movement of inputs across regions, which has compromised their quality and acclimatisation and indeed high mortality rates have been registered in the livestock subsector. You will find cows being moved from very far areas and many have died. Over 40 per cent of animals that were distributed died, according to the report, and not because people failed to look after them but they could not acclimatise with the new environment.

The committee recommends that the system of providing free inputs should be gradually phased out and be replaced by the e-voucher card system and original NAADS co-funding system to ensure sustainability and increased participation of beneficiaries. Because seedlings and inputs are 100 per cent free, even those who do not need them ask for them and that is why you find them under trees, on verandas and some people even wash and cook them as food. 

Madam Speaker, we know very well that a borehole in a village, which costs Shs 20 million with the community contributing a mere Shs 100,000, will last longer than the one which costs the same but without the community’s contribution. 

The committee further recommends NAADS Act, 2001 should be amended to streamline Operation Wealth Creation. The other day, you heard Gen. Salim Saleh saying that the soldiers have messed up the programme. (Laughter) This is what we want to streamline.

The committee further recommends that NAADS partners with regional suppliers of the respective inputs to improve quality and ensure acclimatisation of the inputs. This is what we were saying; instead of moving citrus seedlings from Masaka to Jinja, you should have regional distributors in Jinja who can benefit from the opportunity and the same applies to Masaka. These seeds are living things; they get affected as you transport them over long distances. 

The committee further recommends that NAADS should desist from supplying inputs using a top-down approach as opposed to a bottom-up approach. That is to say, local governments should take a lead in deciding which inputs should be procured for their respective districts. 

Coffee Development 

The committee noted that coffee is one of the major cash crops - this is of course common knowledge – and exports of the country from coffee contribute a lot to the country's GDP. For example, coffee exports increased from 3.6 million 60 kilogramme bags in the financial year 2015/2016 valued at US$ 352 million to 4.2 million 60 kilogramme bags in the financial year 2016/2017, valued at US$ 478 million. Besides, the ministry has a target of exporting 20 million bags of coffee per year by the year – it was supposed to be the year 2020 but it has been amended to 2025. 

However, the coffee subsector still remains underfunded and this will not enable Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) to achieve its target.

The committee further observed that His Excellency the President gave a directive to give coffee seedlings to farmers above the budgetary allocation, including finance during the days when we wanted to push up the exports. Many nursery operators who supplied the seedlings have not been paid and the money has accumulated to Shs 57 billion and above. Madam Speaker, yesterday you informed this House that your voters are also complaining about delayed payments. Hon. Peter Mugema and hon. Henry Kibalya raised the same issue as well as other honourable members. This money is not provided for.

Out of Shs 57 billion, only Shs 2.8 billion has been provided for. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is represented here, provides the Shs 57,084,188,200 to the coffee subsector to enable it pay the outstanding arrears to nursery operators and achieve its target of exporting 20 million bags of coffee per year by the year 2025 and contribute to the country's economy.

Madam Speaker, the other day we were here passing a supplementary request to pay traders who supplied goods to South Sudan. Here we are with people who supplied goods to this Government and they need to be considered.

The Fisheries Subsector

The committee was concerned that despite the potential already exhibited by the fisheries subsector, it has remained inadequately financed. The ministerial policy statement for the financial year 20l8/2019 proposes a total allocation of Shs 1l.83 billion but only Shs 5 billion has been allocated. Other than the deployment of the Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF) to curb illegal fishing, not much has been done by Government to support those involved in fishing.

The committee further observed that Government acquired a loan from the African Development Bank in 2006 to construct nine fish landing sites in Kalangala, Mayuge, Busia, Namayingo, Buikwe, Buyende, Buliisa and Nakasongola. However, only five of them were fully completed, leaving four - Rwampanga in Nakasongola, Kiyindi in Buikwe, Butiaba in Buliisa and Bukungu in Buyende - incomplete yet the loan was exhausted.

The committee recommends that Government provides resources for completion of the four landing sites and full operationalisation of the five, which were completed.

The committee also recommends that that Government stops importation of illegal fishing gear and streamlines operations between UPDF and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries to enable the fisheries subsector perform effectively and efficiently.

The committee recommends that fishing inputs should be included under the NAADS programme to enable those involved in fishing to access appropriate fishing gear. Madam Speaker, this is what you authorised yesterday. What is provided for is mainly for cages and fish ponds, which is a preserve of a few. 

On page 27, we have a reallocation table. The other money had been allocated to KCCA but the committee is proposing that Shs 2 billion should go to support seed certification and certification of agrochemicals. We have a department that deals with seed certification but they cannot even go to the field to inspect gardens where the seeds to be distributed to farmers should come from and later we complain of poor quality seeds. This is because they are underfunded. Therefore, the Shs 2 billion should go there. The justification is: the public outcry about fake seeds and fake agrochemical inputs, for example pesticides. 

Shs 1 billion should go to support extension services. The justification is the inadequate facilitation of extension workers, which has prevented them from providing the much needed extension services. 

Shs 2 billion should go to National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) to support our ongoing research in developing acaricides that are suitable for Uganda's conditions. I am aware that some work is being done in Kyanja by KCCA but the committee is also aware that there was gross abuse of these resources.

Madam Speaker, page 29 shows a supply table.
 
Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal and Fisheries Headquarters
Recurrent - Shs 58,243,718,000
Wage – Shs 11,944,349,000
Non-wage– Shs 33,465,014,000

Government of Uganda (GOU) Development - Shs 89,060,196,000
External Financing - Shs 211,177,569,000
Arrears  - Shs 3,082,000,000
Total - Shs 348,729,000,000

Vote 121: Diary Development Authority (DDA)
Recurrent - Shs 5,032,977,000
Wage 	- Shs 1,570,400,000
Non-Wage	- Shs 2,122,577,000

Appropriation in Aid (AIA) - Shs 1,000,000,000
GOU Development - Shs 2,042,435,000
Total  – Shs 6,735,000,000

Vote 125: National Agricultural Research Centre and Databank 
Recurrent - Shs 10,696,920,000
Wage 	- Shs 1,900,000,000
Non-Wage - Shs 1,732,920,000
AIA - Shs 7,064,000,000
GOU Development - Shs 7,364,217,000
Total - Shs 18,061,000,000

Vote l42: National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO)
Recurrent - Shs 36,716,915,000
Wage - Shs 22,472,228,000
Non-Wage - Shs 7,098,992,000
AIA - Shs 7,145,695,000
GOU Development - Shs 32,782,994,000
Total - Shs 69,499,909,000

Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Secretariat
Recurrent - Shs 5,137,157,000
Wage - Shs 2,184,900,000
Non-Wage - Shs 2,952,257,000 
GOU Development - Shs 244,839,892,000
Total - Shs 249,977,049,000

Vote 155: Cotton Development Organisation (CDO)
Recurrent - Shs 5,401,888,000
Non-Wage - Shs 583,598,000
AIA - Shs 4,818,290,000
GOU Development - Shs 4,401,000,000
Total - Shs 9,812,888,000

Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority
Recurrent - Shs 78,439,400,000
Non-Wage - Shs 53,589,400,000
AIA - Shs 24,850,000,000
Arrears 	- Shs 2,829,000,000
Total - Shs 8l,269,000,000

Vote 501-850: Local Government Agriculture and Community Services 
Recurrent - Shs 107,597,000,000
Wage - Shs 71,599,000,000
Non- Wage - Shs 35,998,000,000
GOU Development- Shs 15,369,000,000
Total - Shs 122,967,000,000

Vote 122: KCCA Agriculture Grant
Recurrent - Shs 1,250,000,000
Wage - Shs 52,000,000
Non-wage - Shs 322,000,000
AIA - Shs 876,000,000
GOU Development - Shs 6,284,000,000
Total - Shs 7,535,000,000

Madam Speaker, this is request to Parliament to approve a  total of Shs 862,920,000,000 for the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries for all the votes for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for your report.  Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers. However, as I indicated earlier, we shall not have a long debate. We shall use only 40 minutes for the debate on this item. 

I am looking for the Members who did not contribute yesterday but were present. Honourable members, we have agreed that we shall share the opportunities. I would like to have first those who have been faithful and have been here every day to contribute. Honourable members, those who contributed yesterday, allow your colleagues also to contribute, please. Let us share the opportunities.    

4.13
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this good report. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson mentioned that tractors were procured and went to one region. I find that this is fanning sectarian sentiments. However, of all things, he said that two tractors went to Mitooma District. I have just talked to the district chairperson and Mitooma has not received any tractors. Is it procedurally right to receive this report and debate it when it contains untruths? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all Ugandans and we read and see. The head of state of this country personally went to the west and distributed 40 tractors exclusively for the west. No other part of the country got those tractors and these people are still waiting. This is the lack of equity that we are talking about.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, Mitooma District did not receive the two tractors.

MS NABAYIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the chairperson for this good report. 

My concern is about Operation Wealth Creation. I come from Kalangala District; most of the time, we talk to the majors of Operation Wealth Creation and we tell them that in Kalangala, we majorly depend on fishing as our economic activity. However, when they are supplying inputs, they bring coffee, oranges, mangoes and other fruits. We all know that in the islands we have landing sites where people do not own land. We told them that we need the right fishing gear but they performed like these people of National Medical Stores.

There was deployment of UPDF on the lake. They have done some work but there are areas of challenge. During their operations, they told our people to make boats of 28 feet and the community complied. However, they now came up with a chart saying that the area where a person sits is supposed to be two feet and they started destroying people’s boats. People are suffering in the islands. 

There is no coordination between the local government, the central government and the UPDF officers. They operate like soldiers –(Interjections)– But they are human beings and the people they are beating and working with are also human beings and tax payers.

Another issue is about the loan from African Development Bank. We received that money and they started constructing the landing sites. In Kalangala, we have two landing sites, Kitobo and Mwena. They were completed sometime ago but I ask myself: What does it take to commission a facility? Does it require very many people to come and commission it? By the time they come to commission, they have already been run down. I, therefore, request that this should be done so that these facilities become operational.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like the minister clarify what it takes to close a landing site. We have very many gazetted landing sites but the UPDF goes on closing them. They claim that the people are few, so the landing site should be closed. I request the Government to support the islanders with fisheries funds. Those people are able to pay; we do not need free money. They can give us a fund from which people borrow money and pay back afterwards. I thank you very much.

4.18
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chair of the committee and the committee members for this detailed report. 

I will start with adding on to what my sister said about the islands. Jinja also has three islands but it is like a forgotten lot. We are requesting Government to come up and support the islands.

I will talk about NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation and coffee development. The committee clearly states that a lot of money is being wasted on purchasing inputs that are not required in some of these regions and also talks about the movement of goods across the region. I would like to talk about Jinja where I come from. We have people with nursery beds for coffee seedlings. People bought these seedlings from the coffee authorities and they have been supervising, but at the time of supplying seedlings they brought people from other regions to come and supply. These people actually end up bringing immature and poor quality seedlings. We call upon those concerned to make sure that they revise their methods.

Honourable minister, when you come up with a programme, you normally have set objectives. Operation Wealth Creation was set up to create wealth for Ugandans. I would like to find out from you whether you are happy with the results so far or you think we should go back to the drawing board and start looking at region by region.  

When it comes to the tractors, Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that next time Jinja benefits because it seems we are always left out. As for the loan they talked about from African Development Bank, Jinja was left out. It is my prayer that next time they think about landing sites, Jinja District is considered. 

Honourable minister, should we continue giving money to NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation with no results? According to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the poverty levels have gone up and we need to look at areas like irrigation, extension workers, agricultural workers who can help our people, and also pest control. The armyworm is disturbing the farmers. I think we need to put more money in those areas –(Interruption)

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation are one word and this started way back around 2004. However, since PMA started, I do not think there is anything tangible that we can move from here now as Members of Parliament to show that it is a product of PMA. Can any of you attest to this, that there is something in their constituency?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now contributing. You are smuggling in your contribution.

MR BURUNDO: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us have hon. Katali. 

MR BURUNDO: The information I wanted to give –(Laughter)- is that the cardinal aim of Operation Wealth Creation and now NAADS was to reduce poverty in the villages and provide enough –

THE SPEAKER: Please, take your seat.

4.22
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about an issue that I have not seen in the budget, and that is the issue of zoning. I remember way back, they talked about zoning, for example looking at what works well in Karamoja or other parts of Uganda. The ministry is putting a lot of money in the budget but they have never bothered to go and see or collect information so that they know whether what they have been supplying or what they have been taking to these zones has yielded any results. 

On issue of the Operation Wealth Creation, honestly speaking, from the time Operation Wealth Creation started, you cannot see any change, especially where I come from. There are no gardens, no farmers with plantations or even tractors. We have places in Karamoja which we call green belts and red belts, why can’t we fund the farmers in Karamoja to show them that farming is the way to go? 

There is no more cattle raiding in Karamoja. Let the tractors go to these green belts and red belts in Nakapiripirit, Napak and Abim so that the farmers can learn from there. Every year, Members of Parliament from Karamoja stand in this House to talk about food insecurity. Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and local partners are going there on issues of food security. Do we really see the essence of putting money in so many departments yet we are not seeing the future? How should we solve some of these issues? (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much for granting me this opportunity to give you information. It is true that the priorities of this Government leave a lot to be desired. Whereas the gesture of helping people by supplying them with seeds in different areas is okay, we have members of the Operation Wealth Creation who are giving seeds to people of Kampala Central yet there is no single place where they would grow maize seeds. Maybe they can grow it along Nakivubo Channel. (Laughter) However, you can hardly see any area where there is return on the investment. 

Further, it is not that we do not require these agricultural inputs. That is why I appreciate my honourable colleague, for accepting this information. We can do much more – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you contributing?

MR NSEREKO: No, I am giving her this information. We can do much more in areas where it is required; for example, in Kampala, Ggaba and Mulungu in Munyonyo can harbour landing sites and if well preserved and well presented, they could be hubs for fishery.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, take your seat. You are smuggling in a contribution.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry should encourage extension workers. I have personally worked with an organisation that uses extension workers to improve farming in the villages and it has worked. The other day, we saw in the newspapers how the leaders of Operation Wealth Creation were despising the army –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, you have three minutes, please.

4.26
MS SHEILA KABAIJE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report on the ministerial policy statement that we have been analysing. 

My concern is about ticks and tick-borne diseases. You will agree with me, and my colleagues will attest to this, that it has been a problem for a long time right from the Ninth Parliament. Ticks and tick-borne diseases have become a menace. They have really caused problems to farmers. We have incurred losses in that sector and yet one of our highest earners is the diary sector. We have had our farmers change from indigenous animals to Friesians and other exotic breeds in order to improve our production. However, these have been ravaged and all the improvements have been spoilt by the ticks and tick-borne diseases. 

Madam Speaker, it is a pity that in the report, they are still talking about continued trials. I would like to suggest that special deliberate effort should be made to fight tick-borne diseases. I find it ridiculous that the item on pests and vector control has been given very little money. Further, I would also like to think that we have the capacity in the Ministry for Science, Technology and Innovation to develop our own acaricides rather than importing these adulterated acaricides that cause us to make more losses.

My next concern is on water for production. I think, together with the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should look at desilting existing dams. In this month and the previous month, we have had plenty of rain. However, it would be a shame if after two months we find ourselves crying over drought yet we need for irrigation and for our animals. I pray that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Ministry of Water and Environment find money to desilt existing dams so that people can have water for irrigation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.29 
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the work done. 

I would like to talk about water for agriculture. When you look at the budget of agriculture, it is a lot of money compared to what the results will be at the end. I would like us to agree that the supporting engine for agriculture is water. If the master plan for agriculture is not ready, then we are wasting a lot of time and money going to NAADS. We supply these seeds but they never grow because of drought and climate change. We are talking about pests; these pests like the armyworm come because of persistent drought and the only solution is the rain. I am thinking that if we irrigate in time, we will not have these pests and the resultant losses we are incurring in agriculture.

Honourable members, what we are saying is that the master plan for irrigation for our country is not yet ready and yet we are allocating a lot of money. We have a lot of arrears, for example for coffee. Our farmers are demanding from Government about Shs 57 billion, which is a loss already because the coffee did not come out. Farmers used a lot of money from banks. It is all losses and more losses because of poor planning. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder why Cabinet has not finished this paper for the last two years yet we are spending a lot of money. There are a lot of concerns in agriculture but I think we should prioritise. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you look at this paper, in Financial Year 2015/2016, coffee gave us $352 million. In 2016/2017, it gave us $478 million. However, it is the sector which is being underfunded. Even the businessmen say you put money where you get profit. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was able to table here a list of members who traded in South Sudan but could leave this sector, which is bringing a lot of money to the economy. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer that today the Minister of Finance, Planning an Economic Development reaffirms to us that this Shs 57 billion will be got to make sure this productive sector is facilitated.

Madam Speaker, H.E Idi Amin – may his soul rest in peace – started an irrigation scheme in Matanda, Kanungu. Matanda was producing the best cotton and it was using irrigation. That area was a food basket of that region. However, in an era where we are talking about technology and despising some past leaders as swines, all crops have dried.

Madam Speaker, on 28 July we hosted the President, where the minister reaffirmed to the President that the master plan for irrigation was ready and Matanda was one of them. The committee is saying the master plan for irrigation was not there, yet the minister was the one who told the President that the master plan was ready and Matanda was part of it and they were going to do away with the prevailing system of farming. 

Madam Speaker, I also wanted the minister to clarify whether it is important to have a ministry that cannot look at the planning of the sector, where irrigation should be prioritized.

Madam Speaker, the committee is talking about the extension workers. I support this but we do not give support to these extension workers. While we recruit them, they also remain there in their offices because we do not facilitate them –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work done. My contribution is also on coffee. The committee report talks about low productivity and old coffee trees in southern and western Uganda. Northern Uganda is a very fertile ground for coffee production but the challenge we have right now is drought. I am really shocked that the issue of irrigation that my colleague has just talked about is under unfunded priorities. 

I had expected that since coffee is one of the cash crops that bring a lot of revenue to Uganda and the President is also looking at Uganda being able to export 20 million bags by 2025, how can we reach that number if we are not able to support the production of coffee?

Madam Speaker, when I look at the Shs 28 billion for small-scale irrigation to support smallholder farmers in northern Uganda, we could get money from NAADS. The budget allocated to NAADS is too much compared to the budget allocated to Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). I appeal to the people concerned that instead of putting a lot of money where we are not seeing results, let us put money for coffee production and support UCDA.

Secondly, I have also seen an allocation of Shs 5 billon for agriculture to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). I do not know the kind of agriculture that is done within Kampala –(Interjection)- My colleague was talking about the money allocated for agriculture and that there is no agriculture done because the seedlings that is given to Kampala city is not being utilised because they do not have gardens. 

Madam Speaker, I appeal that this money be reallocated for irrigation in other areas where there is coffee production. I appeal that there should be increased budget to UCDA so that they can pay arears. UCDA buys seedling from local farmers and these seedlings they buy increase the farmers’ incomes at the household level in the villages. Therefore, it is very important that –(Member timed out)

4.37
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. I will address myself to the funding of Uganda Coffee Development Authority and the reason is that we are expecting to export 20 million bags of coffee by 2025. The journey starts now. We cannot wait until that time without proper planning. Therefore, we should not neglect the people who have coffee seedlings for supply.

Hon. Kibalya was complaining the other time but even where I come from, we also have the same problem. People have coffee seedlings but they have not been able to sell to Uganda Coffee Development Authority and neither have they sold through the Operation Wealth Creation. Without that, what will happen is that people will pull out and we will remain with our quota. 

Therefore, we have to make sure that we buy what the people have prepared. We prepare the gardens and these gardens must be monitored because some people take the coffee but it remains at the districts. There must be close monitoring to show that the gardens have taken off and they are of quality. This is because we are going to compete on the world market and in the past we have had issues where Uganda’s coffee has been almost rejected because of being of poor quality. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that we put more money as it has been recommended by the committee in the seedlings, monitoring and finally getting something of quality which will compete favourably on the world market.

As we put more money, my prayer is that we should also ensure that there is no mismatch because for some people when they want mangoes, they are given coffee and vice versa. When we give people what they do not want but we go and drop at the district other seedlings or fruits which are not required, definitely we will not be able to move from where we are yet we know that this is one of the cash cows. My prayer is that we should concentrate more on the funding.

On the issue of the tractors, we should also have a roadmap and the minister should be able to tell us that –(Member timed out)

4.40
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee. I think they have given us very good recommendations which we should be moving with.

Let me add my voice on those of the Members that have come up to talk about coffee. The President of this country has committed and told Ugandans that by 2025, we must be exporting 20 million bags. This is in line with the National Development Plan II (NDP II) and within the NDP II, the plan is to export 20 million bags of coffee. That is the reason why we are not performing well, where the NDP puts emphasis on the coffee sector but the ministry does not. 

In fact, I am surprised because hon. Ssempijja came here and told us that we have to export 20 million bags of coffee. He was in high gear when I had just arrived in this Parliament. I do not know what went wrong with hon. Ssempijja. He is not putting money where he had promised. Countries like Venezuela mainly depend on coffee for their export earnings and their foreign exchange rates are not as volatile as ours.

I think this recommendation of ensuring that the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) is supported - I think we should pick a resolution from here. I am at pains to hear that Shs 57 billion is not even going to promote coffee but to settle arrears. It is very unfortunate that even the funds that we are looking for is going to settle arrears. How I wish we were talking about more funds that should go into expanding the sector so that the country can earn more foreign exchange.

Madam Speaker, I do not know why we insist on this Operation Wealth Creation, where even the leader himself, Gen. Salim Saleh, said the thing is messed up by the soldiers. 

This financial year, the budget has Shs 249 billion, which we are going to send to people to continue messing up. I have a feeling that that money for Operation Wealth Creation could be used much better; after all, the recommendation of the committee says we gradually reduce on the free inputs that we are giving. We could actually begin this financial year by making sure that the money is allocated where it can bring results like coffee growing and water for production.

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and I happened to go to one of the irrigation schemes that are being developed by the Ministry of Water and Environment. It is, therefore, my opinion that the Ministry of Water and Environment should bring water to a certain point where the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries must pick - (Member timed out.)

4.44
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. On Tuesday, hon. Odongo Otto raised an issue of national importance. He told this House that nursery operators in the Busoga sub-region who are dealing in coffee are demanding money from UCDA. 

However, as we speak, Members are saying UCDA owes Ugandans Shs 57 billion. When you look at the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, they have only provided Shs 2.8 billion to pay arrears. That means that if we go on with that trend, we shall require 20 years to pay off debts as per now.

Madam Speaker, coffee is ranked number three in terms of bringing foreign exchange into this country. When you look at the financial year 2016/2017, the sector brought a foreign exchange of about Shs 1.7 trillion, which is about six per cent of our budget. However, when you look at the budget for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, they have provided only six per cent.

Like colleagues mentioned, where are our priorities? Members are only talking about seedlings and yet we have a lot to be done. Members have talked about pests and disease. We have the coffee berry borer, which is affecting the coffee sector. However, only Shs 50 billion has been provided. What can this money do?

We have rehabilitation where you have to work on the existing trees to make them more productive but no money has been provided to cater for it. Honourable minister, I know you are a coffee farmer but when you look at your sector - I think the coffee sector needs a lot of money.

When you look at the budget for coffee, instead of increasing it because of its contribution to the sector, they have reduced it by Shs 14.3 billion. Therefore, I would like to request this House that given the contribution the coffee sector makes to this country, we should recommend that Shs 14.3 billion that was removed from the sector last financial year be brought back before we even think of providing Shs 57 billion. (Applause)

Under achievement of the ministry on page 10, the committee talked about recruiting extension workers. Madam Speaker, I am an agriculturalist and I did extension work. You cannot pay these people without supporting them to do the work. A lot of money is wasted. I would like to implore the ministry to recruit more extension workers. However, you should provide facilitation for them to do the work.

When you look at the planned output for the financial year 2108/2019, the chairperson talked about the Bills but we are talking about the coffee sector, which is bringing a lot of resources. However, we need to regulate the sector. The minister is silent about the Bill –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I stand to commend the committee for their report and recommendations. I totally agree with the recommendations.

I would like to start by looking at the problems our farmers face. We know that most of the people who brought us here are actually employed in agriculture. As we debate here, we should ensure that we support them.

On the issue of pests and diseases, we are all aware that last year, the whole country was hit by the army worm. As we speak now, it has again started in my district, Kween, and people are gambling.

When I looked at the report, the committee talked about a difference of Shs 10 billion, which has not been provided. I would like to think that since this House appropriates funds, we should do re-appropriation when we come to the Committee of Supply so that we can put money to cater for pests and diseases.

The second point I would like to talk about is post-harvest handling. We incur a lot of loses in post-harvest handling. In my district, we plant a lot of maize, onions and Irish potatoes but most of it is lost during post-harvest handling. One of the biggest problems is processing of these crops. I have not seen any recommendation in the committee’s report on processing of these crops. 

Therefore, I would like to request that as we go towards appropriation –(Interjection)- No, please, there is no time. I was talking about post-harvest; post-harvest is very important and processing is the way to go. In my district, we could have maize millers. We can even process these Irish potatoes and pack them. If we did this, we would do a great deal for these farmers.

Lastly, there is a problem the committee talked about. They said that the ministry reported that there is low production due to low use of fertilizers. Madam Speaker, Sebei sub-region uses a lot of fertilizers -(Member timed out.)

4.50
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for these great recommendations and observations.

I will allude to observation (c), with its recommendation over Kampala Capital City Authority budget. The committee observed that Shs 12 billion in the last financial year was diverted towards purchasing Usafi market. This became a reprimand for the citizens of Kampala not to enjoy their full rights, especially those ones involved in agriculture. That because someone diverted your funds to go and purchase a Shs 12 billion market, therefore it is the people of Kampala to suffer.

The Members of Parliament from Kampala have been here on the Floor of Parliament commenting and talking about the same issue of Usafi market. It was never passed by the authority so I do not think that it was the voice of the people of Kampala who thought it right that their money for agriculture can be used to purchase a market.

Therefore, I would like to tell the committee – I am going to give you information – that this kind of recommendation of getting Shs billion off KCCA budget that was geared towards development of agriculture activities in Kampala that you are taking away is very rude.

In Kampala here, we do participate in agriculture. We do farming, for your information. There are various methods and modalities of farming in this country. One example is poultry farming. The people of Kampala: have poultry farms in their backyards, keep goats in their backyards, grow mushrooms, have fish ponds around their homes. That is agriculture.

Therefore, the only way to develop them is by sensitising them more and availing more funds to these people so that Kampala grows agriculturally –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you for giving way for information. I was perturbed that citizens of Kampala are being targeted by Members, especially when the world is moving more towards urban farming. It is a global trend. Uganda is a model. We have sack farming. Our urban poor, who are unemployed, spend 80-90 percent of their income on food.

Therefore, what has been evolved now is sack farming of fruits, vegetables to supplement on otherwise non-nutritious means of food –(Applause)– where they are only feeding their children on chapatti a day. They supplement it with vegetables and that is high intensive farming.

Therefore, we are perturbed that the nutrition of the children of Kampala is being targeted. I think members of the committee should have sought more information on urban farming and the global trends that are targeting nutrition for children, especially among the urban poor –(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. The honourable colleague has indicated that the committee should have sought more information on urban farming. I am the vice chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

We interacted with KCCA. The first interaction was in a retreat in Entebbe which was organised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the honourable minister also attended. They failed to explain where – in fact they said their priorities were markets. (Applause) 

We invited the ministry and KCCA officials but they never appeared to defend this budget as well. Is the honourable member in order to indicate that actually the committee did not give audience to KCCA yet we gave it audience? Indeed, the records are clear that the priorities of KCCA were in markets, not in agriculture. Is the honourable member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, if the Member was not aware that you had those meetings, then she is out of order. Hon. Kasibante? (Hon. Naggayi rose_) No, you are rarely here. Sit. (Laughter)

4.56
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by correcting the impression that in Kampala, there is no agriculture. About seven years ago, Parliament sat in this very place and approved billions of shillings under a programme called Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme (MATIP).

Under a thinking that there can never be agriculture where there are no markets. This programme was to have markets for the agricultural produce. About seven of them were to be put in Kampala and others across the country. Seven years down the road, it is only one market that was constructed and completed and that is Wandegeya.

Farmers are lamenting that they do not know where to take their produce. Members of Parliament are seated here saying we cannot allocate money for agriculture in Kampala. The vice chairperson of the committee is giving a very good confession to the effect that when KCCA went to justify this, it mentioned the issue of markets.

Colleagues, you cannot think of improvement of agriculture when you do not think of improvement of markets where agricultural produce can be put. (Applause) I do not want to labour much but, Madam Speaker, as Members from Kampala we are opposed to reallocation of this money from Kampala to another vote. We are maintaining a stand that this money can still go to improve markets in and around Kampala. (Applause)

Secondly, you cannot improve agriculture when you default on farmers. These people, whose seedlings were taken by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) to a tune of about Shs 57 billion shillings, are farmers; only that for them, they produce seedlings. When you default on farmers and you are talking of improvement of agriculture, some of us do not understand. I would like to support emphatically the recommendation to give Shs 57 billion to the farmers producing seedlings, in arrears.

Lastly, a batch of 40 tractors to go to only one region – when you do some arithmetic, on average, each of these districts got five tractors. I would applaud the minister for not being sectarian but he should come and justify this. I would like to propose that we redistribute –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MS JULIE MUKODA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you chairperson for the report. My concern is about the cows they give to us. Four years back, my mom was among the lucky few to be given a cow. They told her that it was a dairy cow. She loved the cow so much and she even named it Mukisa. She fed the cow for all these years without it giving us milk. Actually today, in the morning she was telling me, “Can you imagine, up to now that cow gives me one litre a day; one cup in the morning and one cup in the evening”.  (Laughter)

I told her maybe she did not know how to feed the cow. Last year I went to Nairobi and learned how dairy cows are fed. I bought all the things the cow needed but it did not improve. (Laughter) So, I am asking, are these cows for dairy or meat? Even if they are for meat, as I told you, Madam Speaker, my mom has been feeding this cow. However, it is as small and lean as it came. So, I am wondering, are these cows for meat or dairy?

For the last three years, she has been lucky to get three cows out of it. So, recently, she sold three cows and got one cow which can give her milk. 

So, I am requesting the government that when you are giving us these types of cows and goats, tell us whether they are for dairy and meat or how we should feed them or if they are just for home decoration. Thank you.

5.03
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, I have only two issues. I would like to make a comment this time round on coffee. We have been moving around Uganda in areas that grow coffee and we have seen how it can develop a Ugandan faster than other agricultural produce.

For us in northern Uganda this time, we also would like to start growing coffee. Madam Speaker, when we decide to pick on coffee to build the capacity of our people, we are told there is no money to expand coffee production because the Uganda Coffee Development Authority is struggling. 

Madam Speaker, raising coffee seedlings is a very difficult thing. Somebody goes to a bank and borrows money in the hope that since he has a contract, Government will pay him and yet all these years, they are struggling because they have not been paid. That is why it has become so difficult for coffee farmers to access seedlings. It is because a majority of the farmers that raise seedlings have given up. Even the new ones in northern Uganda who would like to start raising seedlings are not coming up.

So, we really would like to thank the committee for this recommendation. We would like to stand by this recommendation that this money is provided. We also would like to request the minister, hon. Ssempijja, who promised us that he would provide money - we would like to request that this time round, you come with a supplementary request to promote coffee production in northern Uganda after this money has been provided.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am hearing a rumour - but I also saw a letter sometime back written by hon. Ssempijja saying they are reallocating pieces of land of Aswa Ranch to certain individuals. The ownership and size of Aswa Ranch are still in question. Nobody is telling us more about this ranch. However, when somebody wakes up and starts allocating land in the ranch when we have not yet been –(Interruption)– Let us start with hon. Okin –(Laughter)

MR OKIN: Thank you, hon. Franca Akello, for giving me this opportunity to give the information. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Franca Akello is that the legal ownership of most of the ranches have expired. It means the land titles of most of these ranches are legally not there. Legally, therefore, if there is no ownership, it is reverted back to the people who gave the land.

So, why can’t this land now revert back to the indigenous people who gave it for that particular purpose so that if there is a need for it, its usage can be renegotiated? That is the information I wanted to give hon. Franca Akello.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, to support the issue of the owners of seedlings and nursery beds closing up, in 2013 you went to Nebbi to attend my party and you commissioned the distribution of the coffee seedlings in a big nursery bed. 

As I speak now, I am at pains to say that the nursery bed has closed. Why? It is because they supplied seedlings for three consecutive years and they have never been paid. So, each time UCDA allocates seedlings for us, Members of Parliament, the only biggest supplier in Nebbi was that nursery bed. We cannot now give coffee seedlings; I do not know whether the number they allocate to us bounces back to them. 

However, the pain is, those people have never been paid and the blame is on me and even the former Member of Parliament, hon. Christine Acayo. Just because of UCDA, the villagers are still crying with her name that we went and picked their seedlings and never paid them. Thank you for this opportunity.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much for the information. (Member timed out.)

5.08
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

However, we have a very serious concern. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went and closed many landing sites because of bad fishing methods. They gave the people advice and they complied but up today, when you go to Kalyambuzi, Muyema and Mbeya, you will find hundreds of people are just sitting and suffering because they have nothing to do. They have nobody to talk to. When you talk to the honourable minister –(Interjection)- Can I be protected, Madam Speaker? The minister cannot even listen.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the member is addressing you. 

MR MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, including many of my colleagues, hon. Namayanja, we were trying to get who can assist us after people complied so that they can be let free to continue fishing. However, there is nobody you can address - (Interruption) – Yes, my sister.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give you is that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries comes from the same area. He is not even bothered to see the suffering of the people in his constituency. It is absurd.

MR MUYANJA: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, these are hundreds of people living on the islands and their only business is fishing. So, the best way to help them is- We thought the Operation Wealth Creation can change their methods of working so that they are also assisted; instead of seedlings, they could be given nets. But there is totally nothing. Many people on the islands are completely cut off; the military is adamant and cannot listen even if you identify yourself as RDC or a Member of Parliament. They say we can only listen to one person and they don’t mention that very person.

Madam Speaker, I was in Mukono. I saw those majors who were given brand new pick-ups for only supply of seeds when the supervisors do not even have motorcycles. Someone who is supposed to monitor does not have any transport at all. However, the majors are having brand new pick-ups.

They gave cows to themselves and we even petitioned the ministry. They were giving cows to well-to-do people only and they said it is this programme that is going to help the poor yet it is helping the majors –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, hon. Muyanja, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this budget allocated Shs 39 billion for facilitating extension workers, to procure mobile equipment, kits to help them in the field etc. However, we do not see these people on the ground and I wonder what is happening. This was a decision taken by this House to provide Shs 39 billion for this purpose. That is the information I wanted to provide. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give is that in Kitgum, the head of Operation Wealth Creation owns a new double cabin. The mayor of Kitgum Municipality has to go begging for lifts from the gentleman.

Besides that, I sit on COSASE; this Operation Wealth Creation has no policy and they are not answerable to NAADS. Now we would want to find out who are they answerable to while we are allocating funds in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Now we invite the minister to respond. Honourable minister as you come, can you tell the country the many vehicles which were impounded by the soldiers and taken away countrywide? They are in Nakasongola; how will the citizens get back their vehicles?

5.14
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members for the lively debate today and the support you are giving to our agricultural sector. I would like to mention that the budget we are discussing is Shs 862.92 billion which is 2.9 percent of the total budget.

Therefore, we need to start from that angle. However, I am a member of the executive and I have to inform you. Therefore what we are doing here is to fight within the small bag where we are fixed to say let us remove this from KCCA and put it here when in fact I think - you understand what I am saying.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the vehicles that are being impounded while carrying the young fish or wrong gears are kept in Nakasongola until the President issues a directive over those vehicles. That is what I have to inform this Parliament. However, we are expecting the President -

THE SPEAKER: Have you requested him to issue the order in view of the long-time some of those have taken? These people use these vehicles.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, I have gone there, inspected the vehicles, briefed him and he is quite aware. We have also made suggestions to the President and one of the suggestions is to pardon the culprits and be given a warning. We hope the President will react on this one – (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you honourable minister. On that particular matter, you are very much aware of the nature or altercations we had in our region in Masaka over the same matter. The excuse we are getting is that you are waiting for a directive from the President. 

Did you ever investigate to understand case by case the nature of vehicles and motorcycles these were because some of these people were innocent transporters? Did you ever investigate or you are doing a blanket statement that all of them are guilty and need to be forgiven?

MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA: We have investigated and there is a full report about this; most of them are habitual defaulters. When you got to Nakasongola, you will find five vehicles belonging to one person. They arrest this vehicle today, he buys another one and it repeats the same actions. Therefore some people have been habitual defaulters in this game but others were one-time offenders and this report is well written for the President to consider. 

For Kalangala, the two landing sites in Kalangala were completed with water treatment facilities to supply portable water and ice. Operators were also trained and this facility was handed over to the local government. Remember that was the agreement in this Parliament –(Hon. Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am standing on procedural matter because I want to understand why the minister is avoiding the key issues which were raised. First of all, I thought as agriculture minister, he should have to know where the gap is. He is talking of 2.9 percent share of the budget which is not correct. It is 3.1 percent.

Secondly you have not told us how far you have gone with the silos programme which all the neighbouring countries have adopted. Last year - the way I am standing up - we spent a lot of money as Parliament to give the disaster preparedness ministry – he doesn’t want it to be called Ministry of Disaster but actually it is a disaster.

We gave them a lot of money when we were experiencing famine and we have not been told what happened to that money. Through the silo system we can at least improve on our food security and be able to prepare for the coming time.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MS OGWAL: The procedural point is: Is the minister proceeding procedurally right when he is not telling us the policy issue which he should be telling us; the progress he has made and the challenges faced?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the objectives and priorities are set out in the policy statement which you have; he is answering the issues raised in this House.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the four landing sites that have not been completed, we have carried out the feasibility studies to find out how much money will be needed to complete and hand them over.

It looks like the districts that are being handed over these landing sites do not have the capacity to run them. They cannot pay for electricity, maintain them; maybe Parliament will have to revisit its decision on these landing sites.

The top management of the ministry decided to take 40 tractors to the ten districts and indeed some of them - Sembabule and Lyantonde - are not from the western but we considered the problems that pertained at that time.

We had drought along the cattle corridor and especially that side; cows were dying and we agreed to avail tractors for pasture and grass production. This time we are not going to give any tractor to that side; they are going to the rest of the country.

The only problem again and I would like to request the honourable member - there must be a democratic consideration but still we have to find the groups, societies, religious organisations, nucleus farmers who can manage the tractors. We are going to work with you to make sure that we put these tractors in the right hands. 

We have recruited 3,032 extension workers so far; the minimum would have been 5,000 but we have reduced the extension to farmer ratio from 1 to 5,000; it is now 1,800 - that is only 60 per cent. We need to recruit more if we are to get the right ratio.

The problem with NAADS or Operation Wealth Creation is the amount of money we are allocating to this sub-sector; Shs 249 billion to cater for all the 68 per cent peasants is nothing.

You may not see it easily but we are still importing mangoes; those who come from Busia and Tororo will tell you that we are importing about eight trucks of mangoes from Kenya every day. Some of the markets and supermarkets require quality mangoes but we have not reached there. We would like to reach that level.

Fortunately for us, the Emirates and the Asian market want our mangoes because of other reasons which I am not going to state. However, we need to properly organise ourselves to produce mangoes for those markets. 

The only problem is that we need to advise our farmers and not leave it “to whom it may concern”. The honourable members must be involved in mobilising our people.

For Kampala Capital City Authority I would want to go with what hon. Ssewanyana said. Using this money for markets does not augur well with us. Originally, Government of Uganda had no budget for markets but right now the Government, through the Ministry of Local Government, is budgeting for construction of markets –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much. I and other Members of Parliament moved together with you and as a delegation of the Uganda-Dubai Expo, and we were told there are opportunities to supply mangoes to the tune of 40 feet containers, 10 or 20 within two weeks. Irish, carrots and others were also mentioned.

The Uganda-Dubai Expo put that clearly before you and us; is there a cargo to carry as soon as possible the perishable? The Government should establish a policy on how to support our farmers to carry some of these perishable goods across the ocean.

The honourable minister is saying that our farmers are not organised; if you went to Nebbi today, you would find that markets are flooded with mangoes. When the mothers fail to sell the mangoes they just abandon them there because they cannot go back home with them for fear of being ridiculed.

Are we proceeding right without the minister laying down the policies to encourage cross-border or international business in perishables for this country? We need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when do you intend to get the foreign mangoes out of this market and we sell the ones produced here?

MS OGWAL: The minister said that farmers are not organised, and he is aware that we have very organised cooperative societies all over the country involving farming but the cooperative unions is dying because the Government has refused to help them. Whether you go to the west or the south, east or to the north, you will find much organised farmers’ cooperative societies operating but they are not being assisted. 

How can you say that farmers are not organised? What is hurting me more is that the Government is giving Shs 5 billion to an investor called Fine Spinners. Instead of giving those billions to cotton farmers to produce more cotton for the investor they are giving the investor cash. These are the issues we want to be sorted out. 

Finally, I would like to know what has happened to the fund which was launched in 2009. What happened to that Agricultural Development Fund and who has benefited from it? If you do not tell us, I have a list, which shows that most of that money has gone to the south again. I can produce the list so can you also tell us what happened to that fund because it has been in operation since 2009/2010.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal that is no longer a point of procedure; you are contributing. (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, we need to stop these imports. In fact, one of our priorities as a sector is to substitute all imports such that all these commodities, which we can produce in Uganda such as rice, mangoes, oranges, apples and milk, should be substituted. We should produce our own products.
 
MR KIBALYA: Honourable minister, it is a good intention to have a plan of substituting all those things that are being imported so that we promote a money economy and incomes in people’s pockets. However, the fruits that we get from the seedlings from Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) such as mangoes and oranges are the same; but the factories that we have processing juice called mango or orange juice and so on, this side of Nakaseke, Britannia and that one that we are coming up with in Tororo do not take the mangoes that we produce. They import mangoes from Kenya yet we are still planting the same seedlings that are producing the mangoes that these factories have refused to take. 

I wonder where we are going to sell these oranges and mangoes that will come out of the seedlings that you are giving us. When will you begin giving us the seedlings for those mangoes that are required by those producers producing the juice we need?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to finish and do the other reports and go to pray; we the Muslims have to pray.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the mangoes that we are growing are known and they have gone through our research systems. We have also worked with Britannia and Riham, which have taken our mangoes to France for testing – that is where they test the mangoes for juice - and the mangoes have performed well. What we are going to do next is to mark all the plantlets. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal should grow the Tommy mango well knowing that this is a Tommy or so. All the varieties will be marked, which has been missing. People have been mixing all varieties; some varieties are for table while others are for juice. Therefore, we are going to mark them so that everybody knows. In fact, some countries are demanding for even the local mangoes provided we maintain the qualities from the word go. 

Madam Speaker, about the cooperatives, this Government supports cooperatives and indeed we have a minister in charge of them on our Cabinet. We are working with this ministry to make sure that we revive the cooperatives and also reorganise the farmers into conscious competitive organisations – I do not want to forget this one. I can give an example that we have so many cooperatives that we have now revived; one of them is Kibinge Coffee Farmers Cooperative Society, which is even exporting coffee now. I was in Bugiri where we have revived several cooperatives and they are moving. If you go to Bugiri, Madam Speaker, you will be surprised. We have very serious groups there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, try to wind up we have got to deal with another report.
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: In this budget, we are going to use cooperatives and nucleus model farmers to make sure that we reach out to all the farmers. I would like to assure the Members - this budget that we are reading - we are going to start immediately.

Lastly, I would like to assure the Members that the irrigation policy has gone through Cabinet. We agreed to work with the Ministry Of Water and Environment to handle this irrigation policy together. The Ministry of Water and Environment handles the bulk water while the ministry of agriculture handles on-farm water. The only problem now is that we need to get enough funds to reach out to all farmers.
 
Why are we losing all these plantings? It is because the farmers do not have water to water them. We are doing all it takes; in this report you have seen the ministry of agriculture has constructed many valley tanks to help farmers access water for irrigation or put this water near to our farmers. 

Madam Speaker, you remember that last time the Committee on Budget removed some money from NAADS; money from Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), money for hoes and tractors was reduced in the previous budget. In this Parliament, we instructed the Committee on Budget to get this money back. Therefore, I would request the honourable members to maintain that directive to the Committee on Budget. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I invite the Minister for Kampala to say a few things. Honourable minister, what about the landing sites which have been closed by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces?

MR SSEMPIJJA: The report that I have is that these landing sites that were closed were not gazetted. That is the report I got from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and they were being used - people had started habits of opening up landing sites everywhere. That is the report that I have.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, I think what is happening is a breach of Article 40 of the Constitution - the economic rights of the people. Why are they being forced to other landing sites? Why don’t you improve and gazette those others. You are impoverishing people by those policies.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the minister is not telling you the truth. The landing sites I am talking about are well gazetted; they have been there and have everything.

When the soldiers came, they closed them. They said they were lacking required standards. Those people have met the required standards - I even took a group to Bank of Baroda and got a loan but up to-date, they have failed to get someone who can deliver their message to be reopened - those are many. Honourable minister, let us be fair; these are our people.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Let me take this advice and the one from the Speaker as it has been put. Later on, I will report to Parliament and give a list of gazetted landing sites and those that can be developed. I will bring it here for Parliament to -

Madam Speaker, let me say that there are landing sites that were not gazetted that were being used by the wrong doers - those people who are illegally doing wrong things on the lake. That was there. However, there are also landing sites that were gazetted which are now closed. 

Therefore, what we can do, allow me to go back, get a register of all the landing sites and those that were closed because the UPDF thought that they were being used by the wrong doers - (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, we had a problem in this country and I want to inform the Members, our lakes were being depleted by people who were using wrong gears, catching immature fish and all that.

Some of them were using –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Point of order

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. How can the minister call our voters “wrongdoers” and if they are criminals, why didn’t you arrest them and charge them in accordance with the law?

We have been demanding details about the landing sites for the last two years and you have not produced any document. Who are these wrongdoers? Is it in order for you to refer to our people who are doing normal activities to survive instead of being robbers; is it in order for you to refer to them as wrongdoers? Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what wrong things they were doing or who they are. However, honourable minister on a serious note, under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) the Government is supposed to facilitate inclusion but if the landing sites have been closed for two years, what is the economic life of those people? It is a serious issue. Let us hear from another man who looks after fishermen. 

4.45
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I would not contribute because I have been contributing for the last few days. However because there is a misdirection and misapplication of the law - you know, when you are enforcing the law, you must understand the critical sectors and laws governing them. 

This is a wide ministry covering several sub-sectors. For example, when we come to the fishing industry, we have the Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011, Cap. 197. You know, you have been tasked to explain when you will release the vehicles that were impounded and seized by the authorised officers.

As a minister, you are saying that this is entirely in the hands of the President. Look at Section 30; what does it say? Even before thinking of how to exercise your powers, you must secure a court order and the court order is not issued by the President but by the courts vested with the jurisdiction where you are exercising those powers.

I want to state and inform the country that much as the mission is good, it has now gone sour. Your officers have exercised their powers ultra vires - beyond the jurisdiction vested in them. 

Therefore, whatever you are doing now, especially the continuing seizure of these properties and vehicles in particular, is a nullity in the eyes of law - (Interjection) I want to accept the information on the basis that I want to refer the minister particularly to the Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011 and particularly Section 30 for him to appreciate the illegalities being committed by his officers - (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to report to the House that in Masaka, five people were charged in court, fined and paid the fine but the army did not release their vehicles even when we insisted. I even informed the honourable minister as a friend and he is aware that there is a violation of the law in Masaka; people went to court, were charged, fined, and they paid but they have never released their vehicles.

MR MUGOYA: Therefore, Madam Speaker, you can now see that what is happening in the exercise of the powers being vested in the hands of the authorised officers is now a nullity. I would like also to state that even when you are issuing the order, it should only be restricted - that order of seizure of the owner of the vehicle or vessel who is caught red-handed exercising or fishing illegally.

However, where a third party has been hired to carry the merchandise which has been got illegally, then the owner or that third party is entitled to recover his/her vessel or property. That is what the law says. Therefore, I do not know which law our honourable minister is now enforcing when it is very clear that this is what must be done.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, our territory goes up to Migingo. However, I can tell you, what is happening in the islands of Bukooli where I hail from is terrible. We do not have authorised officers exercising their power but they have formed up a clique of torture and stealing.

Sometime, when they get money or they recover illegal fish with money, they impound the whole lot and you cannot see how it comes back to the population. I would like to say that much as we appreciate the mission, the acts and intents are now different and what we are seeing is commission of various acts and illegalities, and we must rectify this. Otherwise, the image of Government is now dented on the waters. Therefore, we need a shift in the actions of the authorised officers manning this mission. I thank you.

 5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speake. I would like to thank the committee for the very detailed report, especially when it came to articulating issues of the city. I also want to thank the Members who are in support of urban agriculture. Allow me to indicate that for the last three years, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) has been sending this money to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). Before, this money started coming to KCCA, we articulated the purpose for which this money should be used. 

First of all, the money is meant to promote urban agriculture in the city. Madam Speaker, allow me to put it on record, that National Planning Authority indicated to me that during the course of last financial year, Uganda imported vegetables worth $20 million from Nairobi. The vegetables were fed in the supermarkets of Kampala city. Now, we are carrying out a campaign to make sure that we substitute this kind of import and we are particularly using this money.

Much as it may have had issues of utilisation, I would like to request that as a ministry, we shall sit down with our implementing agency KCCA and other stakeholders including the Members of Parliament for Kampala and then we agree on how we can best efficiently and effectively use this money. 

The second purpose for this money was to complete the agricultural value chain. Madam Speaker, when the agriculturalists in the villages produce, the bulk of the agricultural products find its way on the markets of Kampala. As we talk now, those markets are not there. Allow me to use an example of Busega Market which is at the roadside right now. We want to construct that road but we cannot because the traders are on the road. I would like to thank the Ministry of Local Government under Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP), they got money and they are trying to construct a market for Busega. Unfortunately, due to low funding, they are unable to complete that market. We have consistently kept the traders on the roadside. I am not so sure whether my senior colleagues from the Ministry of Local Government even got money to complete that market in the next financial year.

Therefore, we thought in the original plan that we would use part of this money to promote urban agriculture as the Members of Parliament from Kampala have already articulated and to start on the construction of Kitintale Market. Some of you who go to Kitintale, there is completely nothing. Therefore, we would like to create these work places. Other people in the rest of the country can engage in agriculture; so, even in Kampala, in addition to urban agriculture, we need to create as many work places as possible. Somebody who is not able to plant crops should be able to get work elsewhere at least.

I would like to inform this House that KCCA does not benefit from Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) which the rest of the country is benefiting from. Two years ago, when I became minister, I inquired and they told me the standard operating procedures for OWC do not cater for KCCA. We requested that let those standard operating procedures be reviewed to make sure that they cater for KCCA. To date, that has not been done. 

Given that justification, Madam Speaker, I request the House to maintain that budget for KCCA for purposes of promoting urban agriculture. When you look at the population of KCCA, more than 70 per cent are poor people; this is money which is pro-poor. Let us also help the poor people in Kampala city. I would like to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister still want to say anything or you are through. Okay. Maybe minister just to conclude, there was something we wanted you to assist the fishing community with. In December 2015, I was with the President at Wonda Landing Site, where he issued a directive that the fishing community should have their special inputs in National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). However, the fishing people should have their own inputs under the NAADS programme but it seems no one has followed it up. Minister, in 2015, it was a directive, so you support the fishing community.  

5.55
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, we are going to do exactly that. We are also going to prioritise aquaculture on top of those who are hunting for fish. We are also going to support the fish farmers in this next budget. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank and assure you that we are going to take this matter very seriously to make sure that, the landing sites that are acceptable to local governments are allowed to work and open up so that we close this chapter of landing sites. However, Madam Speaker, the Chairman, hon. Robert Migadde, visited Buvuma together with me and we found landing sites belonging to one person with his small boats and wrong gears. 

I would like to apologise to hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I used really a simple word, “wrongdoers” and my friend here has called people “robbers” when he was submitting. For me, I think it is more humble to use the word “wrongdoers”. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Chairperson have closing remarks?

5.57
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (Mr Robert Migadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the entire Parliament for the comments and support. I would like to emphasis and as a committee, we do not have any issue with KCCA. The issues are actually theirs not ours. If it is for markets, then let it be for markets. Let it go to the right ministry or department. However, if it is for agriculture, we would like to see output out of agriculture. We would like to know how many tonnes of tomatoes come to Nakasero from within Kampala. Statistics should be there. We do not want to find vehicles moving from Mukono offloading tomatoes in Nakasero Market and you say you are promoting urban agriculture. 

THE SPEAKER: What do we do with the recommendation?

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, we still stand by our recommendations because we have not got valid reasons on why that should change.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, you know we are dealing with issues of unemployment. If they are those who cannot be in the gardens but can be in the markets to earn a living instead of stealing, I am appealing that you –

MR SSEMPIJJA: I would like to request the chair to concede provided that we go with hon. Allan Ssewanyana and Benny Namugwanya’s view that we use this money to help the women who remain at home to grow mushrooms, poultry and all these things that really help the Wananchi - not these markets. 

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, if we get the comfort of the minister’s word that the money to KCCA will be put into agriculture so that we see the deliverables, then as committee, we can concede to that. I would like to re-emphasis, there is need for the ministry to first track the Fisheries Act Amendment. For the past two years, this Parliament has been talking of fisheries. There is need to streamline the various activities they are talking about; the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and their mandates among others. Therefore, there is need to first track that Act which has remained pending

for the last seven years. We will also get to know where they draw their allowance. Is it in the army or in agriculture so that we know there is a reporting mechanism?

Lastly, there is need to support agriculture as a ministry with additional funding. The issue of re-allocating may not go a long way in assisting the agriculture ministry. If you move resources from NAADS to another area, you have not assisted agriculture as a ministry. We would like to see more funds and we pray that this Parliament pronounces itself that we should never approve any budget which has less than, say, five per cent of the national budget going to agriculture because this is the backbone of our country. I appreciate the interventions in roads and in the power sectors.  However, now we should focus on agriculture so that we use these roads to transport produce and have agro-industries to consume the power. By doing that, we shall then achieve middle-income status. I thank you once again.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the proposal to reallocate the Shs 5 billion be reverted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question that the report, as amended be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, please use the executive summary and please use about 15 minutes.

6.03
MEMBER COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is our report. We have seven votes:
Vote 001: Office of the President
Vote 002: State House
Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister
Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission
Vote 112: Ethics and Integrity
Vote 159: External Security Organisation,
Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, I beg to lay on the Table, a copy of our report plus the minutes. I beg to lay on the Table the level of performance of all our spending agencies in relation to gender and equity.

We have uploaded our report and so I will go straight to the observations and recommendations on page 5.

The committee was informed of numerous threats like hacking into the financial systems, cyber space and Oil & Gas among others that if not checked compromise national security.

The committee notes that the budget provision in the MTEF ceiling for Vote 001 to fund the planned activities is inadequate to enable execution of the envisaged mandate. The funding requirement is Shs 13.98 billion and only Shs 3.98 billion is provided resulting in a funding gap of Shs 10.0 billion.

The committee recommends that Shs 3.5 billion be availed, to enable the Ministry of Security to implement interventions that the committee considers to be very critical to the security of this country.

The committee further recommends that Shs 3.5 billion of the resources identified under vote 122, Kampala Capital City Authority be re-allocated to Vote 001: Ministry of Security.

Inadequate Budget Provision to the Manifesto Implementation Unit

The committee observed that the budget provision in the MTEF ceiling for Vote 001 to fund the planned activities of the Manifesto Implementation Unit is inadequate to enable execution of the envisaged mandate. The funding requirement for the Manifesto Implementation Unit is Shs 4.571 billion and only Shs 0.974 billion is provided for in the MTEF ceiling of Vote 001 resulting in a funding gap of Shs 3.597 billion. The current budget provision only enables the unit to assess only 51 districts and seven MDAs on their implementation status of the manifesto commitments.

The committee recommends that Shs 2.597 billion be availed to enable the Manifesto Implementation Unit effectively monitor the implementation of the commitments in the manifesto and the 23 strategic directives across all the MDAs as issued by the President.

The committee further recommends that Shs 2.597 billion of the resources identified under vote 122, be re-allocated to vote 001.

Inadequate Budget Provision to Economic Monitoring and Research
The committee observes that inadequate budget provision to the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has been a practice that when we are handling the ministerial policy statements for each sector, the line minister has to be in the House.

As far as I can see, I do not see the minister for the presidency and I do not know –

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable chairperson.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee observes that inadequate budget provision to the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research results in scaling down the scope of its activities.

The funding requirement for the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research is Shs 4.69 billion and only Shs 1.41 billion is provided for in the MTEF ceiling of vote 001 resulting in a funding gap of Shs 3.4 billion.

The committee recommends that Shs 2.589 billion be availed to enable the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research to effectively monitor the implementation of Government programmes to ascertain if implementation is on truck and if not, seek remedial actions.

The committee further recommends that Shs 2.5 billion of the resources identified under vote 122, be reallocated to vote 00l to enable the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research effectively execute its oversight role.

Roll Out of Monitoring Camps

The committee commends this approach since it involves all stakeholders in monitoring Government programmes and projects and therefore holds implementing agencies accountable to the public, which feeds into improvement in service delivery.

The committee recommends that Office of the President explores avenues of rolling out the monitoring camps to the entire country.

Facilitation for RDCs

The committee observed that facilitation to conduct effective monitoring of Government programmes is underfunded to the tune of Shs 5.3 billion. Members noted that inadequate facilitation for RDCs to monitor Government programmes leads to poor service delivery and poor implementation of Government programmes.

The committee noted that the budget provision to the Office of the President in as far as facilitation for RDCs is concerned is so inadequate.

Therefore, the committee recommends that facilitation to the Office of the President be enhanced to enable the RDCs fulfil their mandate envisaged under Article 203 of the Constitution. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 1.566 billon of the resources identified under vote 122 be re-allocated to vote 001 to facilitate operations of the RDCs.

Appointment of RDCs for newly created districts

The committee observed that there is an additional cost implication of Shs 2.63 billion to facilitate appointment of 10 RDCs. The 10 RDCs came as a result of the creation of new districts. Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 2.63 billion be availed to the Office of the President to enable appointment of the 10 RDCs.

Construction of offices for RDCs

The committee interested itself in the office accommodation for RDCs. The committee observes that out of the 112 districts, Office of the President has constructed RDCs’ offices in 28 districts, rents offices in 23 districts while RDCs in 71 districts are accommodated by district local governments and this compromises their level of performance. Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 2.8 billion be provided to the Office of the President to enhance construction of RDCs’ offices.

Transport equipment for RDCs

The committee observed a huge funding gap of Shs 17.76 billion to procure 120 vehicles for the RDCs and deputy RDCs as the cost of maintaining the old fleet is extremely exorbitant in addition to the desire to procure vehicles for RDCs in newly created districts. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 17.76 billion be provided to enable the Office of the President procure the 120 vehicles for replacement of the old fleet and for buying vehicles for RDCs in the new districts.

Operationalisation of the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs

The committee observed that the funding requirement to operationalise the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is underfunded to the tune of Shs 3.91 billion. The committee observed that the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is still housed under Vote 001: Office of the President. 

In the Financial Year 2017/2018 report on the ministerial policy statement, Parliament adopted a report for operationalisation of a vote for the ministry in charge of Kampala. Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 2.2 billion be provided to operationalise the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. The committee further reiterates its recommendation that the ministry of Kampala be given an independent vote.

Renovation of dormitories and other core infrastructure of National Leadership Institute (NALI), Kyankwanzi

The committee observed that infrastructure at NALI is in a dilapidated state and requires Shs 1.5 billion to renovate the facilities. The committee recommends that the Office of the President readjusts its priorities to have the infrastructure renovated. The committee further recommends that avenues be explored to position NALI as a centre of excellence in hosting many activities.

Internal Security Organisation (ISO)

The committee noted that ISO requires Shs 28.86 billion to procure 134 motor vehicles and Shs 25.92 billion to procure 1,578 motorcycles. The committee observed that only Shs 0.241 billion is reflected in the indicative budget allocation, hence a funding gap of Shs 28.619 billion. The committee recommends that Shs 28.86 billion be allocated for procurement of motor vehicles and motorcycles.

Settlement of arrears

The committee was informed that ISO is in courts of law on matters related to settlement of arrears. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government prioritises the settlement of these arrears.

Vote 002 - State House

Model villages

Members, you may recall that it was in this House that it was agreed that the model villages be rolled out throughout the country. Therefore, the committee recommends that special consideration be accorded to this initiative and we should have Shs 4 billion provided to have the initiative fully funded because it has a funding gap since what is in the allocated figure is only Shs 1 billion. The committee further recommends that a comprehensive work plan of model villages for its roll-out to the entire country be availed.

Skilling the girl child

The committee observes that the majority of Ugandans are living in rural areas with no access to any skills development institution. The committee recommends that a comprehensive plan for the roll-out of skilling the girl child presidential initiative be availed so that it is rolled out beyond Kampala. 

Operation Wealth Creation

The committee observed that Operation Wealth Creation is not achieving its targets. Therefore, the committee has recommended that State House interests itself in the Operation Wealth Creation programme with the aim of undertaking a review so as to seek remedial action and culprits be brought to book.

Vote I07 - Uganda Aids Commission

The committee noted that the number of new infections in Uganda increased by 21 per cent between 2005 and 2013. The committee further observed that infections among young people between 15 and 24 years are on high increase, at 34 per cent.

The committee observed that interventions to enhance advocacy, strategic information and knowledge management geared towards increasing awareness and, therefore, mitigating new HIV infections be supported because it has a funding gap of Shs 2.095 billion. The committee recommends that Government fills up the funding gap to Uganda Aids Commission. 

The committee further recommends that Shs 1 billion be provided to enhance advocacy, strategic information and knowledge management in HIV/AIDS response. The committee further recommends that interventions to curtail stigma for young people both in school and out of school be enhanced.

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity

The committee observed that there is a significant reduction in the visibility of the activities of ethics and integrity. The committee recommends that the Directorate of Ethics Integrity steps up its advocacy activities by enhancing engagements with public institutions, religious institutions and cultural leaders with the available resources in the MTEF celling. 

In the medium term, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should consider enhancing their MTEF celling to enable ethics and integrity effectively implement its mandate. The committee further recommends that ethics and integrity disseminates the existing legal frameworks to create public awareness.

Electronic media content

The committee observed that some TV stations in Uganda still telecast programmes with high pornographic contents embedded in them and this inevitably translates into moral decadence. The committee calls upon the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity (DEI) to expeditiously initiate laws that restrict moral decadence. 

As an interim measure, the committee strongly recommends that DEI coordinates with Uganda Communications Commissions (UCC) to impose sanctions on media houses whose programmes contain pornographic content.

Engagement with Other Stakeholders

The committee observed that the directorate of ethics and integrity has not done what it takes to engage other stakeholders. 

The committee recommends that the directorate engages other stakeholders like the Ministry of Education and Sports to have themes of their Music, Dance and Drama competitions relating to ethical morals. They should explore a multi-sectoral approach to address the moral decadence.

External Security Organisation (ESO)

The committee commends ESO for opening up and operationalising seven new foreign stations. This enhanced the organisations foreign deployments to 31 stations, out of which 24 are in Uganda's Missions against the 35 Ugandans Foreign Missions, while the seven are in strategic areas of interest.

The committee was informed that ESO relies on Military Attachés in the remaining 11 Diplomatic Missions, where Uganda is represented to collect foreign intelligence. The committee observed that the option of ESO to relying on intelligence information collected by military attachés is likely to constrain the organisation.

The committee recommends that the funding gap of Shs 7 billion be provided to enable ESO to deploy in all Uganda’s Foreign Missions and other countries for security interest.

Settlement of Arrears

The committee noted that out of Shs 18.87 billion accumulated arrears for ESO, Shs 4.78 billion was provided.

The committee recommends that Shs 14.095 billion be provided to enable ESO clear its outstanding arrears.

Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)

Under the Resettlement Action Plan for Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP) II, the project has been faced with implementation challenges. Therefore, the committee recommends that KCCA expedites the handling of the earlier challenges to enable the communities achieve the envisaged project benefits. This is about resettlement of affected residents.

Proposed Allocation to Corporate Services

The proposed allocation to Corporate Services is Shs 6.31 billion. The committee scrutinised the activities, programmes but was constrained to recommend for approval transfers to Uganda Railways (Shs 220 million).

Madam Speaker, allow me to give a few highlights regarding the reallocation. Concerning Shs 220 million, we interfaced with KCCA. They admitted that they do not have the capacity and so, the management of the service should go to the Ministry of Works and Transport. That is why we are recommending that it should be transferred to the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Secondly, we were also constrained on the issue of Shs 500 million, for teachers and health workers SACCOs. For the last two financial years, KCCA has donated Shs 250 million to support these SACCOs. When we interfaced with them, they said they have reached a capacity of Shs 2 billion per SACCO. We think that with Shs 2 billion, they have already established and so, there is no need to keep donating more money. Further, the teachers in this country have their SACCO. That is why we did not agree with them on the issue of Shs 500 million.

On the issue of boda boda registration, the initial figure was Shs 800 million. However, we decided to only retain Shs 200 million and reallocated Shs 600 million. When we interfaced with KCCA, they told us that the mandate for the registration was taken over by the police. When we asked them whether the mandate had been returned to them, and if it was returned, how far they went with the registration, KCCA briefed us that they had an ordinance in process. However, we could not give them logistical support of Shs 800 million. We gave then Shs 200 million.

On the issue of legal fees for Kampala Land Board, the budget was Shs 900 million. However, we got constrained because we have a Directorate for Legal Services in KCCA and it is fully facilitated. Therefore, to again allocate Shs 900 million meant double budgeting.  Even the department has got Shs 11 billion to handle issues of Kampala Land Board. 

On the issue of external travel, we decided to remove Shs 250 million because the same provision was catered for under Human Resource and Administration; and the figure was Shs 720 million. That again to us meant double budgeting. We, therefore, decided to reallocate Shs 250 million and retained Shs 720 million.

On the issue of markets, they provided for Shs 106 million. The intention for the usage of this money was for election of the leaders of the markets. Honourable members, in our districts, we know how markets are organised. Members come together and elect their leaders. However, KCCA wants to facilitate the process of electing these leaders, which will cost Shs 106 million and yet they will also pay them. The committee decided to remove Shs 106 million.

The committee therefore recommends that Shs 2.576 billion be reallocated from corporate services to other priority interventions identified by the committee. The committee further recommends that only Shs 3.734 billion be appropriated for corporate services programme.

Charges imposed on Solid Waste Collection

The Authority contracts services provided to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste to the land fill. The committee received complaints that the service providers charge exorbitant fees on solid waste collection. The committee sought clarification from KCCA and was informed that the charges range from Shs 3,000-Shs 30,000 per month, for door to door collection.

The committee earlier recommended that the fees charged for solid waste management be prescribed by the Authority and published in public places. The committee noted that the authority never interested itself in the matter and no action was taken.

The committee reiterates its recommendation that the Authority prescribes charges and has them published in a period not exceeding September 2018.

Solid Waste Management

The committee recognises the efforts of KCCA to improve and maintain a clean, habitable and sustainable city environment through the collection, transportation, disposal and treatment of the municipal waste in Kampala. The committee noted that they continued to impose charges on residents despite payments by the Authority and this reflects a double payment.

The committee recommends that the allocation to Solid Waste Management Programme be stayed at the actual outturn level of Shs 12.8 billion. In financial year 2016/2017, this was what we allocated to them. Apart from this, some of the services are also tendered out and also individuals pay.

Proposed Allocation to Administration and Human Resource 

The proposed allocation to Administration and Human Resource Programme is Shs 90.43 billion in financial year 20l8/2019. The committee has scrutinised the planned activities and proposed allocations to Administration and Human Resource Programme and finds no justification for Shs 9 billion shillings for settlement of arrears.

Madam Speaker, we know that it is an obligation to remit arrears but on this matter, we were constrained to approve it. First of all, we did not have clear evidence that there were accrued arrears of Shs 9 billion. We believe arrears are instantly paid as you are paying somebody’s salary. 

As a committee, we were given a copy of a letter written by the Permanent Secretary, finance ministry, authorising KCCA to clear these arrears but with a condition that there should be consultation with Health Service Commission regarding the usage of the Shs 9 billion. This is because - the genesis is that the money for Kiruddu and Kawempe was Shs 9 billion. However, there was also a Cabinet decision on the same; the Committee on Health also took a decision on it. So we also conceded that Kiruddu and Kawempe should go to the Ministry of Health.

As a committee, we have never deducted any salary or wage. Under this, we did not approve it because we felt we did not have evidence to show that there was that consultation. Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 9 billion be reallocated from Administration and Human Resource Programme to other priority areas. The committee further recommends that only Shs 80.33 billion be appropriated for Administration and Human Resource programme.

I would like to emphasise here that there were a lot of complaints that we were laying off casual labourers. We did not touch any cost. We have retained the Shs 12.8 billion. We have never touched the money for casual labourers and the de-silters under roads. That can be confirmed on page 50 of the Ministerial Policy Statement, where we have a clear allocation of Shs 8.39 billion. Therefore, our committee has never reduced any money for wages and salaries.

Kampala Land Board

The committee found out that there are a lot of cases generated and we believe there is a lot of negligence. Therefore, we are recommending for an investigation of Kampala Land Board. We were informed that many of the cases are as a result of allocating the same pieces of plots to different people. Allow me to lay the list of the cases that are pending and they are over 200. This is a case inherited by KCCA, as at 13 May 2011 - and these are cases as at 30 January 2018. I beg to lay them.

Office of the Prime Minister

This is under Affirmative Action. The committee has reflected on the definition of a budget as the most important tool through which Government implements its policies. The committee has scrutinised the budget proposals and found out that most of the Affirmative Action programmes are either underfunded or not funded at all. 

For instance, implementation of the Luwero-Rwenzori Development plan has a funding gap of Shs 10 billion. Kick starting the implementation of Teso Development Plan requires Shs 12 billion and it is totally unfunded. Kick starting the implementation of Bunyoro Integrated Affirmative Development Plan requires Shs 10 billion, which is also totally unfunded.

The committee further notes that the unfunded and underfunded programmes, notwithstanding the proposed allocations to Affirmative Action programme is inadequate to cause any tangible change in the livelihood of the intended beneficiaries. A case in point is the greater Bunyoro being allocated Shs 10 billion to cater for six districts with only Shs 0.8 billion as interventions from Government of Uganda and Teso Affairs with only Shs 1.4 billion.

The committee recommends that allocations to the affirmative action programmes be enhanced, to expedite envisaged achievements in the identified areas. The committee further recommends that Office of the Prime Minister develops comprehensive plans to have these affirmative action plans implemented.

Disproportionate Budget Allocations

The committee observes that allocations of recurrent budget for investment servicing in comparison with development budget did not reflect intent for development. For example, implementation of activities for Luwero-Rwenzori has a recurrent budget of Shs 33.41 billion to oversee the implementation of development activities valued at Shs 2.57 billion. This makes the recurrent budget for the Luwero-Rwenzori project to be thirteen times bigger than allocation to the development activities.

The committee is of the strong view that such project designs are the major reasons as to why interventions in affirmative action programmes have not delivered to the expectations of Ugandans.

The committee recommends that Parliament interests itself in this matter and puts a cap on the recurrent activities with the development projects using a scientific method and in any case, not to exceed 30 per cent of the project value.

Mandate of Office of the Prime Minister

The committee notes that the mandate of Office of the Prime Minister as enshrined in Article 108A of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is ambiguous. It bestows on the Office of the Prime Minister the mandate to coordinate, implement, monitor, as well as evaluate Government programmes.

The committee observes that these are conflicting roles and defeat the intention of what was envisaged in the minds of the framers of the Constitution to execute the mandate of coordination. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Office of the Prime Minister is embroiled in cases of fraud and financial embezzlement; the Kazinda case, is an example. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament interests itself in the matter and proposes amendments to Article 108 to delete the word “and” between “coordination and implementation” and replace it with the word “of.” This will confine the mandate of the Office of the Prime Minister to the coordination role and let the ministries under OPM operate independently like it is the case with other ministries.

Resettlement of Internally Displaced Persons Project

The committee noted that Parliament during its Sitting in 2016 passed an appropriation Bill which, among others, reallocated Shs 8 billion meant for the acquisition of land and resettlement of landslide survivors and over 100,000 people at risk of landslide in the Elgon sub-region. 

The committee has learnt that this decision was based on the misconception that the funds were for a one off item for land acquisition by Government. The committee observed that the Cabinet’s resolution that established this project envisaged continuity to enable resettlement of IDPs in the entire country within the medium-term.

The committee further observed that the budget cut has curtailed the planned activities of the financial year 2016/2017 in form of resettling 600 households of landslide victims. 

The committee strongly recommends that Shs 8 billion be provided to the Office of the Prime Minister to settle the victims. 

Resettlement of the Benet/Ndorobo

The committee noted that resettlement of the Benet/Ndorobo, Bugisu landslide survivors and other IDPs in the country remain an unfunded activity with a requirement of Shs 35 billion. 

The committee interested itself in the Benet/Ndorobo matter and was informed that the resettlement challenge of the Benet/Ndorobo stems from the 1983 land allocation programme where Government provided 15,000 acres of Mt Elgon National Park for resettlement of the people, but many missed out.

The committee is constrained to recommend for the purchase of land or degazette 3,000 hectares of Mt. Elgon National Park to resettle 1,500 Benet/Ndorobo households.

The committee recommends that Government repossesses and redistributes the 318 hectares from Kapsekek temporary camp, 201 hectares from Kisito temporary camp and 2,500 hectares encroachment of Mt. Elgon National Park.

Refugees Policy in Uganda

The Committee noted that the policy on refugees in Uganda is lacking. It recommends that the Executive expedites the process of having this policy in place.

Parish Co-operative Association


The committee observes that the current provision of Shs 0.9 billion to cover 30 parishes against their requirement of Shs 5 billion is too inadequate to realise the envisaged objectives. It recommends that the funds be provided to enable effective implementation of the Parish Co-operative Association.

The committee recommends that Shs 1.5 billion be identified by the committee to be reallocated to Vote 003. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee is of a strong considered view that whereas MDAs portray underfunding as a main constraint to effective service delivery, service delivery in the country is not commensurate with the resource so far expended. This, therefore, calls for strong monitoring to ensure that Government resources expended lead to achievement of envisaged objectives. 

The security of this country cannot be envisaged as it is key for the development of our country. The committee scrutinised the relevant policy statements comprehensively and made critical recommendations. 

The committee has also proposed a reallocation of Shs 13.76 billion from Vote 122 to Vote 001 to fund activities considered critical for the development of this country.

I now move that the committee’s observations and recommendations be considered based on each of the votes.

Vote 001 – Office of the President
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 146,045,746,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 3,566,904,000

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, is it Shs 149,045,746,000 or Shs 146,045,746,000?

MS ABABIKU: It is Shs 146,000,000,000. 

Vote 002: State House 
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 259,181,342,220
Development Expenditure – Shs 12,338,411,302

Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 62,531,325,328
Development Expenditure – Shs 415,426,486,661

Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission 
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 7,731,091,511
Development Expenditure – Shs 127,809,000

Vote 112: Ethics and Integrity 
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 4,726,173,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 210,597,000

Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 194,891,457,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 239,123,362,000

Vote 159: External Security Organisation (ESO)
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 38,649,856,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 392,000,000

Madam Speaker, I would also wish to lay a document which reflects the details of the roads that are going to be worked on in Kampala so that any other person can access them for his or her monitoring. I beg to lay. 

With this, Madam Speaker, I now request that the House receives our report and makes its own decision as it is embedded in the law. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Presidential Affairs. The report has been signed by the minimum number of members of the committee. So, Members are free to debate. 

6.49
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the good job the committee did. I think it is a very thorough scrutiny. 

Madam Speaker, first of all, I find it very hard that KCCA can have Pay As You Earn (PAYE) arrears of over Shs 9 billion. That is a big waste because PAYE is deducted right from the source. As soon as you pay salaries, PAYE goes. So, I think we cannot allow this kind of wastage in this country where the locals are in dire need of drugs, good roads, bridges and so on.

Still on KCCA, the tendency of the Executive Director refusing to come to the committee for accountability beats my understanding. The other time, I saw a whole army chief of this country appearing before the committee, but you find the ED of KCCA is not here. They are busy flying first class every day but they do not want to attend to Parliament. They cannot bypass Parliament.

Secondly, on the issue of ESO being given about Shs 38.6 billion, some of these operations - we know that when it comes to scrutinizing their expenditures, they tell us that this is highly classified expenditure.

However, when the chairperson was reading the involvement, procurement plans that ESO has, it looks like there is a little bit of inflation; they have inflated a little bit of the overhead cost. In the previous Budget, ESO received Shs 26 billion; this disparity between Shs 26 and Shs 38.6 billion; there is a lot of questions here that we need the committee to help us understand. If that is clarified, then I have nothing to do but to say thank you very much.

6.51
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I want to thank the committee for their report. I stand here to talk about the issue of resettlement of the people of Benet, Ndorobo of Sebei sub region and the greater percentage is in the district of Kween, which I represent in this Parliament.

I am perturbed by the information that the committee received from the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and then their recommendation. From the time this Parliament started, you have been hearing me asking the question of resettlement all the time. We have had several engagements and what disturbs me is that we have had engagements with OPM with the leadership of Sebei sub region and we have all the time come up with recommendations and resolutions which have never been implemented. I am wondering why they are stuck to this that they presented to the committee.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that during the Ninth Parliament, we came with a petition to this House and you sent our Committee on Presidential Affairs to the region. We interacted with them and they wrote their report. We have never had even an opportunity for the presentation of that report.

However, I was at least privileged to ask them and I know the findings that they got and their recommendations. If I may give a brief on what exactly happened, honourable members; these people, the Ndorobo are indigenous people of Mt Elgon. When Government took up Mt Elgon and it was upgraded to a national park, these people were evicted from the national park and the Government resettled them in 1983.

They were supposed to receive 6,000 hectares and that time there were no equipment for measuring specifically how many acres they would give. They used the natural resources like valleys, big trees, and now when it came to 1993, when the law came up; Government went to measure the 6,000 hectares. When they measured, it was realised that these people had been given land up to 2,500 hectares that they are now talking about.

Therefore, briefly, I would like to say we do not have encroachers because even the 2,500 hectares that is reported here, these people have certificates of allocation. They were allocated that land and it was not their mistake that they settled there. It was that there was no equipment for measuring. That report is here and the minister the other time –(Member timed out.)

6.55
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern is about the affirmative action programme. Whereas the committee has talked about Luweero, Rwenzori, Teso, Bunyoro, I have not heard them saying anything about Karamoja. What is the allocation for Karamoja and why haven’t you talked about it and yet we are under Office of the Prime Minister?

Madam Speaker, on resettlement of IDPs projects which was meant to resettle 600 households; these people of Bududa, never chose to leave their homes. They had their homes and they were fending for their families. It was a disaster and natural calamity. 

Therefore, when Government tells us that the Shs 8 billion is not there and they even call it an unfunded priority; this is not good for our people. They have been praising Uganda for being hospitable to refugees; now these are our own people. Something should be done for the people of Bududa and even to the Ndorobo.  This should go alongside with provision of social services like schools, water, health facilities and so on. 

Finally, the committee talked about money for registration of boda-boda which was Shs 800 million. However, they said because police was already doing it, they gave them only Shs 200 million and the committee never mentioned where they took the Shs 600 million. This causes a temptation for mismanagement of funds. 

The committee should have told us where the Shs 600 million has been allocated to. There was also another activity immediately following that. You need to tell us where you took the balance. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.58
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at the report presented to us by the committee and it tries to make the presidency and State House a jack of all trades and master of none. I have observed here that the President is supposed to be involved in creating model villages, skilling girls and managing HIV related programmes. I think we are over stretching the Presidency.

I have been wondering what a model village looks like. In my village, I could have a grass thatched house with some few plants and yet in some other places a model looks different. Therefore, why should we be involved in things that do not have blue prints? 

Probably, the chairperson will clarify to us what this looks like. In my view, the Shs 4 billion for model villages should be put somewhere else. We have street children on the streets of Kampala that need our urgent attention and that is the money they needed to be helped.

There is Shs 1 billion for HIV; nowhere in the health sector strategic plan do we find that the President is supposed to be managing HIV related activities. Why are we allocating Shs 1 billion for this? This money can be sent to the Ministry of Health to support it.
	
I have also seen that we want to do affirmative action in Bunyoro, Teso; am also aware that some districts in Bunyoro and Teso have been beneficiaries of NUSAF; I want to understand the scope of this affirmative action and whether it will cover the whole of Northern Uganda. I want to know the coverage so that there is equitable distribution of resources.

Kampala City Council Authority is supposed to be recruiting and registering boda bodas. I am wondering why we have only budgeted for KCCA and yet there are boda bodas everywhere in the country. Because of the high unemployment levels, we have sort of formalised that business and that is what a number of youth are relying on. Why are we only bothered with boda bodas here? Why not in my district? Why not in Arua and other places where we must create a national database of motorcyclists? We need to review that.

Finally, the committee wants us to pass Shs 17 billion for purchasing motor vehicles for Resident District Commissioners. However, when I went to my district, a few days ago, I saw the Resident District Commissioner drive a new double cabin. So, I think this is a waste. If the committee can give us - (Member timed out.)

7.01
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Ababiku and her committee members for a very good job and especially for identifying wanting areas in KCCA. Thank you so much because you have helped the House to identify where there is free money to be re-allocated especially this Shs 120 billion, which must find its way into the Ministry of Works because KCCA has no business with the railways.

The Shs 500 million, which is meant for teachers’ SACCO – we have money that usually goes every year to the teachers union called UNATU and it is being used for that purpose. So, why must we allocate it to KCCA again as a special case? Otherwise, I shall suggest that all our districts also receive specific budgets for teachers’ SACCOs.

Madam Speaker, I have seen the areas that they identified loopholes and money to be re-allocated but only that the committee did not propose where some of it should go. Looking at the estimates, with the workload of the different votes, I feel the Office of the Prime Minister was not given enough money yet it has got a lot more activities; it covers a wider area. 

Therefore, I suggest that this money, which lies idle in KCCA, which we must find where to put - the Shs 600 million plus the Shs 9 billion that you wanted to find where to re-allocate it, should be taken to the Office of the Prime Minister.

The justification is that when you look at the allocation to the development expenditure, you realise that OPM has only Shs 62 billion. When you compare that amount to what KCCA alone has with over Shs 200 billion for development, it is just not fair.

In the Office of the Prime Minister, there are a number of issues to handle - refugees and disaster preparedness, Northern Uganda, Teso affairs - all these areas require money. 

Finally, I am so perturbed to hear that KCCA gets involved in electing the leaders in markets. If we encourage this as a Parliament by allocating money for market leadership elections then we will request that monies be provided to all districts for market elections –(Member timed out.)

7.05
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to the issue of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). In most areas whenever RDCs make mistakes, such mistakes are attributed to the President yet he will not have been responsible for such mistakes. 

The Commission on Land Inquiry that has been moving around the country found out that some RDCs are among the land grabbers. People in the districts cannot differentiate between President Museveni and the RDCs.

My view is that it would be better for these RDCs to be detached from the President’s office because they taint his image wrongly. In the circumstances, it would be fair that Parliament looks at other alternatives to house the RDCs other than the Office of the President because he is a fountain of honour.

Secondly, the committee recommended that State House should interest itself in the Operation Wealth Creation issues and its funding because it realised that it has not achieved its targets.

However, Madam Speaker, the challenges with Operation Wealth Creation - even Gen. Saleh has mentioned before – is that it is not doing well. The President as well mentioned it last month that the RDCs are not helping him to monitor Government programmes.

Therefore, I would like to propose - Operation Wealth Creation is a technical issue because one has to be a professional to be able to deliver effectively - it would be fair that we take this particular docket to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we know that professionals are handling it other than the soldiers who do not know what it takes to handle a farm, seeds and/or animals.

Finally, on the issue of disasters, I think the minister of Finance should explain to this House why the Contingency Fund was reduced from Shs 78 billion and re-allocated to free zones the tune of Shs 8.5 billion and Shs 754 billion to the National Population Council.

Madam Speaker, in your guidance, while we enacted the Public Finance Management Act, it was agreed by this Parliament that this Contingency Fund would help to address the issue of disasters - (Member timed out.)

7.09
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of solid waste management in Kampala cannot be solved by reallocation of funds meant to cater for it. The management of KCCA must be compelled to stop subjecting the people of Kampala to paying private contractors for garbage collection because it is illegal and not in line with any law.

The concessions that KCCA entered into with these private garbage collectors can only allow them to operate in particular areas of Kampala such that individuals who would like to contract them can do it legally.

There are people of Kampala who may not wish to have private companies collect garbage from their homesteads to the skips; those cannot be compelled to pay. However, what is happening now is that the contractors with licences to operate in particular areas are compelling whoever is residing or operating in such areas to the extent of chaining some of them, accusing them of non-payment for garbage collection, which is illegal and it is what we can condemn. We cannot say that we reallocate this money and leave the people of Kampala at the mercy of these private garbage collectors. 

The Local Government’s Rating Act, which is applicable here, calls for the establishment of a Property Tax Fund and it must only be from this fund that money to cater for garbage collection is withdrawn. However, as of now, the people of Kampala are already subjected to the property tax from, which this fund must be. Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) does not use this money. Instead it subjects the very taxpayers to double payments by having contractors who have not sat with the people they are to provide the services to. Somebody sits somewhere and says so and so is your contractor. This must only be like a school; if you get a licence to operate a school in a particular area, you cannot compel everybody including those who have not brought their children to pay school fees. 

Therefore, this money must not be reallocated. Instead KCCA must be compelled not to subject taxpayers to any other double payments, as far as solid waste management is concerned. Taxpayers in Kampala, like I said, are so chained yet heaps of garbage are going unattended to. This is because KCCA has abdicated its duty of collecting garbage from the skips including those who can collect theirs from wherever and take it to these skips - it only remains there –(Member timed out.)

7.13
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add something to the critical issue raised by my brother, hon. Moses Kasibante, on solid waste management. We all know that Kampala, with a minimum population of 1.5 million, generates about 750,000 kilogrammes of garbage per day. We indeed welcome KCCA as well as the private investors to collect the garbage and dump it where it is supposed to be. 

However, when I was the Magistrate Grade I in charge of Kampala Capital City Authority, I discovered a lot of dirt taking place in our city. I would like to start with the solid waste management. These are not companies owned by third parties. Most of these companies are owned by the very officers of KCCA. That is why they are given unlimited liberty to operate anywhere in Kampala forcefully and they do so against the wishes of those who generate the solid waste. 

Secondly, there is no mechanism of supervising these service providers because the so-called people vested with the powers to supervise them have peculiar interest in the whole arrangement. We need to investigate this as Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to the endless and unwarranted civil litigation against KCCA. This is also premeditated; it is just a creature of their own making. I have serious cases and petitions I am also supposed to bring and file before this August House where law enforcement officers from Rubaga Division are on a frolic of demolishing structures where they need land. I have these serious concerns. 

When one complains to the KCCA Directorate of Physical Planning, they are sent back to the division. When such people get to the division, they are sent to KCCA legal department, where the Director of Legal Services in KCCA usually tells them that he is not aware of such issues. You can see what the enforcement officers do; they go ahead and even impound people’s property in that process, you cannot find, after a spell of time, where they have placed these items. 

Madam Speaker, there are so many thieving activities taking place in KCCA and indeed we thought – the reason why some of us left the public service is because we found areas where there was no human faces. I will give you an example; when I was the in charge at City Hall Court, I met an arrangement between judicial officers and KCCA law enforcement officers whereby they could impound or demolish people’s property and at the end of it all, they share the loot after remanding these people to Luzira Prison for several months. When I resisted this, it caused me a transfer. The management even tried to block my promotion as an acting Chief Magistrate at Buganda Road; these are real matters that we need to investigate. 

And for my colleagues in charge of the political leadership of Kampala, you need to place serious and keen eyes on the operations and activities of KCCA. That is my submission.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Abala comes, I want to give a testimony - I live in Makindye Division where we have a garbage collection company, which has been working with us for some years. One day, KCCA wrote to say that we should now deal with so and so. I told them, “I have no business with that company; I am staying with the old company.” They wrote; you can imagine.

7.19
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very good and important report but before I begin submitting, I would like to read some verse from the Bible. 

Proverbs 31:9 states: “Open thy mouth, judge righteously; plead the cause of the poor and needy people.” That is what the Bible says. 

Madam Speaker, when you read the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - see the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy especially, I want us to interest ourselves in Part XII (ii) and (iii), which state thus: 

“The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.” 

(iii) States thus: 
“The state shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.”

Madam speaker, after reading this report, you find that the Government of Uganda did a very good job by creating ministries, one of them being that for Teso Affairs. Unfortunately, it is only Shs 1.4 billion being allocated to it yet its mandate is to make sure it initiates projects that help us in fighting poverty in that region. Remember, Teso poverty is at 41 per cent - second highest in the country - and that creates a lot of concerns. In Bunyoro it is only Shs 10 billion and our neighbours in Luweero have been allocated only Shs 33 billion. If you looked at this - that is why the Bible says that, “Open thy mouth, judge rightly and plead for the poor.” The basic principle in terms of the state policies and principles, has not been respected. This is where I am concerned as a Member of Parliament. I come from Teso and Madam Speaker, this is something very disturbing to me. 

We are talking about allocating money for the election of leaders for boda-boda riders. I used to be a boda-boda rider. What I know is that boda-boda riders can sit down and decide who the chairperson, the secretary and so on, will be, without any money. For us to go to these specifics, we are even going to pay people who are going to help themselves in pit latrines.
My view is that we should not even approve this money - (Member timed out.)

7.22
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda County South, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the good report presented. My opinion is not far from that of my colleague, hon. Abala. As an MP from Bunyoro, where we have that so-called Ministry of Bunyoro Affairs –(Interjections)– yes, because colleagues, Bunyoro Integrated Affirmative Action, which takes seven districts - and we have that ministry in charge - has a budget, as the chairperson has put it - of only Shs 800 million and it is intended – Members can see the dilemma we have.

I wonder - and I wanted to correct the chairperson - she said that they had requested for Shs 10 billion but that instead they have allocated Shs 800 million, which is just pocket money as you can put it. I wonder if these ministries are intended for affirmative action really and if not they should be scrapped off because they do not add up; it is total mockery.

Honourable members, I stand here to show our disappointment as a people of Bunyoro that that affirmative action does not exist, it is just in name. There is no development activity that we can achieve with Shs 800 million; that is mockery.

Madam Speaker, the recommendation I would make is that if they cannot allocate more money to that ministry, it should just be scrapped off because we do not achieve by hearing Bunyoro Affairs Ministry yet we cannot even have a construction of a school.

Madam Speaker, I also want to add my voice on the issue of RDCs - I support that one. It is so amazing that an RDC, who is the eye of the President and central Government, goes begging for office space in a local government facility. These people are harshly treated, and compromised. At one time, the office of my colleague was closed because there was an opposition district chairperson - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us try to share the opportunities. Those who contributed on the other reports can allow the others to do so, on this one.

7.26
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me go to the sector of ethics and integrity. These people are not doing their full mandate of fighting corruption and the consequences of moral decadence. Corruption is still the order of the day in our country.

Concerning moral decadence, our girls most especially in urban centres, during evening hours, end up on the streets and we all know what they do on those streets - indecent dressing yet there is no comment on that. I suggest that we sensitize the girls in the urban centres who go to the streets at night through formation of associations. In addition, we can maybe skill them so that at the end of the day, we can have success stories from some of them.

The other issue is pornography on television stations. Most of our kids these days when they are watching some of these things they say, “Do not watch because mummy is coming.” I do not know why they are allocating this Shs 4.7 billion - I do not know what it does in that office because the results are not visible. For example, look at the indecent dressing of our girls and boys in institutions of learning and at the end of the day, we say there is sexual harassment. At times these people entice the lecturers. I beg to submit.

7.28
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. I am concerned about the impact of affirmative programmes, which are implemented through the Office of the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, since the 1990s, Government of Uganda has spent colossal sums of money on affirmative programmes through the Office of the Prime Minister yet on the ground, there is nothing to show. The very areas where Government has been spending a lot of money are the very areas that have the highest poverty levels. 

We have had programmes like PAPSCA and NUSAF, which has been running - it is now in its fourth stage, we have had PRDP, Luweero - when you look at the budget for the Office of the Prime Minister, it will appear like they are doing something on the ground. It shows you Shs 415 billion going to be spent on development programmes out of the 478 billion. It is true most of this expenditure goes into these affirmative actions. However, when you go to these areas, the poverty levels are instead on the rise. What happens? Why is it so?

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time, as a country, we reviewed these affirmative programmes. Are they helping anybody? In the first case, what we call development programmes are actually consumptive expenditures. Look at the Luweero Triangle Programme, for example. There is no development programme under that initiative. All that we have there are just consumptive expenditures - allowances, people go for meetings, trainings and that is where we are spending this Shs 400 billion.

Madam Speaker, when you look at other regions of Uganda - look at Busoga for instance, even Bukedi, I would say so - conditions in Busoga are the same as those in Teso because they are just divided by a lake. However, there has never been any programme in Busoga. For instance, we have got all these programmes I have mentioned in Northern Uganda, in Teso where my brother, hon. David Abala come from and has been complaining about –(Member timed out.)  

7.31
MR RWEMULIKYA IBANDA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the wonderful report. My concern is on this Luweero-Rwenzori Programme. I come from Rwenzori Region but you would find that this programme is not getting to all the districts because of underfunding. You find that programmes that are geared towards development are not realised. In Ntoroko District, we have not yet got any assistance from the docket of the Luweero-Rwenzori Development Programme. Therefore, I would like to pray that Shs 10 billion be got and given to this programme so that we all benefit because we are not benefiting anything.

I have another issue on Presidential pledges. The President has been making many pledges in this country, not only in Ntoroko but the entire country. We are being pushed by our voters because when the President says I am going to do this, our voters keep demanding. Sometimes, they shift the blame to us that we are not following. However, in the report, I have not seen guidance. How can we really realise these pledges made by the President in our different constituencies? 

The last is on garbage collection in Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). This one is becoming so terrible. Personally, they bring receipts and I am paying Shs 40,000 per month. Furthermore, KCCA allocates money for solid waste collection but they are not doing their work. You go around Kampala; you will see a lot of heaps of waste without being collected. We pray that KCCA should be compelled to collect waste garbage and do their work without fights and people should not be subjected to double taxation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.34
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to thank the chairperson and committee members, for the good report you have represented ably. I only have some two issues that may require clarification:

One is on the poverty alleviation initiatives, called the model villages. We have been told that we so far have 21 model villages and there is a funding gap of Shs 4 billion to roll the programme across the country. However, I am concerned that as the chairperson of the committee has rightly put it, there is no comprehensive work plan to this implementation. If we are to cover this funding gap of Shs 4 billion, to what extent is this programme going to be rolled out? Is it going to each district or sub county? I think we need some clarification on this.

Secondly, is the issue of affirmative action; I come from Kamwenge District, which falls within the Luweero-Rwenzori Affirmative Action Plan. However, like my colleague has rightly put it, in Kamwenge, I have not seen any development programme initiated under the Luweero-Rwenzori Programme.

I realise that we have Shs 10 billion funding gap, which I would support but I realised that of the total monies budgeted for this programme, the recurrent expenditure is 13 times higher than the development budget. So, I am wondering - and maybe the minster could come out to explain to us - why we would have a budget where more than 13 times of the money we anticipate to spend on development programme, is going to be spent as recurrent expenditure? I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

7.36
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join others in thanking the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the good report presented. 

Madam Speaker, I have an appeal to you. Recently, you were in Pakwach District - I read it in the newspapers - on the funds for the boda-bodas - the President has been giving out money to boda-bodas, the youths in urban areas, especially here in Kampala and under the Presidential Initiative on skilling the younger people - the President has a big group in Wandegeya but all these are in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, my appeal to you and the President is that he is the father of the nation and we are all his children. If it is Parliament that gives out this money, we want this money to be spread to other areas. (Applause)

Another issue is about the RDCs. I come from Kigezi, which is Kisoro and I find it as one of the hard-to-stay areas. Our RDCs office is not facilitated. As I talk, they have a car which has spent over 12 years. Recently, they used my car when they had an operation. We had a border attack and they had to borrow my car when I was in Kisoro. I would like to suggest that RDCs in these hard-to-stay areas to be given priority when it comes to facilitation.

In addition, in Kigezi while all people belong to some groups like Karamoja Sub Region, Teso Region, Bunyoro Region, Northern Uganda and Luweero-Rwezori, for us, it is like we have nowhere we fall when it comes to development programmes and social infrastructure; it becomes hard. I was talking to the Minister in charge of Luweero and he said that hon. Rose Kabagyenyi, you are not in my region. That means even if, I were to help you, it is hard. 

Therefore, we would also like to know where we lie. If we are not Ugandans, maybe we are from Congo; we would like to know where we lie? I think that is all, I had to say, Madam Speaker and I thank you, for the opportunity.

7.39
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the Chairperson of the committee for the good report presented. I happen to belong to the Luweero-Rwenzori region. When you look at the development budget of Shs 2.7 billion, it is supposed to cover 37 districts that make Luweero-Rwenzori. That money is too small for the people of Luweero-Rwenzori as far as development is concerned. I would like to pray that the recommendation by the committee is accepted by Parliament. 

On skilling, I would also like to propose that let the programme rollout to the rural districts. We also have girls in our districts who would wish to benefit from that skilling programme.

Lastly, I want to talk about the budget for Internal Security Organisation and External Security Organisation. I was looking at their wage and there is no salary enhancement yet they are part of the security. It was agreed by Cabinet that the salaries of the security personnel had to be increased in one way or another. However, you realised that, it is not provided for. They do not have motorcycles, cars or any other form of transport. They lack accommodation. We have District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) in our areas that lack mobility yet intelligence is the base of security of our country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pray – (Interruption)

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you so much, honourable, for giving me way. We have a very big funding gap in Internal Security Office, External Security Office and the Resident District Commission (RDC) offices. We should not wonder why there has been insecurity in this country. Without them being funded, that means they are compromised. 

If you hear a Member of Parliament being waited for so that their cars can go and operate, what happens if the Member of Parliament does not come?

Why would a crime preventer, without any experience, be given a motorcycle yet a full DISO has nothing? How do you expect this country to be secure without any foundation of security? (Applause) Thank you for giving me way. 

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My prayer would be for this august House to consider the recommendations of the committee regarding the ISO budget. Thank you so much.

7.43
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for a report well done. I have issues with the Prime Minister’s Office in relation to the definition of refugee hosting districts.

I would like to introduce another understanding to the whole thing. We must also have considerations for districts that are affected by refugees. We must have all these attended to because although refugees are staying in one district, the neighbouring districts are also affected by the presence of refugees in the neighbourhood.  For example, my district has no forest coverage. The trees that we had in my district have all been cut. We share water with the refugee community, our roads are used by the refugees and our food is shared with the refugees. 

However, when it comes to benefits of the refugee presence in the region, we are not beneficiaries; Maracha District is not benefitting. Therefore, I would like to have this concept redefined; there must be attention to the refugee affected districts as well. 

Another issue is about KCCA. I would like to submit that KCCA is not managing waste collection properly. Waste should be sorted. All the waste that is collected is dumped into containers. Some of it would have been very useful for making things like briquettes, which would solve our fuel problem. We are relying on trees. We are cutting our trees. We are degrading our environment yet we could have other sources - like making briquettes from this waste. 

The behaviour of Ugandans should be controlled, more especially those who live in the urban areas. People mismanage waste. They litter “kaveeras” and they are uncontrollable and moreover it is not a crime here in Uganda to scatter waste everywhere. When you consider other countries like Rwanda, it is an offense to throw rubbish everywhere. Therefore, we should take that and ensure that we have control over littering waste everywhere.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of the ISO budget. I would like to agree with colleagues that the money which is allocated to ISO is insufficient. For example, my DISO has no vehicle. The GISOs are not facilitated and this needs to be seriously considered.  

The budget for ethics and integrity, which is only Shs 4.7 billion, is insufficient. I think there is need to increase this budget from the allocation to the KCCA. Those were the issues I had to raise. Thank you for the opportunity.

7.49
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I bring you greetings from Rwampara. I would like to raise an issue of KCCA. Kampala is our capital city as a country. I live 10 kilometres from here but I am not in Kampala. 

Therefore, the planning for our city is a very big issue that must be addressed. Sometime back, I was reading a story in the press about the metropolitan area. As Parliament, how do we look at a tiny dirty city - we are not planning for a bigger area to accommodate our city - I do not mind about the boundaries of the district but the status of the district gives them very little money that where we live in Wakiso and Mpigi, areas which surround Kampala do not have any resources and we are just here crowded in a small area called Kampala. 

Therefore, my concern to this Parliament is: how can we increase the planning for our urban areas especially the greater metropolitan area of the Republic of Uganda? We are the Members of Parliament who travel all over the world. We travel through good cities; huge cities of 80 kilometres. However, when we come here, we just sit down and can’t do anything. This is a city with garbage, flies, no transport; it is a challenge to us as legislators of this country; we should look at that very seriously.

My second point is that I have looked at these programmes run under the Office of the President – look at the skilling programme, the model villages and others. These programmes come up when the president goes out to the different areas and gets their needs but they are competing with similar programmes in Government. When you go to a model village, what they do is production and value addition but when the President comes, that project raises its profile and it outshines the other programmes. 

We have a skilling programme in the Ministry of Education and Sports. When the President started the skilling programme in his office, this one is now forgotten. We need a policy direction to see how the two are linked. Either the Office of the President gives out equipment for trained young girls under the skilling program in the ministry of education –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving me way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving is that it is not only in that programme of skilling. Recently, we passed the report for the Ministry of Local Government in which there was a programme on Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF). But this same programme is appearing in the report of this committee. It seems many programmes are appearing in different ministries and I think this is where the civil servants get money to eat. Because if this programme of NUSAF is under the Office of the Prime Minister and again we find it in local governments, how will they handle the same issues in the same areas? They will end up eating this money. Maybe local governments will find when OPM has done something and they will get a way of eating this money. At the end of the day, we are losing and crying that we have no money for SAGE to roll out when money is being eaten and eaten in big numbers. Thank you.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you for the – (Member timed out.)

7.51
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this elaborate report. My comment is on the facilitation for RDCs. 

These officers undertake enormous tasks like security, land matters, presiding over functions and others. In undertaking these tasks, they need to be motivated and one way of motivating them is to enhance their facilitation. Therefore, I suggest that the ministry reallocates the money that has been identified to support and enhance facilitation to RDCs.

Madam Speaker, my second concern is on the poverty alleviation initiatives in the name of model villages. I overheard my colleague asking: “What are these model villages?” I would like to testify that as Karamoja, we have three model villages and that means we are beneficiaries. There is one model village in Moroto Municipality, one in Adunget, Matheniko County and the other is in Nakapiripirit. These villages have changed the faces of these areas because the one in Moroto Municipality was once a slum but this has improved the livelihood of the people in that area.

However, I would say that the 21 model villages that have been mentioned here are only a drop in the ocean. Therefore, I request that more funds be identified and provided so that more model villages are created in the different parts of this country.

Madam Speaker, my final comment is on the garbage collection that is contracted to service providers by KCCA. A lot has been said about garbage collection but my concern is on the charges. The charges, according to committee’s observation, range from Shs 3,000 to Shs 30,000. However, the service providers charge people exorbitantly to the tune of more than Shs 50,000. Of course those who can afford can pay these fees but the urban poor cannot and these are the people who dump solid waste everywhere and the place becomes very filthy. Thank you.

7.53
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the committee for their report. My issue is that an RDC is the representative of the President in that particular district; I will talk about Apac District. My RDC’s accommodation, which is Government housing, is in a very sorry state. The windows are there without glasses and some do not have doors, let alone outside toilets. The outside toilet has no doors and that is an embarrassment to the users and Government.

Madam Speaker, I support the recommendation of the committee that money be provided for RDCs’ transport. For example, my RDC has no means of transport and she has to keep borrowing from other agencies such as the police and NGOs within the district and that makes her work very difficult.

Madam Speaker, I support the report of the committee and thank you.

7.54
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for a job well done.

Madam Speaker, a country without intelligence or weak intelligence agencies is as good as blind. We cannot afford to continue with limping intelligence agencies. We need them and they have worked in difficult conditions. We should enhance the budget, particularly on developing their capacity because intelligence collection and processing is an expensive venture and so they need the money. 

In actual fact, relying on defence attachés’ – defence attachés’ and intelligence officers have different roles altogether. When their mandates clash and you expect one to bring you intelligence, he will not bring you what you want.

Therefore, it is important that we enhance the budget for these agencies because our roles in the international community, as you are aware, have grown and as when you grow, much more is expected from us. We must have effective eyes and ears out there and even internally.

Madam Speaker, on the question of model villages, I remember there was a programme of picking the best farmers in every parish but it never took off. I just hope the model village programme will be different. 

On Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), I think most of us have seen that the seeds that have been given either come late or they fail to germinate. I need to inform this House that OWC officers have faced the same problem. The supply is done by another agency; they are only distributors. While the failure is attributed to them, the problem lies elsewhere. Therefore, we need to improve the entire chain so that OWC does not fail like NAADS. NAADS gave rise to OWC because there were issues. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.57
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, before I came to Parliament, we held a meeting in Jinja with the President. Senior leaders who were then in Parliament and Cabinet, including hon. Migereko, made a statement before the President that the special programme for Busoga is on the table of the Prime Minister and that in less than a year it would be rolled out in Busoga. It is now more than two years. 

I attentively listened to the report of the committee; I did not hear anything related to that programme. On several occasions, we have asked, but we have not got the answer. The Office of the Prime Minister is fully represented here. Can we know from the representatives when the special programme for Busoga will start? I have seen that this is the only way we can also develop. 

Madam Speaker, we heard that 40 tractors went to the other side. The other day, the youth in Busoga received Shs 200 million only and it became an issue in Uganda. When Shs 5 billion went to Rukungiri, it was business as usual. (Laughter) Therefore, the only way is for us to also demand for affirmative action for our region so that we can uphold our people.

The second issue is about the RDCs. In my area Kamuli, the easiest person I consult and get in touch with is the RDC because he is the head of security in the district. Before I even learnt what they call “cars” the first car I heard of was Santana 110 and I only saw it with the RDC in Kamuli. 

I see RDCs driving very old vehicles that are supposed to have been written off. Instead of lamenting, can we use our authority as Parliament and allocate money without even going here and there? Let us allocate money to the Office of the President so that they buy good cars for the RDCs so that they can represent the President decently. 

Lastly, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness is here near me. The other day disaster struck my area and people slept outside for months. I wrote a letter to the Office of the Prime Minister, requesting for support and to also receive iron sheets like others did but I did not receive the answer. Maybe the minister in charge of disaster preparedness –(Member timed out.)

8.00
MR KENNETH SOYEKWO (Independent, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I have concerns the resettlement of the Ndorobo or the people of the Benet in Kween and Sebei region at large. There is this recommendation that has been made by the committee that demands that Government repossesses and redistributes 318 hectares of land from Kapsekek Temporary Camp, 201 hectares from Kisito Temporary Camp and 2,500 hectares of land - I would like to submit that these areas are highly populated and if Government attempts anytime to repossess land from these people, where are they going to resettle this huge number of people? This is an area where we went to commission a school with you, one time Madam Speaker - Koseri Girls Secondary School. That area is highly populated. I know for sure that the moment we disturb these people, Government will be waging another war with them, which may not be very healthy for this country.

There are recommendations that have been made by several committees to look into the issue of resettlement of these people, including even the Rt hon. Prime Minster - we went there one time with him with a recommendation, which I know has been submitted. I do not know whether the committee got chance to go through those recommendations.

Two, there was a directive by the President at one time to resettle these people in a place called London, which I do not see in the report of the committee. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my prayer is that if we could expunge this recommendation and maybe form another committee to look into this matter, it would be good for these people. Thank you. 

8.02
MR MUBARAK MUNYAGWA (FDC, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for the work done. However, when you look at the report, the wage bill of KCCA is so huge.

Kampala City Council Authority is 33 per cent staffed according to the structure, which was approved. However, it consumes over Shs 54 billion in technical staff alone. In fact, they have 399 staff in total and some of them were headhunted; they were not recruited through the right procedures. There is a lot of waste in KCCA. The Executive Director earns over Shs 40 million a month in allowances. Her political assistant earns Shs 27 million; a lot of money is just being wasted in KCCA.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to solid waste management – there is a “ka-bar” that eats in solid waste. It is an organised theft and people are eating from this solid waste money. (Applause) Government gives them money but they go ahead to collect money from people yet they do not collect the garbage. A lot of garbage is not attended to and people end up throwing this garbage in the drainage. That is why whenever it rains in Kampala, it floods into the city. In Kawempe, it is becoming completely impossible to reside there when you do not know how to swim because you may – Madam Speaker, these endless litigations you are seeing against KCCA – the juristic basis of these ligations are highhandedness - KCCA enforcement is now a mercenary force and whoever wants to carry out an illegal eviction, he or she hires KCCA enforcement. 

There is also the issue of illegal taxation. That is why we shall always have endless litigations against KCCA.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) - I am a former mayor of the great division of Kawempe - money could be deducted from my pay-slip on a monthly basis to cater for PAYE and gratuity. When I finished my tenure of office as the mayor and demanded for my gratuity, the Executive Director told me that there was no money yet I contributed towards my gratuity; just broad day thuggery. (Laughter)

Lastly, is about the conduct of the Executive Director of KCCA. The committee has just – anyhow, she respects no politician. It was manifested in her letter, which she wrote on the 16 May 2018, where she lambasted politicians, describing them as people who never conducted any interviews, people who are not professionals and people who do not know what they are doing; she actually respects no politician.

Madam Speaker, I pray that a forensic audit be conducted in the management of solid waste in the city and the structure of KCCA be reviewed to make it cost effective and manageable by this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started the sitting, I said we should not go beyond 6.30 p.m. because I did not want to offend the Muslims but I have gone beyond what I had wanted because I thought the debate was important. Anyhow, since 25 Members have contributed, I think we could close here and the ministers – because they are many - can respond on Tuesday. We shall give the first 40 minutes to the ministers to respond on Tuesday afternoon at 2.00 p.m.

Honourable members, thank you very much for staying and working. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.07 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 



