

Thursday, 18 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I apologise for the delay. We have been consulting over many issues that have been handled this week. On Tuesday this week, we observed a moment of silence in honour of a very senior citizen, the hon. Boniface Byanyima, Member of the First Parliament.

Following Cabinet’s decision that hon. Byanyima be accorded an official burial, the body will be brought to Parliament tomorrow at 12.00 noon for the Members to pay their respects and then have a tribute. The public is also invited to be here at 12.00 noon. Please come and we pay tribute to a distinguished senior citizen.

The programme will run as follows: tomorrow, Friday, 12.00 - 2.00 p.m. he lies in state in the lobby. At 2.00 p.m. we will start the tribute and close probably by 4.00 - 5.00 p.m. On Saturday 20 May, there will be a funeral service at St Paul’s Cathedral Namirembe and at 4.00 p.m. on Saturday, the body will be flown to Ruti in Mbarara for an overnight vigil. On Sunday, 21 May 2017, there will be an ecumenical service at Ruti in Mbarara and burial will be on the same day. Please note that programme.

Honourable members, we are in the last lap of the last leg of the First Session. For the new Members, this means we are ending our first parliamentary year, which will be completed by adjourning sine die. This means we shall adjourn without assigning a date for further sitting of Parliament. We are now sitting for the end of year exams and we wait to move to the next one. In the meantime, we are being assessed by the electorate.

Parliament will then reconvene for the Second Session by way of summons and I will give notice to Members through the official Gazette. A new session of Parliament will commence with the State of the Nation Address. We have consulted and if nothing changes, the State of the Nation Address will be given on Tuesday, 6 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m. at the Serena Conference Centre.

I am also giving notice that on 8 June 2017, we shall go back to the same venue for the Budget Speech. Therefore, please note those two important days. The 6th and 8th are very important –(Interjections)– 6 June for the State of Nation Address and 8 June for the Budget. They are very close to each other so we have to stay in Kampala for that time. 

However, given that there is a lot of business before committees, which we have to consider, I am not yet able to give you a date for closure. It may be a difference of a day or two. Therefore, I call upon the Members to be available so that we do as much work as possible in order to report to the country what we have been doing. Otherwise, I wish you a pleasant sitting.

Honourable members, yesterday we discussed the question of the funds, which were appropriated for the project affected persons, which are in the Consolidated Fund. I will allow room for a resolution of this House to urge Government to immediately pay those people who have been waiting for five years for their compensation. Therefore, I will make that amendment so that we have that resolution. 

Thirdly, honourable members, on Tuesday, I had indicated that we will allow Members to move a motion on the issue of torture but I would like to dedicate Tuesday to discussing that subject. We will discuss the minister’s statement and the report of the Human Rights Committee and then have the motion. Therefore, the whole of Tuesday will be devoted for that subject so that we can close it and go to other work.

Therefore, I am just giving notice that Members should get ready for that business. I hope the minister will be ready with his statement. Thank you very much.

3.01
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I rise to make a statement of national importance based on the statement, which was made this week by the General Manager of the National Medical Stores (NMS) to the effect that for this last quarter of the financial year, there will not be any funds to supply drugs to our hospitals and health centres. This statement was made to the committee and it has been aired on television and radio. Therefore, I think that Members are aware of the statement made and the consequences and implications of that statement.

Madam Speaker, my concern is, if you recall on Tuesday, 16 May 2017, when we were discussing the justification for the approval of the loan that will finance the road, which will pass through my region, I mentioned one of the loans, which we approved and that loan is the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) loan of $200 million.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the objective of the $200 million loan, which this Parliament approved. That will make us ask questions why the National Medical Stores has a shortfall of Shs 68 billion or more when that shortfall should have been absorbed by that loan.

I would like to read the objectives because some of us may have forgotten: 

    1. To finance a shortfall in the domestic revenue projected at Shs 288 billion for the financial year 2015/2016;
    2. To substitute domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 280 billion;
    3. This is more important because that is where National Medical Stores falls - to finance the supplementary expenditure that was approved by Parliament that required additional financing amounting to Shs 156 billion.
4. 	To finance expenditure pressures resulting from the exchange rate depreciation experience during the financial year 2015/2016.

Madam Speaker, the objectives of this loan speak for themselves and if you care to look at the budget for FY 2017/2018, you will observe that the repayment of the PTA loan has already started and servicing that loan alone is taking 44 per cent of the external debt servicing obligations.

In other words, for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and this Government to start repayment of the PTA loan of $200 million, it means that the money has been disbursed and I believe that if it has been disbursed, the money has been disbursed to the targeted sector. 

Madam Speaker, I am more concerned, as somebody here by virtue of people’s trust. I do not want people to rise up as a crisis because we are seeing children dying because there are no anti-malarial drugs, there are no ARVs and then there will be protests all over. Parliament, as usual, will be boxed at the corner to explain why and then we become fire extinguishers. I think we have better work to do. 

My concern is to make Parliament aware that we should expect an explosion of a crisis where thousands upon thousands of Ugandans will die, especially children. This is because the general manager has made it clear that there is no supply of medicine in this last quarter because there is no money and the Budget Committee has already received requests for a supplementary budget for that particular department. 

Madam Speaker, this attempt is to save the image of the institution of Parliament. It is to prove to the people of Uganda that we are concerned about their plight and that Parliament is doing its job but somebody else is not doing their part and they want to blame Parliament for their failures. It is to show that Parliament is proactive; we do not have to wait for a crisis in order to take action. 

Therefore, I urge Parliament to take extra precautions and to follow-up all the approved loans and ensure that these loans have reached the targeted areas and sectors. It is important that we take interest; this is a clear example.

Secondly, I am urging this Parliament to pass a resolution asking the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to us what happened to this money and more so, I will be more comfortable if we ordered a forensic audit of the PTA loan. 

That will also mean that we may have to spread out even to other areas because I am now concerned about the PTA loan because that is where we were going to get money for medical supplies. Madam Speaker, you know that I have always been very passionate about Hepatitis B and I know that the people of Uganda are very happy with Dokolo because we are ahead in the way we have intervened on Hepatitis B.

I am so concerned that for the third vaccination, Dokolo and the entire country will not have the vaccines and testing kits. I would like this House to take a position on this matter but more so, to order a forensic audit of the disbursed funds and the utilisation of the PTA loan worth $200 million. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, for those who were in the Ninth Parliament, Dr Elioda Tumweisgye, the then Minister of Health was very persuasive on the need to pass this loan to get drugs for Hepatitis B and others. If there is still no money, I think that is a matter of great concern to all of us. 

We asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring an update on all the loans and he had said he would do it in two weeks, which are ending today. It seems we have scrutinised all these loans. There is a loan on the Hotel and Tourism Institute, which suddenly has come from $24 million to $7 million. We were told that it was because of fluctuations. Check with the Committee on Tourism; this is what they were told. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues and thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for raising that issue. 

It is true we came to this House and borrowed $ 200 million from the PTA Bank as a revolving loan and so far, we have been able to use $75 million out of the $200 million. We are aware of the shortfall of Shs 68 billion for NMS, which we are now processing.

We talked to the General Manager of NMS and the Minister of Health is here. We said that they could go ahead and start the procuring of drugs as we process the $15 million or so to clear that issue. We do apologise for the delay to sort it out. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the minister knows that if you are caught with blood on your hands, you confess your sin. The National Medical Stores came to the Budget Committee pleading for a supplementary. I have the file here. It was supposed to come from that loan, which loan has been disbursed.

Why are you now looking for money? The money should have automatically gone to the National Medical Stores because that was the purpose for which it was approved. Is he therefore in order to continue confusing us, thinking that we do not know? Is he in order to misinform this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my information is that, that money came in November, 2016 and this is May 2017.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, hon. Cecilia Ogwal is really hard on me and I beg that the House accepts to listen to this explanation. I know it is hard to believe but just listen to it. 

We borrowed $200 million from the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) Bank. We have so far received $75 million and we still have $125 million in the bank. This loan is not like any other loan where you borrow, for example Shs200 million and you receive it immediately.

However, that does not explain why we have not solved the issue of National Medical Stores (NMS); that is a different matter. It is not like you get Shs 200 million and the following day, you request for all of it. It was structured in such a way that we would be requesting as and when we have invoices, which are dollar dominated to pay and on 6 November, we requested for $30 million on the account of NMS. 

On 11 November, we received an extra $12 million on top of the above money. Therefore, we have received $42 million on the account of NMS. So far, we have received $75 million, we have $ 125 million and $ 125 million is part of other things that we are going to solve. NMS is just one of them. 

We apologise for delaying to solve the issue of NMS but that is the situation at hand and I cannot tell you less than the truth.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, the most interesting scenario here is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development got a very good substitute in his ministry who can come here to answer –(Interjections)– yes, I am saying my words and I am very careful. He has a very good deputy who comes here to convince us. 

Madam Speaker, I listened to the NMS Executive Director, Mr Moses Kamabaale and in his statement on radio, he said he cannot procure any more medicine in this financial year because even in the previous financial year, they borrowed and they have debts. He added that if there is no money, they will not procure medicine. 

If the Minister of State for Planning comes here and informs the House that this is the money they have got so far, why aren’t you giving NMS money to procure these drugs? This is because Mr Kamabaale has said you have not been giving them money, you have debts with them and that is why they cannot procure. They are now saying that this financial year, they will not procure at all because they are tired of remaining with debts. Therefore, what justification are you giving us by telling us what you have got when you cannot provide? Any budget of the country must cater for the people in terms of their health. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would like to know why money received in November 2016 has never reached National Medical Stores. The health sector was the main driver of that loan. Between November and now, why hasn’t it gone to NMS? We need an explanation.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the minister has made it clear that they are receiving this money in bits, as and when need arises. If that is the correct position, why are they now asking for a supplementary to fund the same activity when we know that we have the money?

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thought we have the Chairperson of the Budget Committee who has got all the details of this information. We passed a budget in May 2015 and it was then that National Medical Stores wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for money. In their budget they had Shs 110 billion where Shs 50 billion was for ACT and Shs 50 billion for ARVs. However, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had to write to National Medical Stores to use Shs 95 billion for ARVs, leaving only Shs 5 billion for ACTs. What was the plan of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

I am also questioning National Medical Stores. If they know that in their plan it is 50/50, why should they be instructed by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to use Shs 95 billion for ARVs and only Shs 5 billion for six or nine months down the road? I see something fishy here, Madam Speaker, that needs to be investigated. 

The National Medical Stores’ manager said and this House will agree with me that it is northern Uganda, which is so affected by malaria and you said health centres II, III and IV will not be supplied with any medicine for malaria. This is a great concern to the population who benefit from the lower health centres.

I would like the minister to come to this House and tell us clearly when they will release this money and what happened between Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and National Medical Stores? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would like to have an explanation in writing on Wednesday about that discrepancy. The health sector was the main driver of that loan and the minister spoke very strongly here for that money and the sector has not received it. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EXTERNALISATION OF LABOUR
     
3.21
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, this statement is made under rule 44 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I am informed that the Minister of State for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations tried twice to table this matter before Parliament but failed. As a senior minister, I take responsibility and apologise for the delay.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to brief you about the Externalisation of Labour Programme. You will recall that in a bid to manage the unemployment pressure and maximise the benefits of labour migration, Government initiated the Externalisation of Labour Programme in 2005. The programme is regulated by Statutory Instrument No. 62 of 2005, The Employment Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad Regulations, 2005, which is annex 1.

Madam Speaker, under the said regulations, workers may travel abroad for work through the following channels:

    1. Through licensed recruitment companies and the licensing requirements are attached as annex 2.
    2. Through individual initiative where a worker sources a job as an individual. 

Madam Speaker, to date, about 50,000 Ugandans have been deployed to 11 different countries through licensed companies under the Externalisation of Labour Programme.

The benefits of the programme include: 

    a) Estimated monthly remittances from migrant workers in the Middle East is about $6 million every month; 
    b) Improvement in income of the households of migrant workers and; 
    c) Acquisition of new and positive work ethics and skills by Ugandan workers. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, because of the problems faced by some of our domestic workers in the Middle East, Parliament passed a resolution on 18 December 2014 banning the export of domestic workers to the Middle East. 

Consequently, hon. Muruli Mukasa, the then Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development imposed a temporary ban on 22 January 2016 on the export of Ugandans for domestic work. The minister also appointed an inter-ministerial committee to inquire into the matter and inform him on the following:
 
    i) The nature and extent of violation of the rights of migrant workers in the Middle East;
    ii) The demographic profiles of Ugandan migrant workers whose rights have been violated including age and sex;
    iii) Whether the Ugandan migrant workers, whose rights were violated, were placed into jobs in the Middle East by licensed or unlicensed companies;
    iv) The role of local or foreign agents in promoting illicit labour export activities;
    v) The major traffic routes of illicit labour export to the Middle East;
    vi) Data on self-employment as well as deployment by licensed and non-licensed companies;
    vii) Efficacy of existing legal and administrative institutions in identifying, preventing and controlling illicit export of labour; and finally 
    viii) Any other related matter. 

The committee completed its work and submitted a report, which I am presenting as annex 3.

Madam Speaker, what are the measures that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has undertaken ever since we received the report? 

I am glad to report that since January 2016, my ministry has undertaken the following measures to protect Ugandan workers abroad: 

    1. Imposition of a temporary ban on labour export

Madam Speaker, as stated earlier, the minister imposed a temporary ban as one of the measures to protect our people. However, during the ban, human trafficking continued and I am asking why.

The reasons include:

    1. The office handling human trafficking is weak. It is poorly facilitated in terms of finances and personnel. This office should be upgraded to the level of a directorate or department.
    2. The push and pull factors such as unemployment, poverty and employment opportunities abroad.
    3. The public had a negative perception towards the ban.
4. 	The human traffickers took advantage of the ban, because of our porous borders, to smuggle people out of the country illegally.
5. 	Other countries in the region did not impose a ban and hence provided conduit routes.

Nonetheless, the ban provided the ministry with an opportunity to study the industry better.

Implementation of the recommendations of the inter-ministerial task force committee 

Madam Speaker, the inter-ministerial task force came up with recommendations, which were implemented. These included: Capacity of key institutions, legislative reforms, pre-departure orientation, raising awareness on and control of illicit labour activities and rights of migrant workers and orientation of migrant workers and employers in the host countries. 

In order to streamline labour export, my ministry has held meetings with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Internal Affairs, licensed companies, joint intelligence committee, anti-trafficking coordinator and the airport authorities, including the airline representatives and ground handling services. 

My predecessor made two visits to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The first was to sign the Bilateral Labour Agreement on Domestic Workers and I am presenting it as annex 4. The second was to discuss the General Bilateral Labour Agreement, which is annex 5. 

From 26 December 2016 to 5 January 2017, I led a delegation to Saudi Arabia to do, among others:
    a) Discuss issues of mistreatment of Ugandan domestic workers with the three ministers responsible for labour; 
    b) Inspected the companies, which employ Ugandan domestic workers in the Riyadh, Jeddah and Dammam; 
    c) Met and interacted with the domestic workers from Uganda. 

During my visit to Saudi Arabia, I found out that there was no violation of workers’ rights for the girls who were sent through licensed companies but there was violation of workers’ rights for girls who were trafficked. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform Parliament that Uganda has signed a Bilateral Labour Agreement with Jordan presented as annex 6. The bilateral agreement with Qatar will be signed on 23 May 2017 and the one for Saudi Arabia for general labour, other than domestic, will be signed in the future. 

The bilateral agreements under negotiation include those with Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman and UAE so as of now, we have no bilateral agreement with Oman, Madam Speaker. 

Establishment of liaison office

My ministry has established a liaison office in Saudi Arabia to handle labour matters, awaiting the recruitment of a labour attaché. So far, this office has repatriated 200 girls back to Uganda. The office has developed an online monitoring system and also conducts vetting of companies in Saudi Arabia. 

Reorganisation and revamping of the labour export companies

Madam Speaker, in this area, the following has been done:

    1. Revamped and strengthened Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies where all licensed companies are required to be members. That is to answer the issue of the “kafalo” system because individuals were trafficked or used to go to Saudi Arabia under the “kafalo” system. 
    2. We have strengthened the secretariat of the association of external recruitment agents with an executive director and other technical officers. 
    3. We have made it mandatory for companies to export to only licensed companies abroad. 
    4. We have inspected all licensed companies to weed out briefcase ones. 

Vetting of migrant workers

Madam Speaker, prior to travelling for work abroad, all candidates, including individual migrant workers, are now required to undergo a security vetting process before they are finally cleared by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

The Government agencies involved in the vetting process are Interpol and the Joint Security Committee which includes Internal Security Organisation, External Security Organisation and the Criminal Investigation Department. 

Pre-departure orientation

The ministry, using the existing regulations, is entering into Memoranda of Understanding with companies that have met the requirements to provide pre-departure orientation to migrant workers seeking employment abroad. 

There was the issue of the cost of remittances. In order to reduce the cost of remittance, my ministry has identified Post Bank, as a Government owned bank, to manage remittances of Ugandan workers abroad. Bank to bank charges are lower than using Western Union.  

Deployment of labour officers at the airport

Madam Speaker, labour officers have been deployed at the airport to clear Ugandans who are scheduled to travel abroad for employment. This has been done to enhance transparency in handling the affected persons and to curb corruption. 

Reforms in recipient countries

Madam Speaker, the following measures have been undertaken in recipient countries:

    i) Only licensed recruitment companies are allowed to recruit workers from Uganda. 
    ii) Jordan and Saudi Arabia have developed online systems for tracking the recruitment and location of domestic migrant workers; 
    iii) All domestic workers are provided with a mobile telephone on arrival by the Government. Some companies will also soon begin issuing cellular phones.

The Saudi Government has developed a system for monitoring the payment of wages of domestic workers. A number of recruitment companies in Saudi Arabia and Jordan have developed internal complaints and redress mechanisms for domestic workers. These include call centres and Uganda supervisors charged with the responsibility of monitoring the conditions of Ugandan migrant workers at household level.

Challenges

Despite the benefits, the programme has encountered a number of challenges which include:

    i) Illegal recruiters who often, through false representation, deploy workers into unknown destinations and hostile working conditions;
    ii) Inability to trace and offer consular services to workers deployed by illegal recruiters; and
    iii) Violation of the rights of the workers who seek employment through traffickers.

In conclusion, Government through the Ministry of Internal Affairs will strengthen the office responsible for combating trafficking and border management. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport will prevail over the aviation industry to curb human trafficking. 
The Ministry of Public Service and that of finance and economic planning will provide adequate staff, structure and funds for the recruitment of additional staff for the department which currently has only two officers; the department of employment services and labour attachés.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to encourage you to be part of the campaign to sensitise the electorate to use licensed companies in accessing employment abroad. I am laying on the Table all the annexes and the report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. At least you have made an effort to answer to the various recommendations of the House because we have discussed this over time and made proposals. Thank you for responding.

3.37
MS AKELLO LUCY (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this report to Parliament. However, I have quite a number of issues regarding the report. 

One, you talked about the pull-and-push factors. I wonder whether the ministry – I know that in your last statement you made a request to us to go out there and sensitise the public. But before we do that, has the ministry gone out there to caution our girls and boys about the dangers of going out there?

I would like to give an example. There was a time I was going to Bangkok through Dubai. I came across three girls. They looked much stranded but they were going to Oman. They did not know which aircraft to use and when I offered to help them to come back to Uganda, they turned the offer down. They said that they had to go to Oman. The minister has said that we don’t have any relationship with Oman. We don’t have any MOU signed with Oman. 

And this brings me to the role of the media in this. Several times we hear adverts on radios and read some on posters that are very appealing. What has the ministry done to curb some of these things? They advertise and they say that the applicants will work in places like Sweden and the young people pay their money, but lose it. What is the ministry doing about this?

My next concern is about the association of the external recruiters. They have varying charges; they charge differently. Have you come up with a uniform charge in your discussions? You now have an agreement with these people. You need to come up with a uniform charge so that we know how much is required to process a visa and not varying for different recruiting agencies. We have also seen this happen.

Notable to talk about are the labour officers at the airport. I must tell you that some of these labour officers are not working. This is because every day – I think if even you are to go to Entebbe now, people are going out. Some of them will just look on and let them go. How are they going? What are these labour officers doing? Can we see –(Member timed out.)

3.40
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, but my concern is on the institution, which she said is weak to handle issues of human trafficking.

Honourable minister, when I listened to this statement, I was so scared.  I realised that if this is what is happening, then our security is at stake. What I would like to know is: who is in charge of human trafficking? Is it the Interpol? Is it our police here in Uganda? Is it the UPDF? Who is in charge and who should be held accountable for these acts?

Secondly, honourable minister, I also would like to know how other countries are handling these issues of human trafficking. When the Interpol is interviewed, they are lamenting about the way you are doing things. How are the other countries in the East African Community handling the issues of human trafficking?

Lastly, honourable minister, what criteria does the ministry use to select the companies that are licensed to send people abroad for employment? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.42
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by thanking the minister for trying to tell us how she is managing the situation. I am only worried about one thing: your report does not provide us with a future. Is this a policy? Can we adopt it as a country, that we will be exporting our children all the time, while we are busy giving the local jobs here to foreigners? 

Honourable minister, I hoped your ministry and we desired to know your input about the Local Content Bill, which desires to ensure that our local citizens and our budget cater for the creation of employment in this country, so that our children and our people here are employed in their own country where their rights will not be violated. 

We have not received a response - let me use this opportunity to inform you that we are about to conclude the consultations. However, I would like to consult with you honourable minister, you are handling the licensed companies – your report does not provide a solution to those Ugandans that go without passing through licensed companies yet that is where the major worry of this Parliament was; it is about our people who are trafficked out, mistreated, killed and/or their rights abused.

The report should have provided solutions and told us that the licensed companies are under control but for those that are not, this is what we are doing because - (Member timed out.)

3.45
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for her presentation. My concerns are that we are not sensitizing the masses. People out there need to know those companies we are talking about. 

So, what is the ministry doing about it because someone will come from any part of this country and wants to go abroad? They will have sold land and want to go out of the country. How will they know where to go and know that this is the right company and this is not? Therefore, there must be a lot of sensitization for people to know because they are willing to go because of lack of employment. 
And supposing the company that took them defaults, what happens? We would wish to hear about the punitive measures that the minister is going to take for those companies that have been registered but they do not do what is expected of them.

You also talked about the labour officers and we would wish to know how many labour officers have been recruited because we have been having issues. In this country, we did not have labour officers at the districts. Out of the 140 districts and municipalities put together, we have less than a third recruited as labour officers and many issues of workers cannot be handled because of lack of these officers. That is why I am interested in knowing how many have been recruited to be stationed at the airport so that we can know that they would be complaint and also have a comprehensive plan to make sure that we get others in the districts because we have always been told that there is no money.

The other issue is that we agree that something is going to be done. However, how about those who have gone and are already there suffering, what plan do you have to make sure that we get these Ugandans return home? Every day, we get posts on Whatsapp where Ugandan girls are crying because they are suffering; they are raped and beaten and some are dying; it is so dehumanizing and we get so hurt when we hear about such things.

Therefore, we need to know how we can bring back Ugandans safe –(Member timed out.)

3.48	
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have lost the whole issue. The Minister comes here and gives a rosy report yet this House got terrible stories about the mistreatment of our people in the Middle East. That is why Parliament asked the hon. Muruli Mukasa to ban the export of Ugandan workers; that was the main reason. How can the minister come here to give a wonderful rosy report about training workers to go to the Middle East and acquire experience, forgetting the mistreatment of our people? We got reports.

We invited the Minister of Labour as a Committee on Foreign Affairs. When she appeared to us, we gave her our reports. Even people who had been mistreated in the Middle East were invited; terrible stories, honourable members. That was the reason we invited the minister.

We asked the minister what this Government had done to make proper agreements with these countries. Kenya went up and objected to the mistreatment of its people. I gave the minster the example of Philippines, which has more than 10 million workers - the minster is telling us how much money we are receiving from these workers but she forgets that these people are being mistreated all over.

Madam Speaker, even this Parliament sent delegations to go and see how people have been mistreated to terrible conditions. That is why we said this could not continue, we must ban the export of workers.  I am wondering that the minister is now telling us that they are going to put people at the airport and going to get them. It is not the issue of getting them back; it is the issue of mistreatment of Ugandans, which is terrible outside there.

You went to Saudi Arabia and met some of these workers and you said it was all wonderful. But you did not go to Oman, Kuwait, or UAE where people are suffering from.
Therefore, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you listened to the minster. She said she has put some measures to ameliorate those situations. She also told you that the bulk of the sufferers are those who go through illegal companies and traffickers. 

Secondly, honorable members, we cannot stop Ugandans from going to work abroad; we cannot. I think let us distinguish between lawful companies and the others.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that Government should go and make agreements like all the other countries, Philippines, Kenya and others have done. Those countries have signed agreements with those receiving countries and have given conditions that their people cannot be treated like that.

The problem here is that we have allowed people to go illegally - they are Ugandans and therefore, they must be protected by this country, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me reecho the words of my senior colleague, hon. Wamanga-Wamai. The issue at hand with external labour is not how much it can solve unemployment in Uganda, or how much it can improve on the economy of Uganda or, how easy it is to remit the funds from the Arab World or wherever, to Uganda. The issue is exposing Ugandans to the dangers including sexual exploitation and slavery, among others. Madam Speaker, the hope we expected from the minister’s statement would have been how are we making Uganda more attractive to Ugandans by actually creating more jobs?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, most of the said licensed companies are owned security companies. Their only experience in this work is having gone to Iraq during Iraq war and served as security guards there. Now they got contacts with the rest of the Arab World and when they came here, they began shipping our fellow Ugandans to where they actually do not know. The only contacts they have were got from Iraq. The rest of it no one knows.

When we banned the exportation of domestic workers, these same companies went and opened up offices in Nairobi. What they do here is take these girls by road and then get planes from Nairobi.

What the Minister is talking about are just principles. When they sign some sorts of agreements, they do not make follow-ups. Now, Ugandans go by road and then ferried – I could even call these exploiters but I do not want to use that language because it will be extreme - and Government is just looking on.

Today’s minister’s statement would have been richer if it was giving us the status of Ugandans almost rotting in the prisons of the Arab World. The minister is just saying now it is easier to remit funds back to Uganda. That is not the issue at –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank the minister for the statement. While it gives us a number of positive indicators, it leaves a lot hanging. In the document she has circulated, I see the statutory instruments regarding the arrangement of regulations. 

However, the question I have been contemplating is what happens to the victims - the girls who have been sexually abused as well as the young men who have been abused? Those who were taken there and their passports confiscated – whether they went through licensed or unlicensed companies – still remain Ugandans and the fact remains that their rights have been abused. Your statement here has not indicated to us what your ministry is going to do to the victims who have gone through such sufferings.

The girls who came and confessed in tears before the committees, up to date we have not heard – even in this statement, you have not told us what your ministry has done for these girls. We know the countries from which they were abused; they told us. Your ministry has not helped this country to address those because we would start with these victims who have come back alive with their stories. Can we start from there, honourable minister?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I think we are having a lacuna in terms of the legal framework through which we are engaging these companies recruiting our children for external labour. 

I have seen companies asking for money from these recruits before they even board the plane. It is like they pay for every cost for getting that job. That means for the first six months one works for the company that took them there and that is the first point of abuse and exploitation yet there is no legal framework through which these people can seek redress.

3.57
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting the statement. My first concern is that as a country, we pledged to create more jobs through the National Development Plan II – we actually talked of 640,000 jobs annually. I would like to find out the progress we have made in that direction. 

In addition, like a colleague asked, is this part of the policy of Government? Our focus mostly was agriculture, industry and the service sector. This should be made formal if it is a way of creating jobs for our young people but their security is also paramount. 

The minister attached the companies which are exporting labour, but I would like this information not to just stop at the ministry. Why can’t you issue circulars to our districts? This is because not everyone will get the MP to ask about which company. As a ministry, you should ensure that the registered companies are circulated to our local governments, after all the processing of passports begins from the local governments and so they should know which companies are licensed by the Government, as well as the fees – because one would ask, why would someone leave a registered company and instead go through individual or private means? It is because of the high fees that are involved in processing all travel documents. Even when these companies promise that they are going to earn so much - for example, they usually tell them they will earn Shs 2,000,000 but at the end of the day they find themselves earning only Shs 1,000,000. This means there are inconsistencies in what they are promised to earn. So how do you help these people as a ministry? How do you ensure that what is in the memorandum of understanding regarding the salaries is what is actually realised when they get to wherever they go? 

However, I was also wondering, why does Government entirely leave this to the private sector? We have a full-fledged ministry in charge of labour issues. Can’t it own this up? Can’t we have a desk at the ministry to deal with the externalisation of labour? Can’t you be the ones to clear? Why should you leave this to the private companies?

If Government wants to create more jobs for our people, they should also own it up at the ministry level. We should have a desk instead of leaving our people at the mercy of the private companies. 

But, honourable minister, we have seen some of the agreements you have made with some of the counties, but these are not all. So, I request that you also scale up the process of signing memorandum of understanding –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MS JUDITH BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about our girls and boys who go to these countries, whether legally or illegally. The fact is that wherever they go – and whichever means they use – they still remain Ugandans. Even those who go through the legal companies sometimes face extortions. They are mistreated and have nowhere to go. 

I would like to request the minister to create measures and/or to put up sanctuary offices like other countries where Ugandans can go and report any matter or case wherever they feel offended. It is only Ugandans that are like orphans in those Arab countries.

I have a friend who used to tell me that the Kenyans have where to go. The Philippines are like first class citizens. They have where to go. It is only Ugandans who are on their own. In case of anything, they have nowhere to go. Remember the companies that take them remain here in Uganda. In cases where the passports are taken away, when they call back they tell them to stick to the agreement and they have to go through the situation without any one to report to. 

It is even a shame that on cultural days when other countries come up with their flags, our flag doesn’t come up. Uganda is a beautiful country. We deserve to protect our sisters and brothers. Actually, as you have mentioned, given the amount they bring to the country, they deserve maximum protection while in those countries. Thank you.

4.03
MR WILBERFORCE Yaguma (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues that I would like to ask the minister about. We all know these young people are not going out because they like it, but are running away from unemployment, which has been persistent in this country. 

Now as the minister in charge of labour, what are the long-term plans of Government to create employment so that these young people stop going out? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, recently the President was in Qatar inviting people there to come and buy our products. I am now wondering whether he was inviting them to come and buy our young people. Thank you.

4.04
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the honourable minister for presenting the statement and for the work she is doing because surely, she has brought some sanity to the ministry.

However, from the onset, I would like to say that the statement falls short of our expectations as workers. I respect the minister for the good work done but you are presiding over a very difficult system. We expected this statement to offer a measure on how to resolve the challenges we have with Ugandans that go out.

Madam Speaker, in her statement, there is an impression that those who suffer from these kinds of situations are those who go illegally – I think that is what you are trying to say - while those who go through a formal procedure do not suffer. But the information I have is that this suffering is not only limited to those who go illegally; we have that evidence. 

Honourable minister, we gave you recommendations as workers organisations because of what we have seen. Madam Speaker, we have counterparts in these countries where these illegalities take place. Honourable minister, it is like you are not aware that workers organisations have done a lot. We have recommended to the ministry some good measures like creating networks with workers organisations in this country. It is also true that some of these recruitment agencies here are involved in some of these illegalities. We gave this information.

However, in your statement, it appears as if these organisations are doing very good work. It is true some of them are doing good work and we support them but some of them are involved in these people’s situations. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is full of corrupt officials; very terrible! I thank God that one of them who was here –(Laughter)- whom I replaced as the defucto minister for workers. You are presiding over a very corrupt system that is full of pollution and conflict of interest, to the extent that some of these problems are caused by some of your officials. They receive money to cover up some of these companies and these kinds of situations. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, therefore, I, would like to call upon you, honourable minister, to take charge and be able to provide systems that can assist even those who have gone illegally. The law does not prohibit someone from going out using another system. If I want to go out, it is not illegal for me to use another system other than the recruitment agency. I can go there and work. 

4.07
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for that report. 

In this report, we have not heard about cases of victims who die in those countries. Therefore, has your ministry tried to investigate the numbers of the victims that die out there?

It is not true that all the people go out through the airport. Some of them pass through other borders like Busia. It is important that the ministry handles those cases in the immigration department. Honourable minister, have you tried to work with the immigration officers?

I would like to suggest that all stakeholders, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, security agencies and NGOs, must coordinate centrally so that even those culprits who do human trafficking are brought to book. I would like to also suggest that there should be a committee that will follow up these cases that are reported, in order to make evaluation and recommendations to the different ministries. 

Madam Speaker, I have realised that there is a Commissioner of Police who coordinates cases of trafficking in persons. However, I would like to point out that the police lack some reinforcement to bring out these culprits, especially those involved in human trafficking. I thank you.

 4.09
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and my colleagues for the good points they have raised.

Madam Speaker, I am here to give solutions. First of all, I concur with the school of thought that we should display a list of genuine companies for the local people to know so that everyone can be aware of whom they are going to deal with.

Secondly, the ministry should own up this so that we can put up a full desk office that we can liaise with the company’s  that take our children for overseas jobs.

Thirdly, I feel that we can create more jobs by ensuring that these infrastructural developments that are ongoing in the country, especially by companies which are foreign, endeavour to employ more of our people than they are doing now. 

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because we still have foreigners who are drivers in these companies, traffic controllers, cooks among others. Why can’t we give these jobs to our people? These foreigners are using our money. This is our money because they do not give us free money. It is the money we borrow and we shall pay it with an interest. 

Finally, I would like to request that we look into our method of training. That is the reason we have a lot of unemployment. We are training people to go and seek jobs. Madam Speaker, we need to sit as a country and find lasting solutions so that we do not go treating symptoms yet we train people not to create jobs but to just be job seekers. I think if we did that, we shall be able to handle all these issues. I thank you.

4.11
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her presentation and for honouring our request to come and address Parliament.

The minister talked about several things that they have put in place in order to curb trafficking in persons. However, I would like to assure the minister that trafficking is now going on and it is in big numbers. People have discovered that when one starts such a company, they can get a lot of money. They are fleecing Ugandans. Even the legal companies charge a lot of money. 

The workers’ pay between Shs 5 to 6 million; however, when the workers get to their destinations – and which is puzzling, Madam Speaker - when the committee on Foreign Affairs invited the witnesses to interact with them, they told us there is no money in Uganda for the companies that are here and that when they get to wherever they have been posted, they are told to honour their contracts since their importers already paid for their travel services.

Now, if they have paid money here and the people they work for have also paid money for their services - that is why, they are told to honour their contracts until their debts are paid off.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to raise the issue of immigration officers at the airport. These girls and boys pay a lot of money here yet when they reach Entebbe Airport; they also have to pay the immigration officers a fee. They ask them for Shs 500,000, before they can cross. If one does not pay, they are not allowed to board the flight.

Madam Speaker, the minister informed our committee that one of the measures they are putting in place is to request these companies to pay a fee of Shs 50 million. This fee acts as security that incase these girls get problems wherever they have been taken, then there is a follow-up position by the companies that took them there. They can bring them back by paying for their tickets. Today, she has not mentioned it. I heard rumours recently that the Committee on Foreign Affairs advised that the Shs 50 million was too little. They have increased it to Shs 100 million so that –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. But this statement is unconvincing and does not provide sufficient information to us. It lacks those companies and partners which you have licensed to handle this business. Once it is lacking, it gives us very vague information. We need the list of these companies.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the statement is not taken and we ask the minister to bring the list here and read it to the nation. We would like to know which companies are involved in this kind of business. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that one time, I travelled with the Committee on Equal Opportunities to Malaysia. Among the key reasons why this committee went was this issue. A report which was so touching was tabled before this House. 

Honourable minister, your statement focuses on the Middle East and you didn’t look at other countries where our people are suffering. When we were in Malaysia, we visited the Ugandans who had been arrested and they were languishing in the prisons there. We should not only look at Saudi Arabia and others, but address the whole issue in its totality.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that without addressing the causes that are pushing these people to go for these unknown jobs - some of them take a serious risk and even if you tell them the nitty-gritty involved, it is hard to convince them not to go abroad. There are no jobs in the country for our children. Why would you tell somebody not to go when he or she knows there is 50-50 chance that he might get employment somewhere? We need to address the issue of unemployment and population explosion in this country. It is yet to be worse and I believe in the next five to ten years, it will be terrible. We looked at the statistic of –(Member timed out.)

4.18
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister because she has apologised on behalf of the ministry for what happened even if I do not know why. However, there is a problem. 

Many Ugandans, especially the youths, have paid a lot of money to that ministry. I read the statement, but the minister did not clarify exactly what happens and who receives that money that people pay when they are being recruited. We know some of your senior people in the ministry receive the money. We have read in the media about all these issues, but you have been quiet.

Madam Speaker, we have a problem in this country with the senior ministers. They usually come at last when there are problems. When many things were happening in your ministry, where were you? I would like to agree with hon. Lyomoki that the minister should have also been here to defend some of the challenges of the ministry. Therefore, next time, come early, honourable minister, so that you can express some of these issues.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this issue is very easy. If I were the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I would display these companies to respective local governments. These people are within our respective local governments. You display these licensed companies onto the respective noticeboards at the districts. It is very simple. However, you cannot get this information anywhere. We do not know how many - in your statement, honourable minister, you said you would like to know how many licensed companies –(Interruption)

MR OJARA: I wanted to add, Madam Speaker, that much as we are trying to propose for the ministry to provide names of the companies, it would also be nice for them to display the list of those who are getting these employments abroad so that we are able to know where they are. That’s when we can justify that we are tracking them. If we are not able to display the list, it means we are not actually tracking them where they are going to work. That is the additional information I wanted to give. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need to find out information of those who are going for work abroad outside the companies’ list. 

MR MUGUME: Finally, I would like the minister to tell us how many Ugandans –(Member timed out.)

4.22
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the sugar-coated report. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, almost every Ugandan is desperate for survival. However, whether you are tracked or not, you still remain a Ugandan. Therefore, it is incumbent upon Government to help you whether you were tracked or not. 

Secondly, it is very hard to fight some of these vague companies that export labour because the owners are highly connected to the power centre. Whether you get reports on them or not, it is very hard to punish them.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we would like to know whether it is the official position of Government that now labour export has substituted the likes of coffee and cotton. (Laughter)

4.23
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For those who do not know me, I am Lucy Achiro Otim; the new Member of Parliament for Aruu County North. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for the statement you have made. Ugandans might not appreciate what the minister has read to us, I have a testimony. I think sending people abroad to work is not something bad. I have a testimony, 11 boys from Aruu North have benefitted from this kind of work in the Middle East; they are doing great. As you know, in Uganda, we do not have jobs for everyone. Not all tribes are getting jobs.

Like for us from Northern Uganda, our jobs include serving as security guards and other such jobs. These boys have been working in the Middle East and they are earning about Shs 3.5 million; these are facts. Therefore, if they can get a means of livelihood, it is not bad. Just imagine in Uganda here, you work and get exploited within your own country. However, remember there are companies that are accredited by the Government of Uganda and are giving jobs to our people and we are moving on. People are paying for their children in school so that they can survive in future.

Therefore, we should not criticise all these companies, which are taking our children or youth to the outside world; they are not all wrong people. We should separate the wrong from the right companies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.25
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and would like to thank the minister for this report. Colleagues, unemployment is a big challenge in our country; not only Uganda but even the neighbouring countries and others that are in our level of development. Therefore, the efforts that Government is making to explore opportunities to enable our youth to go and seek employment outside are commendable. 

Madam Speaker, I analysed some of these challenges and I feel that they can be tackled well on a policy level. First, there is the question of Ugandans who by-pass the labour export companies. The main reason given for these is that the companies here charge exorbitant amounts of money - between five to six million shillings. That is why some opt to be taken by individuals or to pass through neighbouring countries like Kenya. Three weeks ago, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Hood for giving me time to inform you. The charges do not range from five to six million shillings. They range from five to ten million shillings because I was personally approached by three of my constituents who came asking for financial assistance of up to Shs 8.9 million by a one Julius who was my constituent and two others whom I will not mention. 

They really wanted to go, but they did not have the ability to pay the money to enable them access the facility. Therefore, it is much higher than Shs 5 million.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, colleague, for this information. Then the second point is that we are grouping all Ugandans going abroad as domestic workers and that is not right. There are Ugandans working abroad as professionals. Therefore, for you to think that the working terms of a professional and non-professionals can be the same is wrong.

Madam Speaker, three weeks ago, my colleagues and I met the executive of Ugandans who are working in Qatar and we were informed that they are more than 8,000 Ugandans who are working there. However, they are lacking support from our embassy which is far in Riyadh - Saudi Arabia because the ambassador is overseeing eight embassies in the camp. How does he extend consular services to these Ugandans with such a large number?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should find a way of getting more money to the missions because when this happens and there is no budget, they cannot go to our missions for help.

4.29
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement she has given to us; it is so good. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for having chosen the honourable minister who is a lady, because most of the workers who are suffering are ladies. I suppose she is going to take more keen interest in seeing that our girls who are suffering abroad are rescued.

Madam Speaker, I have some few issues to raise. You are talking about increasing the funds for missions; it is very important because recently, we visited our missions but the situation in the missions is alarming. Just nearby here in Tanzania, they were shifting the embassy from where it was to Dodoma and we had just rehabilitated our embassy in Dar-es-Salam. However, communicating from Dar-es-Salam to Dodoma is still a challenge.

While there, one of our friends called Black decided to go to Dar-es-Salam and left a child in a hotel. The child was taken to the embassy and the embassy could not even bring back that child to Uganda. Therefore, it is a challenge and I am joining you to make sure that we increase the money for the missions because our people abroad are like foreigners suffering with no hope of relief. 

Back to the statement of the minister, I would like to call upon the minister - you have mentioned that there are 200 girls being trafficked – but they are more than this. I am member of the committee on gender - we witnessed testimonies from some of the girls who were taken outside this country to work. Some were already qualified professionals, but when they reach there, they were diverted to other jobs; what was advertised here is not what they do once they reach there.
Some of them had their organs removed –(Interjections)– yeah; it is appalling. They remove your kidney and sell it and some of them are being sexually abused and their uteruses are being removed; many die without the knowledge of their families. 

I would like to inform the minister that regardless of your information that our girls and boys who work abroad are given phones, I know it is not true. I would like to inform you that when they reach there, their phones are removed from them; even their passports. Therefore, if you are telling us that they are being given -(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntejeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am approaching this issue from the dimension of inflows - the remittances. You know what failures we have experienced in coffee, tea, fish and all these enterprises. The best option we have now are our own people. Indeed, Uganda can earn in billions if we perfect this industry. The problem is that we are exporting these people by chance; we had not done any preliminary arrangements to make sure that we prepare them well and give them the necessary skills before exporting them.

I can assure you that if we prepare these people by skilling them properly and tailoring them to a need of the target markets, their demand will increase and we shall streamline the ways of delivering these people into those markets.

As it is today, even with the $6 million coming from the Middle East alone per month; we are doing quite well. Which other sector can bring in $72 million every year?
 
This is a very good source and we should encourage the minister and support her on the challenges she has highlighted to make sure that we perfect this industry.

She has not talked about skilling our population in order to export this labour - I think it is high time you considered this as a priority in your programmes - preparing our youth for export –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, so much, Madam Speaker, with due respect to my chairperson; this is Uganda; much as we are in the third world, we are also enlightened. 

Ugandans are educated; this is the labour force that should be engaged in this country. If we were directed on what to do - we discussed this yesterday. Instead of exporting coffee, tea and cotton, we are now exporting human beings at the expense of their lives and we are grateful and celebrating the income we are earning out of this. The majority of the population that is exported are women. The women are suffering -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS JOY ATIM: Is it in order for us to dehumanise Ugandans to that extent instead of training them on what to do so that they become a source of revenue for this country - we just export them for labour. How can the chairman of the budget committee advice the country that way?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not be clouded by the misfortunes in some of these areas. In NASA, Alibaruho one of the best trained scientists is a Ugandan. Many of the American university lecturers are Ugandans; we have Dr Sezi in Texas, who is among the best in the world.
 
We have a very highly developed manpower; let them go and work; we are marketable - let us solve and streamline the problems we have; they will earn and also bring us money and we have a good life.

Last week, when I arrived in Dubai, I went to Grand Hyatt Dubai at 11:00 O’clock and the girl who welcomed us was a Ugandan; she is a supervisor there. When we moved to Abu Dhabi, the young man who welcomed us was a Ugandan; he has been there for eight years and his wife now works in a bank there. 

We went to Zaidi University, all the four security men there were Ugandans, we interviewed them; they were happy. We went to Masdar City, there were Ugandans in security. Those are examples of some good stories much as there are also some bad ones. Let us solve the problems of the bad stories.

As we conclude, join me in welcoming the children of Kumi Development Centre represented by hon. Aogon and hon. Amoding, welcome. (Applause)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for that very wise ruling; because we must make a distinction between exporting human beings and exporting a service. All of us are potential labour exports - because it is tradable; there is nothing wrong with that. 

Like the Philippinos have done, let us prepare these people so that we can generate more income from this sector. These houses you see around the country are built by people who are out there. It is a good opportunity that we need to exploit as a country. Thank you.

4.40
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for highlighting the fact that many times we have heard good stories. In Gomba, for example, there are a number of people who have been to Iraq and it has given them income, experience and their parents are happy about it. 

What disturbs me is the bargaining power of whoever is going. Somebody comes to you and says; “honourable, please assist me, I have been asked for Shs 4 million - the training is going on for two weeks, make a contribution.” You find that it is not one or two people; it is very difficult for us.

Can there be sensitisation on the category of the companies that are taking these people and the countries that they are going to? It can be done through media arrangements and information at the districts. 

If we have transparency on the fees required and also the conditions regarding training before departure; what protection is given in the countries when they get there - let us insist on humane conditions of work, access to medical facilities, and protection from sexual abuse. Thank you. 

4.41
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the minister for the report. However, I read a lot of bad stories in the newspapers, but the worst was on WhatsApp group page of Parliament, where one member posted a girl being punished naked - it was so bad. 

What we are talking about is different from the minister’s statement. You are talking about employment but it ceases to be employment; that is slavery. 

Madam Speaker, just last week, one boy from my constituency was calling me, asking for contributions because he had got a job. I told him that it is not necessary, we have land in this country; you have a job at home. Ugandans have failed to appreciate the resources that we have that we can utilise internally. The problem is our attitude. 

Madam Speaker, when I look at the agreement that Uganda is signing with some of the countries, something is lacking; when our people are leaving the country to work in those countries, they are supposed to get a certificate of good conduct; but those employers are not showing their certificates of good conduct. Meaning the individuals should also be certified as good people. Otherwise, you do not know the kind of person you are sending Ugandans to work with. The minister should note that those who are taking these people - be it domestic workers, should have certificates of good conduct from their countries.

It is important for the ministry to publish which country Ugandans can go and work. And those that are violating the rights of our people should be blacklisted - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Akol, for giving way. I am wondering whether, for example, in Uganda, you have got a housemaid in your house, have you been given a certificate of good conduct to employ that housemaid?

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Madam Speaker, I think the Member was not paying attention. I have read from the report of the Minister that some of the agreements demand that the people should get certificates of good conduct from Interpol in Uganda. If they demand that the people who will be recruited for them should have certificates of good conduct, those individuals should also have certificates of good conduct from Interpol so that we know they will be employed in the right hands. That is the communication I was giving.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the fact is that under globalization, we cannot stop people from working anywhere they want. Therefore, we only need to streamline how people will get these jobs. You remember very well that a few years ago, I was the champion against this activity and the reasons were very clear. It was because of our Government that there was no system, nobody knew the number of people who travel abroad in search of jobs, the companies that were exporting and we were in darkness. 

I would, therefore, like to thank the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development since the former Minister, Mr Muruli Mukasa plus his technical team started on this - I would further like to thank hon. Mukwaya that when you joined you consistently continued improving this activity. Honestly, there are good jobs if our governments are serious and I would like to emphasis on the point of the honourable minister, about the labour attaché in our embassies.

If you are exporting labour from Uganda, like 100 people, the list should first be sent to the embassy before they arrive and this verification must be done that these people have arrived in good health and therefore, they will be deployed in identified companies and we should follow them up. We need to create a database for all our people who are outside this country. Honestly, if we do all the above, then Uganda will benefit. Gone are the days of coffee and bananas, services are very important now; we must have our people go out and serve and bring back cash in this country.

THE SPEAKER: We have concluded on this matter. Honourable members, we have spent one and a half hours on the above issue and I know many people would like to speak, but we shall continue and I would like to ask the owner of the sector, hon. Chair of Gender you can have the Floor before we close.

4.47
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, I must say that I support the minister on lifting the ban. This is because when we stopped people from going abroad, there was also a resolution on the Floor of this Parliament by hon. Betty Nambooze and we all supported her including the committee of gender. After a long period of the ban, the people who would go abroad illegally tripled and the suffering escalated and due to that, we saw the need to lift the ban. 

However, under what agreement are we lifting the ban? The main concern is that the people in Middle East, the Arabs, do not respect blacks, they are racists, I must be on record for this; they do not see us as human beings at all. As a committee, we recommended that both governments come together to shield our workers. When both governments sing a memorandum of understanding, they will respect each other and protect the citizens both in the receiving and sending country. However, what are we seeing here? If you would like to check establishment of liaison offices; this is a good state, but you can see they have repatriated so far 200 people, meaning the situation is still bad.

Honourable minister, we would like you to shield Ugandans at all costs, give them ample training, rise their awareness, talk to them, give them the skills and let there be government to government agreements before export of labour –(Applause)

Madam Speaker, the issue of due diligence is very critical. If you are to send workers across the country, you must follow them up and know where they are going, the conditions in which they work, how are they sleeping, their health and payment. Therefore, you must have a mechanism to do due diligence. Otherwise, we are all interested in seeing our unemployed youth working somewhere comfortably. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as I said we have spent a bit of time but it is an important subject; we would like to encourage the ministers in those countries where people are and there are no agreements to quickly have an agreement because they are there without protection. 

I would further like to ask the committee on gender to follow up on the proposals. The minister has given us a skeleton of what they are going to do, but I think that we should help her to tighten the loopholes so that we can allow people to work safely in other countries. Thank you very much.                  
       
LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

4.52
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget estimates for Financial Year 2017/2018.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the committee on budget for perusal and report back.

ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS

4.52
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, in line with Rule 136 of the Rules of Procedure, I humbly submit copies of alternative policies through the shadow ministers for the Financial Year 2017/18. These are the policies on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Public Service, works and transport, education science technology and sports, Internal Affairs, Information Technology and Communication and Kampala Capital City Authority. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those reports are sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

4.54
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Financial Year 2017/18.

4.54
Ms LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay an alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission for Financial Year 2017/18. I beg to lay. 

4.55
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table an alternative ministerial statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

4.55
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table an alternative policy statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay. 

4.56
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the alternative policy statement for the Works and Transport sector for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay. 

4.56
MR APOLLO KANTINTI (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table an alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

4.57
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table an alternative ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. They are sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition and your team.
 
CORRIGENDA TO THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, the document the minister has just laid on the Table has real fundamental issues. In fact, he is drastically adjusting the budget in several Votes and this is going to require a lot more time than we had earlier envisaged. You note that the total budget is now moving from Shs 28.9 trillion to Shs 29 trillion and there are increases of Shs 423 billion and reductions of Shs 405 billion in several sectors. 

These movements have serious implications and need to be critically examined so the timeframe we had set may have to be somewhat affected seriously.
 
MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development lost Shs 11 billion to the Ministry of Microfinance. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development assured us during the deliberations that they were going to bring back that money into the budget. 

I want to be sure now because what I have seen is a return of Shs 9 billion not Shs 11 billion. This money is meant for the women in the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Program (UWEP) and the Youth Livelihood Programme. Therefore, I want to be very sure that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has returned Shs 11 billion for the social development sector. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, my concern is that if the corrigenda are going to have significant change on what we have seen on the policy statement, at what point will the committee look at the corrigenda to harmonise the position of the report of the policy statement that we have already seen? 

My worry is that the corrigenda may go straight to the Budget Committee, and yet it might have issues that the Committee on Finance for instance would probably look at and try to harmonise its report. What would be the way forward, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, I thought you are members of the Budget Committee. You are all members of the Budget Committee; you the chairperson and vice-chairperson. Have you forgotten? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, yes, the leadership of committees are members of the Budget Committee but the committee report is a report that is owned by members. It would probably be very instrumental if committee members also had a chance to give an input, especially if this corrigendum is going to have a significant change in the figures. 

THE SPEAKER: Was the chairperson worried about time? Under Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, the Speaker has powers to make a reasonable extension, if it is necessary. However, if you think your committees also need to look at it, they can look at it and still go back to our chairperson of the Budget Committee when we are all together. The chairperson and vice-chairperson of Finance Committee will also be in that meeting. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the fear we might have in that is that at the beginning of this sitting, you had already informed us of the days we are supposed to have the budget read and the next opening session. 

I am aware that the Speaker has that prerogative of extending the time but given the circumstances now, I do not know whether you would still have the prerogative to also change the dates that you communicated to us, in case we accept that we vary the time and push it ahead. 

THE SPEAKER: If they look at it and think they need a bit more time, we will see what to do. I do not want to speculate. 

REPORT OF THE 62ND COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE HELD IN LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM FROM 11TH – 17TH DECEMBER 2016

5.01
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 32 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation to the 62nd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held in London, United Kingdom from 11 to 17 December 2016. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the second session, I will appoint one week in which we are going to deal with the reports of delegations because we have not had time to do them. We shall debate it at the time we shall agree. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE STATE OF UGANDA’S TEA INDUSTRY IN COMPARISON WITH NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a robust debate on this matter but we did not take the votes so I want to put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry on the state of Uganda’s tea industry be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO IMMEDIATELY COMPENSATE PERSONS WHOSE LAND WAS ACQUIRED FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS

THE SPEAKER: I amended the Order Paper because this is a matter over which we appropriated money. It was not paid to the PSCs but it was sent to the Consolidated Fund and it is cited there. I am talking about the Shs 19 billion which you told us about yesterday. We are urging you to get the money out of the fund and pay. That is all we are doing.

5.04
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to immediately compensate persons whose land was acquired for the construction of roads moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads:

“WHEREAS Article 26(b) (i) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that no person shall compulsorily be deprived of property or any interest in or right over property of any description, except where the compulsory taking of possession or acquisition of property is made under the law, which makes provision for prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession and acquisition of the property;

AND WHEREAS the Government of Uganda planned, budgeted and through Parliament, appropriated money for the construction of various roads in the country and indeed released a sum of Uganda Shs Shs 47.7 billion for the payment of project affected persons;

AWARE that several construction companies that were awarded the contracts did not pay the projects affected persons the sum of up to Shs 32.79 billion remained in their possession until it was later recovered by Parliament, through the parliamentary Committee on Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), on whose instructions it was returned to the UNRA bank account;

FURTHER AWARE that the said sum of Shs 32.79 billion was to be paid to the project affected persons, specifically for the compensation of their land acquired for the road construction works but contrary to the original intention of Parliament in appropriating the said money, it has to-date not been paid to the rightful beneficiaries.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: 

    i) Parliament instructs the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to immediately release the said Shs 32.79 billion, to be used for the purpose for which it was originally budgeted and accordingly appropriated by Parliament. 
    ii) Parliament instructs that the said Shs 32.79 billion be paid to the rightful owners as compensation for loss suffered by them, after the compulsory acquisition of their land by Government for the construction of roads.” 
I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: We just need members to second. We do not need a debate.

5.07
MS AKELLO FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion because Parliament is aware that money has already been passed. It is not something that we really need to talk about. The money that is passed must be used for its purpose.

There is no reason why Ugandans should be left to wait for dates that are not mentioned, for the purposes they do not know, when money is lying in the Consolidated Fund, as the minister of finance stated here yesterday on the Floor of Parliament. This money must find its way to the rightful owners because compensation is a right. Compensation is a basic human right. These people are supposed to vacate the said land but they must be compensated.

Above all, this money was recovered by Parliament; Shs 32 billion is not little money. We are really wondering why the ministry of finance is keeping the money in the Consolidated Fund. It is supposed to do the work that it was appropriated for. 

Madam Speaker, it is for these reasons that I second the motion and I would like to request this august House to unanimously move that Parliament instructs Government to take immediate action so that this money is released by finance and the people are compensated. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just an amendment to the motion by way of including prayer No. 3 - a timeframe within which this money should be paid and that a report of that payment be made to Parliament.

I also beg to move that this money be paid within seven days from today and a report thereof be made to Parliament within seven days from the same date. I beg to move.

5.10
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, the amendment I would like to move is about the roads in question and the people affected – you know, we have a history in this country of paying the wrong people.

We, therefore, need the list of the roads and the list of the affected people. Do you remember the case of the pension fund paid to non-existent pensioners? We, therefore, do not want this repeated here. As this money is paid out, the roads and the affected people should be specified so that the funds do not go to the wrong people. I beg to support, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the roads were mentioned in the COSASE reports; so we know them. I think it is the individuals that we do not know but we know where the money was supposed to go.

5.11
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know that the issue of the roads is very important. However, the seven days that my brother has given is too short a time –(Interjection)– one month is very long and I suggest at least two weeks. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the money should be paid in any case before the end of the financial year –(Applause)– the money has to be paid before 15 June 2017. 

Honourable minister, if you do not have the roads, we shall tell you because they are in the COSASE report – but you have the report.

Honourable members, I put the question that the question now be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do approve the motion arguing Government to immediately compensate persons whose land was acquired for construction of the roads.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO EXTEND THE DEADLINE FOR THE REGISTRATION, VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION EXERCISE OF SUBSCRIBER IDENTITY MODULE, WHICH IS A SIM CARD IN UGANDA

5.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I wish to present a motion for the resolution of Parliament to extend the deadline for the registration, verification and validation exercise of subscriber identity module, which is a SIM card in Uganda. The motion is moved under Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Article 189(1) and the sixth schedule of the Constitution of Uganda stipulates that the Government is responsible for the communication policy and the national identity card;

AWARE that section 5(1) (b) of the Uganda Communications Act stipulates that the Uganda Communications Commission is in charge of monitoring, inspecting, licensing, controlling and regulating communication services in Uganda;

FURTHER AWARE that in April 2017, the UCC directed all the telecommunication operators to use the national identity cards as the only valid customer identification document for the purpose of SIM card registration;

NOTING that section 5(1) (f) of the Registration of Persons Act stipulates that the National Identification and Regulation Authority shall issue national identification cards and aliens identification cards;

FURTHER NOTING that section 66(2)(k) of the Registration of Persons Act directs a ministry, department or agency or any other institution providing a public service to demand from a person accessing registration services, a national identification number or national identification card or alien's identification number or alien's identification card; 

COGNIZANT that Regulation 7(2) and (3) of the Regulation of Interception of Communications Instrument No. 42 of 2011 provides that valid identification documents may include national identity card, work permit, passport, driving license, student identity card, certificate of incorporation and voter's card; 

NOTING that all SIM cards that are not verified and validated against the National Identification and Registration Authority database using the national identification  numbers  or  cards  will  be  disconnected  by  telecom  service providers after 19 May 2017;

FURTHER NOTING that there is no law prohibiting persons below 18 years of age from acquiring and using mobile phone;

FURTHER AWARE that presently the National Identification and Registration Authority only issues national identity cards to citizens aged 18 years and above;

COGNIZANT that Section 54(2)(a) of the Registration of Persons Act stipulates that it is the duty of a parent, guardian or any other person responsible for the welfare of a person below 18 years to take steps to cause the person to be registered;

FURTHER COGNIZANT that Section 56(1) of the Registration  of  Persons Act stipulates that the Minister of Internal Affairs shall from time to time by notice in the gazette and the mass media prescribe the dates upon which every person is required to register under the Act shall register; 

NOTING THAT Section 56(1) of the Registration of Persons Act stipulates that the Minister of Internal Affairs may divide the persons required to register into different categories and appoint different dates for registration of persons in the different classes of locations;

FURTHER NOTING that the National Identification and Registration Authority has indicated constraint of staff as indicated in the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs FY2017/18 which raises a risk of hindering the verification and validation process of SIM cards;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting today as follows:

    a) That we urge the Uganda Communications Commission to further extend the verification and validation exercise of SIM Cards;

    b) That the Uganda Communications Commission directs telecommunication companies to deactivate SIM card applications in a phased manner;

    c) That the minister responsible for Information, Communication and Technology presents to Parliament a comprehensive status report on the SIM card registration, verification and validation exercise;

    d) The minister responsible for Security issues specific regulations pertaining SIM card registration.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to briefly give the justification for the request for extension. Colleagues, I once again come before you, on behalf of the people that you represent here, who are out there suffering in regards to the SIM card registration. 

As I speak, MTN has switched off some people today and even yesterday before the deadline. We are here carrying a message from the people that we represent. It is the reason that I am asking for your support to request that a date for SIM card deactivation be extended to enable our people have their SIM cards registered.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we take note of the fact that there are companies, which use telephones and these companies are not registered as individuals that you will request them to register using SIM cards.

Honourable members, you will also recall that the registration that was carried out was done for persons who were of voting age. As for now, we have not yet started carrying out registrations for persons below 18 years yet these people have SIM cards. They are our children and they use their phones either to receive money for school fees wherever they are. If these people are not considered in the current status, we are going to lose out and that is why we are asking that the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) be directed by a resolution of Parliament to extend the date.

Madam Speaker, in the motion when I talked about deactivation in a phased manner, I know that it is really hard for many people to comply and I also know that this information has not reached the real users of the phones; the massages are in English and Luganda but our people in the villages do not know these languages.

Therefore, we still need some time to explain to the voters the ways of having their SIM cards registered. We still need time to tell our grandmothers and grandfathers how they can access the registration processes. Those who have been able to see what is happening at the registration centres, you know that there is still a lot to be desired.

Madam Speaker, if we are to save Ugandans, we believe that the reason this Parliament passed the law of the Interception of Communications was to ensure that we combat crime and we are indeed interested in doing it. However, we cannot do this piecemeal.

Therefore, our request is that the deadline be extended from the current date and be done in a phased manner. When we talk about a phased manner - for example, I can suggest that we may say that from June to August, we are going to switch off possibly people calling out until you register. You may receive calls but you cannot call out. That alone will encourage someone to go and have the phone registered.

The second phase may be that we are deterring you from sending SMS, for those who will not have registered. All this can be done so that those who are non-complaint can have the time to do so but at the same time, we are aware that the process of getting to be registered by the NIRA is not as simple as we may think. Therefore, I would like to ask that we use this opportunity to ask UCC to extend the period. 

Madam Speaker, there are countries that have carried out SIM card registration successfully and I would like to lay on the Table documents pertaining the countries that have carried out a similar exercise that we carrying out. Papua New Guinea, Kenya and Rwanda have done so. I would like to lay the document as to how they did it and how that may help in combatting crime.

I would like to urge this House to support the resolution that the SIM card registration be extended for purposes of enabling Ugandans to have their phones registered. (Applause) It can be extended for a year to enable Ugandans and possibly the young persons –(Interjection)– honourable colleagues, when a motion comes, you can propose amendments to it. 

You are aware that not long ago, the Minister of Education and Sports presented to this House a commitment by Government that they are going to rollout registration of persons of five to 15 years in schools. They told us that this registration is going to take up to around August. Can we, therefore, say that possibly in relation to the registration of the young persons – whom they call the learners – we can still say this exercise is held concurrently? 

As they register a young person, they would allocate this young person the National Identification Number (NIN). If the young person has a SIM card, they can attach the SIM card to the NIN so that we know that the process of registering the young people is going concurrently with the registration of their SIM cards. 

We can use the same process to have our people in the villages go forward with having their SIM cards registered. This is, therefore, the need for the extension. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I beg to move.

5.27
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I fully associate myself with the reasons given by the Leader of the Opposition in supporting this motion. Mine will largely be on the legal aspect and to convince the entire House to support this motion.

Madam Speaker, the right and freedom of communication is enshrined in our Constitution, particularly under Article 27(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, which gives Ugandan citizens the right of privacy of communication. 

Although we believe that the intentions of SIM card registration are good for everybody, it is also our belief that doing so in utter disregard of the citizens’ rights, particularly those under 18 years who are yet to be captured by the national registration exercise for reasons not up to those particular individuals but because of the National Identification and Registration Authority’s (NIRA) problems, should not be denied the chance to retain their SIM cards.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the data that has been collected by NIRA is supposed to be handed over to private service providers for telecommunications and communication services. We know that Government privatised all the services to do with communication and the companies in charge are entirely in private hands. Unfortunately, this country does not have a data protection law. It would have been prudent for the minister in charge to bring a data protection law to assuage the worries of citizens that their data will go into private companies.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, when the Registration of Persons Act was passed, it mandated the board and the minister to make regulations. I believe that had these regulations been made, they would capture areas such as people who got registered under the national registration exercise but are yet to receive their IDs for reasons beyond their control. I know of some individuals who registered but because of the inefficiencies in the board, they are yet to get their national IDs. If the regulations were there, they would also provide for those who could not be registered because of age and the like but would still be able to access telecommunications services. Unfortunately, these regulations are yet to be made. 

The only regulations we have are those, which were made in 2011 in respect of the regulation of interception of communications – Regulation No. 41/2011. These regulations were made long before the Registration of Persons Act was passed. When you read those regulations, they actually allow individuals to be registered as long as they present any form of identification, including but not limited to a passport, driving licence, student identity card and the like. 

In the absence of these regulations, I would fail to comprehend how the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and the National Identification and Registration Authority could give private companies the data they have when the Registration of Persons Act  Section 67(2) and (3)  restricts giving information to state agencies and organisations. This is so yet our information is now being given to agencies which are outside the state control.

Therefore, it would be in the interest of everybody, especially NIRA and UCC, that the time for this exercise be extended for Government to reorganise itself, bring both the data protection law and regulations envisaged under the Registration of Persons Act for everybody’s comfort and security so that we move ahead to protect our country. 

Of course there are very many economic issues involved. As you know, most of these telecommunications companies have centres only in towns. In my constituency, the furthest person – (Member timed out)

5.32
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I throw my full weight behind this motion –(Laughter)– for extension of the deadline for the registration, verification and validation of this exercise of SIM card registration.

Madam Speaker, our members of the diaspora community have raised numerous worries pertaining to this SIM card switch-off deadline. Most of them have active mobile money accounts. What will be the fate of their deposits if the switch-off deadline is tomorrow? Moreover, we have talked of the valuable contribution made by our colleagues in the diaspora through remittances. A huge amount of these remittances are actually transacted through the active mobile money accounts. 

Now that there is a blanket dictatorial SIM card switch-off deadline, this may actually spell disaster on the part of our colleagues who are in the diaspora. That is why, Members, I implore you to support an extension of the deadline for the registration and verification of these SIM cards.

Madam Speaker, I have categorised our citizens and non-citizens into four categories. We have those that are registered. They have IDs but they are required to acquire a National Identification Number (NIN). I passed by Makindye, the constituency of my good friend, hon. Ssewanyana. I was driving around but I was compelled to stop because there was a lot of noise and I saw complete pandemonium. People were many and there was a lot of noise and commotion. What I found out was that the police had deployed to arrest unscrupulous persons that were extorting money from people that had gathered for registration – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to complete that story.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, for the additional time. What I am trying to put across is that Ugandans are panicking all over the country because they are flocking the registration and update centres to ensure that they have their SIM cards registered and verified. 

The challenge is that we have a category of those who are registering for the first time and they are in hordes. The numbers are uncountable. I, therefore, pray that for improved validation of this exercise, they ought to be given more time.

Madam Speaker, with the Makindye story that I narrated, there are extortions. Besides the extortions, there are some people who have come from upcountry to Kololo. They have spent two weeks here yet there is no hope for them to have their registration done in time. Therefore, there is need for extension. Thank you very much. 

5.36
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM,	Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion.

Madam Speaker, when the mover of this motion approached me, I took time and moved around the different registration stations in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono. Many of you, who are on the Tenth Parliament WhatsApp platform, can see the photos. You can see that unless you have gone to site, you cannot know the feeling of how our people are suffering.

Madam Speaker, I took time to enter into the offices of the people who are registering for national identity cards and they told me that for new registration, you can get the identity card within three to four weeks. Majority of these people were fresh registrations. This implies that they need more than one month. 

Like the mover of the motion said, if we extend from today up to the end of August, majority of our people will be in safe hands because communication is a necessity for everyone. This is why I support the motion. Thank you.

MR OSHABE NSAMBA: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe, you spoke yesterday.

MR OSHABE NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to make an amendment to the motion. I was speaking about it as a matter of national importance. 

THE SPEAKER: But the substance is the same. You wanted support for your people. 

MR OSHABE NSAMBA: It is an amendment to the motion.

5.38
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In a rural district like Buvuma, people are told to go to the district headquarters yet sometimes these people do not have money and they did not know that Government was going to put a deadline.

Madam Speaker, considering the fact that registration of persons below 18 years and above five years is also on-going and we budgeted for it; also considering the fact that for the sake of the security of this country, the country needs to know the people who communicate to each other for ill motives; as a representative of the people of Buvuma, I do not support the one year extension. However, for the reasons mentioned above, I support one-month extension for our people –(Interruptions)

Madam Speaker, I support a one-month extension for those who did not register because our children below 18 years were not catered for yet the process is on-going to register them. This does not stop me from using my national identity to register two SIM cards, and I give one SIM card to my child doing business or to any person I want to communicate to. The people planning to commit crime through communication have reasons as to why they want to extend to a year.

I was in Kenya sometime back and I wanted to communicate to my family; they refused to use my student identity card – I was still student then. They insisted until I provided my passport. Some countries have tightened their security yet in Uganda, we are very reluctant.

Madam Speaker, can you imagine this is the second time we are extending this registration? We are here asking for a third time. What is the essence of this?  I would like to ask this honourable House that – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: I rise on a point of clarification. Hon. Nantume, it is as if you do not live in Uganda. Madam Speaker, some time back when I went to register, I went back three times before I was captured. Can you imagine people standing in lines for days and they are not registered and they have to come back for a week? 

The clarification I am asking therefore is: if we extend the deadline to one year, is it really a very short period of time?

MS EGUNGU: Sit down and I answer –(Laughter) Madam Speaker, I would like to answer that extending for a full year is too abnormal for a country. That is why Uganda is very weak in the laws that we make because we obey everyone who makes a request. 

Honourable members, sincerely, this is the second time and yet we want to request for another year when the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) is going to start registering –(Member timed out.)

5.43
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion on two conditions.

One, the issue of extension of deadlines has become a very big problem in this country. Each time an issue comes up, we tend to relax but when the deadline nears, we all rush for the registration. I think if we have to extend this deadline, we need to put conditions to it.
 
We need to take into consideration that the matter that we are addressing concerns issues of security. If we leave these issues at the hands of everyone to decide, I think it will be a big problem.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion. However, I would like to request that we put stringent conditions on the extension; that anyone who will not have been registered by then, either will be penalised or otherwise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe the condition should be that NIRA should supply all Ugandans with information about themselves, which was captured. Some people don’t have their cards; to me, that will be a good condition -

5.44
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in support of the extension but it shouldn’t be a year. A year is too big. It should be at least three months but NIRA should go to either parish or village level. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MR PATRICK OSHABE NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whatever period we will agree on here will not help unless NIRA helps the situation. The UCC comes up with a deadline but NIRA is not helping the situation. They are working both from Kololo and also at the districts. 

Madam Speaker, I was here on Tuesday and my people told me that they want to register their SIM cards but they do not have national IDs. First of all, many cards go to the district. Secondly, when they go there, some are asked for money for their SIM cards. 

Therefore, unless NIRA – and that is the amendment I would like to make in the motion; that NIRA takes the ID issuance and registration to either sub-county or parish level so that in the new deadline, NIRA - (Interjection) - Somebody is asking where is the budget; why are you putting a deadline when you do not have the budget? UCC and NIRA must work together towards that deadline. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when they were registering us, they found us there in those villages. Therefore, the machines are there. It is not a new budget. Let them take the things to the village there. (Applause)

5.47
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where my colleague has stopped that there is really serious extortion of money. In my district, the officers ask for Shs 50,000 to register people to get a new national ID. It is not easy to get Shs 50,000 at this time when there is famine.

I request that this extension is given a minimum of six months because there are challenges in the registration for the IDs. First of all, there are people who tried to register but were not successful and they are still waiting for their IDs. 

Secondly, there are people who got their national IDs but when they tried to register their SIM cards, they were not successful. On that note, there are people who are asking Shs 5,000 from the illiterate people who do not know how to register. If they try the first time and it is not successful, they ask for Shs 5,000. The second time they are not successful, they ask for an additional Shs 5,000. 

Madam Speaker, I feel our people should be given time –(Interruption) 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, hon. Alum. The information I would like to give you is that I have just received a message on my SIM card saying, “Dear subscriber, we have a challenge verifying your National Identification Number”. They are asking me to register again. 

Secondly, by definition, once you register somebody, you give them chance to look at the information you have captured such that they can verify it. Therefore, NIRA should be able to display a register of the people they have registered in the country at the village level such that people can look at it. Using that information, they can then come back and follow up the process. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for that useful information. 

Madam Speaker, there were people whose fingerprints failed during the registration for the national ID. How are we going to cater for them? When will they have that chance when they were asked to come up to Kololo for registration? Finally, people who are under 16 –(Member timed out.)

5.50
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question from the debate is how long but not why or whether we should extend. If you represent a constituency like mine, you would need an extension to let everybody get registered. 

I would implore our friends across the political divide to find it necessary and help this Government have the citizens’ telecom numbers verified and registered. It is for our own benefit. If we can acknowledge that the process has not been done well, isn’t that a justification for extension? Must we worry about how many times we are going to have the extension? It is not about how many times but whether the process is being done well. 

I believe, Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of challenges. I do not want to say that - My wife has been trying personally for so many weeks to register but they are telling her the same things - now, having a wife or a husband in the house whose phone is not registered -(Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, not to trivialise this, we should all embrace a move for extension coming from the Leader of the Opposition. That is a very good precedent. There is nothing cast in stone. We can extend this registration because we are the people’s representatives. We are not here as delegates. We are representing people who are giving us information that the process has not been well. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, with those few words -

THE SPEAKER: Any proposals for time? 

5.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I wanted to speak immediately after hon. Oboth because I saw Members of Parliament bogging down the motion on the period. Others said three months, six months and one year, yet the principle of the extension is to let everybody register. The House was being bogged down on the period.

Secondly, like hon. Nantume said, the committee for all the security agencies in this country sat and decided to register SIM cards. They also know how the exercise has been going on. Parliament is now backing them up by this motion to extend the deadline from tomorrow to a certain period, which will allow everybody to register. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that we pass the principle of extension; that Government sits with the concerned people and presents all that the Members of Parliament have proposed and then appropriately suggest a period in which we will ensure that people have registered.

Yesterday, hon. Sseninde told us that they are going to schools. We can use this period to make sure that we do the exercise concurrently. However, the principle of extension must come up instead of being bogged down by the period. 

5.55
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all the challenges surrounding registration in terms of few areas of registration, distance from homes to registration centres and other issues, I also buy the idea that at the moment we cannot set a deadline to extension time before we are sure that the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and other concerned parties shall start work together so that they can harmonise.

If they do so, then they can focus and say we are going to work maybe within this period of time. For that matter, since everyone seems to appreciate that we need an extension - and indeed we are all concerned about security, we need our sim cards registered and everything - I would like to request, Madam Speaker, that I move a motion that we stop the discussion here and you put a question so that the changes we have suggested can be dealt with for the smooth registration of Ugandans. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to emphasise in the motion the issue of NIRA. Government is not aware that people do not have their identity cards. The other day, I was reading that in Serere, they discovered cards for two districts including Katakwi. They were in Serere and because people had not come to pick them up, that is when they realised that they were not for Serere. Therefore, I would like the issue of delivery of the cards to the population to feature in that resolution.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the House is the haphazard decisions that different Government departments take. The proper planning of this country is interfered with when different decisions are haphazardly brought on board. For example, we are going to pass a budget and the budget strategy clearly has a resource envelope which includes monies from the sim cards and the moment you abruptly cancel, then you have lost the revenue.

What is the planning period? It is only practical that we extend this by one year so that we allow everything to move in line so that the next budget strategy proposes other sources which will replace whatever you will have lost and will be catered for. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: About the time, is it six months or one year? 

HON. MEMBERS: One year.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, shall we leave it to the Government? You know, Members, that all these things were done without consulting us; the first and second deadlines were set without consulting us. That is why they do not know that people do not have their cards.

Honourable members, the proposal is that the extension runs for not more than one year. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have still got a number of items on the Order Paper but I would like to propose, if you do not mind, that we receive item 13 - the report on UTL.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON UGANDA TELECOM LIMITED ON THE MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA TELECOM LIMITED

6.00
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I go into the content of the report, I would like to –

THE SPEAKER: Has it been uploaded?

MR OJARA: Yes, it has been uploaded. I would like to lay at the Table the original signed document and the minutes of our meetings. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the volume of this report, it seems enormous. Therefore, I would like to say that we may not go page by page –

THE SPEAKER: Just give an executive summary.

MR OJARA: I want to summarise the report to allow members to have ample time to debate.

Madam Speaker, on 17 November 2016, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Member of Parliament for Budadiri East, made a statement in this House that Uganda Telecom Limited, where the Uganda Government has 31 per cent shareholding, was ailing and was on the verge of collapse if no immediate action was undertaken to rescue it.

He highlighted that not only was the company highly indebted, but also there was high turnover of top management, mismanagement of resources, illegal operations, asset stripping by management, collusion, conflict of interest, inside dealings, lack of investment and lack of annual audit. He further observed that whereas in 2016, the Cabinet directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to conduct a forensic audit on the operation of the company, no audit was conducted. 

Accordingly, pursuant to rules 178 and 179 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda 2012, Parliament resolved that a select committee on Uganda Telecom Limited be constituted to investigate the performance of Uganda Telecom Limited. The members of this select committee were:

    1. Hon. PP Ojara OKin  - Chairperson
    2. Hon. Michael Tusiime
    3. Hon. Lillian Nakate
    4. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo
    5. Hon. William Nzoghu
    6. Hon. Paul Akamba 
    7. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa.

I hope the members are present here. They did a tremendous job and should be recognised. 

On 5 December 2016, the Clerk to Parliament constituted a team of five technical staff to facilitate the select committee. 

The terms of reference of the committee were: 

i) 	The committee was to investigate and determine the current state of corporate health of Uganda Telecom Limited. It was to determine the extent to which the company is complying with Uganda’s company laws and regulations and international communication regulations. 

ii) 	The committee was to inquire into the company’s human and financial management, corporate governance, finance and accounting principles especially but not limited to the following concerns: 

a) 	Conflict of interest by managers 
b) 	Remuneration of top managers versus other employees
c) 	Audit reports of the company
d) 	Compliance to taxation laws in the country 
e) 	Compliance to the requirements of the national social security laws in Uganda
f) 	Allegations of assets stripping of the company assets.

iii) 	The committee was also to consider the reports on whether there is organisational learning, including change in policy practice which would help to prevent recurrence of the current situation being investigated. 

The committee further was to do anything incidental in pursuant to the terms of reference clearly stated above. We were required to report within 45 days. Unfortunately, we are now reporting within 90 days due to reasons that were beyond the control of the committee. 

The methods of work are clearly spelt and Members can go through them in 1.2. We also went to the extent of looking at the background of UTL. I will go through 2.1 to highlight some of the telecommunications services in Uganda before 1998.

Madam Speaker, until 1998, the fixed lines and mobile telephone market was monopolised by UTL and Celtel Company respectively. However, in October 1998, the second national operator MTN launched its services with a licence to provide local cellular mobile, national long distance and international service.

After six weeks of operations, MTN Uganda acquired 60 per cent of the total mobile market with 21,000 subscribers, something Celtel disputed. By then Celtel the incumbent GSM operator that had been in the market since September 1995 only had 15,000 subscribers.

Today, MTN has 9.9 million subscribers as of 30 June 2016. Airtel has 7 million subscribers as of November, 2015 and UTL has about 2,000 subscribers. It is pathetic to note that UTL has this number being the first mobile operators in this country.

Madam Speaker, prior to the UTL divestiture in 2000, the telecom industry in Uganda had gone through a number of reforms. Therefore, they were a result of IMF, World Bank sponsored privatisation and liberation policies that discouraged Government from providing services that could efficiently be provided by the private sector. 

Consequently, the Uganda Government adopted a telecommunications policy in 1996, which led to the liberalisation of the sector introducing competition in the industry. To enforce the policy, the Uganda Communications Act CAP 106 was enacted and took effect on 16 September 1997.

The Act provides for privatisation, competition and independent regulation of the communications industry in Uganda.

The Act also paved way for unbundling of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (UPTC). With the communications Act in place, the Government moved to create an independent regulatory body - the Uganda Communications Commission - together with a technical advisory office and an enforcement tribunal with High Court powers.

The government moved to separate the post, banking and telecom functions of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation. This led to the creation of Posta Uganda, Uganda Post Bank Limited and then Uganda Telecom Limited. Government also moved to assume some UPTC pension liabilities. 

Pursuant to the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act CAP 98, Post Bank Uganda Limited was placed under class 1, which meant that Government was to maintain 100 per cent share.

Uganda Posta was placed under class 2, which meant that Government would maintain majority shares in the company. Uganda Telecom Limited was placed under class 3, which meant that the Government would gradually divest fully from the company. 

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that one of the biggest mistakes committed was Government’s failure to divest fully from UTL as the Act provided - this is just an observation. 

Madam Speaker, paragraph 2.2 on page 9 talks about the incorporation of UTL, which is historical and I believe Members can read it. On page 10, 2.3 talks about the divestiture of UTL. 

The process of divesting UTL began in 1998. The Uganda Government undertook financial debts restructuring of the company’s balance sheet in order to make UTL more attractive to investors.

The first restructuring was carried out in 1998 for all the UPTC successor entities. This involved debt swaps, Government takeover of loans, revaluation reserve, tax waivers, writing of the current accounts and past losses.

The second financial restructuring was conducted with the objective of improving and right sizing UTLs capital and including capitalising retail profits, converting, understanding interests and reduction of authorised share capital to Shs 100 billion.

On 23 December 1999, UTL passed a special resolution ratifying the adoption of the financial restructuring, which led to the reduction of the authorised and issued capital from Shs 100 billion to Shs 46.2 billion.

In addition, Government and UTL signed four debt swap agreements over accumulated telephone bills for the year 1997 to 2001. This financial restructuring was geared at ensuring that UTL, as a company, started on a strong capital base with no legacy challenges. 

After financial restructuring of UTL, i.e. cleaning its books of accounts in February 1998, Government embarked on divestiture of UTL. The consequences of this financial restructuring had the effect of improving the equity of UTL from Shs 24 billion in 1998 to Shs 46.2 billion in 2000.

After two failed attempts to attract strategic shareholders, Government succeeded in February 2000 to attract a strategic investor in the name of UCOM limited. 
The strategic investor was a consortium of several international organisations and companies which I think their names are there. Subsequently, UCOM Ltd purchase 2,040,000 shares ordinary at $33,520,600 from the Government of Uganda. When you look at the annex there is a bank cheque which was drawn on the 23rd May in favour of the Enterprise Development Project Divestiture Account with the Bank of Uganda.

This, in effect, meant that UCOM Ltd became the majority shareholder with 51 per cent shares while the Government of Uganda became a minority shareholder with 49 per cent share. To concretise the relationship, the shareholders signed the following documents:

    1. The Memorandum of Articles of Association
    2. The Shareholder’s Agreement signed in 2000
    3. The Share Purchase Agreement
    4. The Technical Assistant Commitment Agreement signed in 2000.

Observations

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that some of the agreements signed between the Government of Uganda and the majority shareholder in UTL were not favourable to Uganda. For instance, the shareholder agreement, the technical assistance and commitment agreements gave a lot of powers to the majority shareholder in making decisions such as hiring of key managers, provision of technical assistance and borrowing loans for the company. 

Between 2002 and 2006, under the cover of Technical Assistance and Commitment Agreement (TACA), UCOM hired 10 top managers including the managing director. During this time, the managing director was paid US$28,000 per month while the other nine top managers were paid US$25,000 per month each and this was for a period of five years. Moreover during all this time, Madam Speaker, the company was making serious losses.

The management team hired under TACA was inexperienced and incompetent, lacking basic corporate management skills and there was no effective communication in the organisation and management was borrowing money from banks without the knowledge of the minority shareholder. 

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Government representative on the UTL board, the chairman and his other colleagues the Attorney-General and managers in the company should have averted this by advising the Uganda Government to take action and act on the state of affairs of UTL. They failed and therefore, they stand the responsible for this great loss and mess in the company.

Most of the agreements signed have since expired but the company continues using them without renewal. For instance, the shareholder agreement expired in 2005 but the company continued using it up to date without renewal.

Change of UTL shareholding structure in 2007

Madam Speaker, in 2007, the UTL shareholding structure changed when UCOM Ltd acquired 18 per cent of Uganda’s shares, thereby increasing its shareholding from 51 to 69 per cent and Uganda Government shares reduced from 49 to 31 per cent.

The committee was informed that this dilution of Uganda’s shares arose when a capital call for US$26.4 million, which is an equivalent of Shs48.18 billion, was made to invest in the UTL network but Government could not raise its share of the equity. 

The committee was further informed that Government of Uganda could not use the funds on the divestiture Account to pay its share of the equity due to the need to support the energy sector as well as attachment of Divestiture Account by the terminal benefit claimants. Hence the remaining option was to ask the majority shareholder, UCOM Ltd, to inject all the required equity of Shs 48.18 billion in return of 2,322,581 ordinary shares from the minority shareholders. The shares were taken at a price of Shs 121,000 per share based on a valuation carried out by a consultant, Databank/MBEA Consortium. This is how the shareholding changed, when you follow the genesis of UTL.

In March 2007, an engagement was reached between the two parties that is UCOM Ltd paid a portion to Government in return to Government shares. Consequently, UCOM Ltd injected all the required equity and had its shareholding in UTL increased from 51 to 69 per cent while Uganda Government shareholding dropped from 49 to 31 per cent. This explains why up to now we still retain the 31 per cent share in UTL.

Another interesting part is the Libyan Government Investment in UTL. Madam Speaker, in March 2007, LAP Green Network, a subsidiary of Libya African Investment Portion (LAIP), a company owned by Government of Libya, acquired 69 per cent shareholding in UTL after buying into UCOM Ltd. The committee was informed that ever since the Libyan Company, LAP Green bought into UTL, the Company has never registered any profit. Instead, the company has registered net losses despite heavy borrowing indicated in UTL books of accounts. 

The committee was further informed that the performance of UTL deteriorated in 2011 when the United Nations imposed sanctions of assets owned by the Libyan Government. Mr Moses Mwase, the current Director Privatization Unit, Mr Stephen Kaboyo the current chairperson of the UTL board and the current Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that UTL’s majority shareholder assets were one of the sanction entities and hence, the majority shareholder could not downstream funds to UTL to enable it finance its projects and operation. 

The committee noted that this was the time when the Ugandan Government took over the management of UTL. Uganda Government handed over the management of UTL back to the majority shareholder when the sanctions were partially lifted in 2012.

In light of the foregoing background, the committee investigated the allegations that mismanagement of UTL suffice to state that by the time the matter of UTL was brought to the attention of Parliament, the company was heavily indebted to the tune of over Shs 700 billion. 

The Uganda Communications Commission had issued a notice for the revocation of UTL’s license and withdrawn some of the UTL’s spectrum. Cabinet was seeking means and ways to rescue the company from the bankrupt and dilapidated situation of UTL. 

Corporate Governance of UTL

Madam Speaker, corporate governance is a system of rules, practises and processes by which companies are directed and controlled. The committee established that UTL was governed under the Company Act 2012, the Article of Association and Shareholders Agreement. These documents stipulate how Governance is dispensed in terms of monitoring, evaluation, strategy, oversight and financial sourcing. The documents also spell out roles and responsibilities of management and board members.

Representation on UTL board

The board of directors of UTL is composed of seven members. At inception, when UTL was divested, the Uganda Government had three directors at the board level and then the majority shareholders had four directors. This is in accordance with section 3(2)(1) of the Shareholders Agreement.

However, when Uganda diluted its shares in 2007, the board representation was reduced to two directors. The Government as a shareholder is entitled to designate one of its nominated directors as chairman of the board of directors as long as it continues to hold or record equity securities of the company representing 20 per cent or more of the voting equity. 

However, the chairman of the board does not have a casting vote, which means we had only one representative on the board. 

Company boards, such as the UTL board, are expected to play a tremendous role in setting company’s strategic direction by establishing policies, procedures, plans and regulations. They recommend and approve methods and sources of funding for the company. They approve and monitor major projects, oversee the conduct and performance of the company to ensure proper and appropriate management. 

They exercise borrowing powers of the company and provide fiscal accountability, approve budgets and formulate policies related to contracts from public and private sources and put in place plans and processes for the selection, appointment, development, evaluation and compensation of senior managers. They review and approve the company’s annual audited financial statement. Thus, a company’s board of directors is central in ensuing the growth and development of the company. 

I would like to go straight to analyse the work of this board of directors.

Looking at the performance of the board, the committee observed that – 

    1. UTL has not had strategic investment plans ever since the technical and business plans developed at the time of the divesture expired in 2005; 
    2. UTL has been operating without an approved budget by the board of directors. The board argued that there was a certainty to capitalise the company rendering preparation and implementation of budgets futile, an argument that the committee did not agree with; 
    3. Their accounts have not been audited for the years 2014, 2015 and 2016. The board attributed the absence of a published account to growing concern challenges i.e. the liabilities of the company currently exceed its assets and equity; 
    4. Whereas the board had the powers of the company to borrow and mortgage, and call for capital in case of need, the board abdicated this function to the managing director and the majority shareholder. Instead, the board became a rubber stamp of the majority shareholder to ratify retrospectively the loans acquired by the company;
    5. The board did not have a policy on remuneration of board members to guide on sitting allowances, retainer fees and per diem. This is the observation the committee made on the operations of the board.

The current UTL majority shareholder

One of the governing issues surrounding UTL is the mystery about its majority shareholder. According to the records in the Company Registry, the majority shareholder in UTL is UCOM Ltd. However, the committee was informed by the Head of the Privatisation Unit, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Moses Mwase, who also doubles as the director of UTL that UCOM Ltd sold its shares to LAP GreenN in 2007.

The committee noted that there was no evidence on file in the Company Registry showing that UCOM had sold its shares to LAP GreenN. 

When the committee visited the United Arab Emirates, Dubai, to meet with the full board members, the committee was addressed by one Dr Faisal Gergab who indicated that the ownership of 69 per cent shares of UTL had changed hands from LAP GreenN to LPTIC. I think you can see that organogram - but let us go to the observations. 

The committee observed that there have been several changes in ownership of UCOM Ltd from LAP GreenN to LPTIC, which were not registered with the Registrar of Companies in Uganda. 

The committee also observed that the existing confusion, uncertainty and various layers in the ownership of UTL majority shares created no centre of authority and reporting, which negatively impacted on the way the company was run. 

Legal compliance

Pursuant to Sections 5 and 90 (a) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, the Uganda Communication Commission granted UTL a 20 year National Telecommunication Operator’s License. UTL was obliged to comply with the license’s terms and conditions if it was to maintain the license. The committee was informed by UCC that UTL was in breach of many, if not all, of its license obligations. 

The committee was informed by UCC that UTL, for instance, had failed to-

    i) have its telecommunication equipment approved by UCC before connection to the network contrary to Article 13.2 of the UTL License; 
    ii) adhere to the National Numbering Plan and was illegally using numbering resources not allocated to it contrary to Section 5 (1)(f) of the Uganda Communication Act, 2013 and Guideline 7 (d) of the Uganda National Numbering Plan Guideline of September 2012; 
    iii) submit to UCC annual reports on measures and procedures put in place to safeguard confidentiality of subscriber data contrary to Article 7.11 (a) of the UTL License;
    iv) submit audited financial statements of UTL within the stipulated time contrary to Article 7.1 6 of the UTL License; 
    v) pay a fee to UCC contrary to Article 5.1; 
    vi) pay interconnection fees to license interconnected partners contrary to Article 9 of the UTL License.

This is the illegal regime under which UTL has been operating. 

In addition, UCC informed the committee that UTL was technically insolvent and was heavily indebted to the operators and had failed to meet the quality of services required in the telecommunication sector. 

As a result, UCC issued a notice of intention to suspend or revoke UTL’s license on 21 February 2012. Again on 30 March 2015, UCC issued yet another notice of revocation of UTL’s license on grounds of serious financial indebtedness to UCC and sector players. 

Failure to adhere to the financial reporting and deteriorating financial standing of UTL exemplified through negative net worth, inadequate capital investments and insolvent trading, illegal usage of spectrum; failure to meet interconnections obligations with other telecommunication operators, non-adherence to the Uganda numbering plan and failure to ensure type approval of equipment and use of absolute equipment. 

Despite UTL being in total breach of license and despite the measure taken by UCC to bring in order, UTL continued to operate because of Government intervention and appeal to UCC to give the company sometime as a turnaround strategy was being developed.

Government took a decision that notwithstanding UTL’s financial crisis, the company should not be allowed to collapse due to its strategic nature, namely it has a countrywide network, offers employment directly to 488 persons, provided tax revenue of Shs 47 billion between 2009 and 2017; and was always the leading landline provider of telecommunication services to Government ministries, departments and agencies.

In light of the above, the committee observed that UTL has never compiled with the relevant laws and regulations governing telecommunications operators in Uganda. The committee also observed that UTL’s noncompliance with the relevant laws and being allowed to continue to operate set a wrong precedent in the regulation of the telecommunications industry in Uganda.

Compliance with the NSSF Act

In accordance with the NSSF Act, UTL as an employer is mandated to remit social security contributions of its staff to the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). The committee was informed by NSSF that for the period 2012 and February 2014, UTL had outstanding arrears of Shs 18,332,570,341. This can be found in Annex 3. The committee was further informed that UTL had not made any contribution for the periods March 2014 and December 2015. They had not made any contributions from August 2016 to date.

The committee observed that UTL’s failure to make contributions for its workers was illegal as it violated the NSSF Act. In addition, it has exposed the current workers of UTL to serious loss and desperado when they retire.

UTL’s Pension Liability 

There is a disputed pension liability of UTL to the tune of Shs 151 billion. This matter is in court and the facts are as stated. At the time of divestiture, the permanent and pensionable employees that transferred their services from Uganda Posts and Telecommunications (UPTC) to UTL were taken on UPTC employment terms.

Under the Uganda Communications Act 1997, a provident fund known as the Uganda Communications Employee’s Contributory Pension Scheme (UCEPS) was established. This was done as a step towards settling the benefits of employees in the permanent and pensionable employment of UPTC that transferred their services to UTL, UPL, Post Bank and UCC, and those employed on permanent terms from March 1998 onwards.

The UTL employees began to contribute to UCEPS from March 1998, in addition to contributing to NSSF. However, those who transferred their services from UPTC to UTL also maintained their permanent and pensionable terms. In other words, they had three pension schemes running at the same time - UPTC (permanent and pensionable), UCEPS and NSSF.

The UTL Human Resource Manual only recognised two schemes, that is, NSSF and the approved pension fund, UCEPS. This pre-supposes that UTL did not properly recognise and appreciate the terminal benefits and pension of the staff that came from the defunct UPTC.

In 2003, a suit was instituted by former employees that were retired and not provided the same pension/retirement benefits that were given to employees that retired at the time of divestiture. This was the case in court between Bernard Mweteise and Asaph Ndaula suing on behalf of 823 others versus Uganda Telecom and others. The case number is given there. The plaintiffs were employees of UPTC, who in accordance with Section 31 (a) of the PERD Act and Section 88(1) and 89 of the Uganda Communications Act, Cap 106, transferred their services to UTL among other successor companies to UPTC. (Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Madam Speaker, given that this report has 89 pages, would it not be prudent if the chairperson just gave us the observations and recommendations and Members will read the rest of the details? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you can read the subject and then give your observations. Honourable members, do you have the copies?

MR OJARA: Madam Speaker, I will also allude to that fact that I may not be able to read the entire report. However, I thought the background to the report was very important and I needed to emphasise this to the Members. I would like to comply with what you have said. 

This is on the issue of the pension liability, which is a very crucial issue. I will go to the observations.

Observations 

1. 	The committee observed that the matter was in court and it was not proper to delve into it beyond the facts given above. 

2. 	The committee also observed that by virtue of Section 26 of the PERD Act, some of the monies in the divestiture account were to be used to clear dues to the former UPTC and for retiring UTL employees who joined the company from UPTC. This was not done.

3. 	The committee observed that UCEPS was given assets by virtue of statutory instrument No. 42 of 2000, Uganda Communications (Transfer of Assets to Uganda Communications Employees’ Pension Scheme) Instrument, and statutory instrument No. 36 of 2012, Uganda Communications (Transfer of Assets to Uganda Communications Employees’ Pension Scheme)(Amendment) Instrument in order to settle the pension issues. It would appear the proceeds from the assets were not used to settle the pension.  We never divulged ourselves into investigating UCEPS.

Compliance with the Taxation Laws

This is clearly elaborated. You can see the outstanding tax arrears that UTL has accumulated – to the tune of Shs 89,279,770,067. These are tax arrears that range from VAT, withholding tax, PAYE, among others.

Capital Gains Tax and Stamp Duty on the Sale of UTL Shares

This was on the basis of the transaction that transpired between the majority shareholders. The committee noted that there were a lot of changes that occurred among the majority shareholders; from UCOM Ltd, we went to LAP GreenN and then now to LPTIC. These three changes should have attracted payments of capital gains tax and stamp duty to Uganda Government. The estimate is here. It could have gone to US$ 260 million. 

The committee observed that Government of Uganda should have received capital gains tax and stamp duty revenue from the above transactions involving the sale of shares by UCOM Limited, the then majority shareholder, to LAP GreenN. 

In the meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it was observed that no capital gains tax was collected when UCOM Ltd sold its shares. The minister was tasked by the committee to ascertain why capital gains tax was not collected and accordingly report back to the committee. To date, he has not yet provided any response. 

The committee observed that failure by the majority shareholder of UTL to register changes in ownership with the Registrar of Companies in Uganda was intended to avoid paying taxes to the Government of Uganda. 

The committee further observed that Uganda Revenue Authority ought to have assessed and collected the capital gains tax and stamp duty from UCOM Ltd over the sale of shares.

The National Audit Act 

The committee observed that whereas there may be many laws pertaining to the audit of UTL, the Constitution is the supreme and any law inconsistent with the Constitution is null and void to the extent of its inconsistency. The Constitution gives the Auditor-General the mandate to audit all public funds in any company or project as provided by Article 163 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Further, the National Audit Act, No. 7 of 2008 was enacted to, among others, provide for the auditing of accounts of the central government, local government councils, administrative units, public organisations, private organisations and bodies. Does UTL fall within this Act? Section 2 of the Act defines a public organisation to mean any body corporate, whether established under the Companies Act or under any other enactment, in which the state owns the whole or part of the proprietary interest or which is otherwise controlled directly or indirectly by the state. The committee noted that UTL falls within the definition of a “public organisation” under the National Audit Act. 

The committee further observed that if the Auditor-General had done his constitutional and statutory duty of conducting annual audits of UTL, the poor financial and governance performance of UTL would have been detected early enough. However, we have heard that the Auditor-General never audited the accounts of UTL.

Financial Performance of UTL from 2000 to 2014 

Honourable members, as you can see from the table, in 2000 UTL made some profits of Shs 1.21 billion. In 2001, they made a loss of Shs 7.15 billion. In 2002, they made some profit of Shs 1.53 billion. In 2003, they made a profit of Shs 1.10 billion. In 2014, they made a profit of Shs 0.90 billion. In 2005, they made a loss of Shs 3.19 billion. In 2006, they made a loss of Shs 9.59 billion. In 2007, they made a profit of Shs 9.87 billion and in 2008 they made a loss of Shs 16.21 billion. 

In 2009, they made a loss of Shs 11 billion, while in 2010 they made a loss of Shs 69.26 billion. In 2011, they made a loss of Shs 145.63 billion. In 2012, they made a loss of Shs 27.67 billion. In 2013, they made a loss of Shs 59.91 billion and in 2014 they made a loss of Shs 229.51 billion. Therefore, there were some up-and-down spirals in terms of the profits of the organisation.  

Observations

1. 	There have been delays in preparing and auditing accounts of UTL. The accounts of the period ended December 2013, for example, were signed on 16 February 2015 and yet the shareholders, including the Government of Uganda, seemed not to be worried absolutely. As a result, the true picture of the performance of the company was denied to the stakeholders and shareholders to enable them take necessary action. 

2. 	From 2000 to 2008 fiscal years, UTL revenues increased from Shs 45.59 billion to Shs 206.51 billion. However, from 2009 to 2014, the company's revenues declined from Shs 193.6 billion to Shs 118.6 billion.

3. 	From 2009, the company's operating expenses continued to increase despite the declining revenues. This led to deteriorating Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA). From 2010, UTL experienced a negative EBITDA, which meant that the 
company started experiencing cash flow problems and has been in a negative position since then. 

4. 	Uganda Telecom Limited’s financial position was worsened due to very high depreciation expense because of dilapidated and obsolete equipment and high interest payments on loans. 

5. 	The accounts of UTL for the financial years 2014, 2015 and 2016 were deliberately not signed off due to fear of exposing the company's insolvency and its attendant consequences.

Assets, Liabilities and Equities

The committee looked at these under point No. 5.2 and it is very clear. When you look at the total liability and equity, it is to the tune of Shs 324.03 billion. 

The financial position from 2000 and 2008 is given in table No. 5. The total assets are at Shs 204.31 billion. When you compare the assets and liabilities, then you will see that the assets are less than the liabilities of UTL.

Observations

1. 	Uganda Telecom Limited's total assets have been on a downward trend from the year 2009 (Shs 309.28 billion) to 2014 (Shs 204.31 billion). This is a decline of Shs 104.97 billion in a span of six years.

2. 	In the year 2011, UTL’s total liabilities exceeded total assets by Shs 58.34 billion, which meant that at that point, the company was incapacitated to clear its obligations. The condition worsened in 2014 when liabilities exceeded assets by Shs 344.25 billion. This means that since 2011, UTL has been insolvent.

3. 	When the top management of UTL realised that they would be held personally liable for the illegal continuation of UTL trading as an insolvent company, they secured for themselves insurance. I think we were supposed to list down those top managers of UTL from 2011, including the representation in the board. This management team insured themselves from liability of the company.

Indebtedness of UTL

The indebtedness of UTL is very clear and it is detailed in table No.6. The cumulative majority purported shareholder loans are to the tune of Shs 221,389,180,905; UPTC pension liability stands at Shs 151 billion; Government of Uganda – this includes statutory obligations for taxes, NSSF and UCC fees – Shs 126,896,066,963; trade creditors, Shs 86.2 billion; PTA Bank, Shs 30.748 billion; interconnection fees, Shs 11.872 billion; Other liabilities, Shs 69.987 billion. The total liability of UTL is Shs 698,162,860,540.

Majority Shareholder Loans

This has been discussed in detail and you can read the details. The committee was doubtful whether this loan was actually down streamed to UTL. However, the majority shareholder claims that UTL owes him Shs 221 billion.

Observations of the Committee

1. 	The LAP GreenN loans were obtained by UTL under an expired shareholding-lending framework. 

2. 	Whereas the duty to borrow was vested in the UTL board, the majority shareholder loans were down streamed first – supply driven – without the requisite investment plans agreed upon by the board. 

3. 	The agreement ratifying the majority shareholder (LAP GreenN) loans acquired before 2013 was effected retrospectively, i.e. made way after the funds had been down streamed. 

4. 	The agreement of US$ 62, 586,995 million was signed by only one person, Mr Ali Amir, the then Managing Director of UTL, an appointee of the majority shareholder, thereby casting doubt on the authenticity of the agreement. 

5. 	The action or practice of the shareholder loan being down streamed to UTL by the majority shareholder without the knowledge and approval of the UTL board was in contravention of article 82 of the UTL’s Articles and Memorandum of Association, which provides that the directors may exercise all the powers of the company to borrow money. 

6. 	The LAP GreenN loans were down streamed to UTL when the company did not have a technical and business plan to guide acquisition and utilisation of the loans. Here, the members observed that even if the loans were claimed to be down streamed, there was no documentations in regard to how these loans were supposed to be utilised.

Uganda Telecom Limited’s Liability to Government of Uganda

The MDAs owed by UTL include: Uganda Revenue Authority, Shs 88.5 billion; Uganda Communications Commission, Shs 27.8 billion; and NSSF, Shs 10.6 billion. The total is Shs 126.9 billion. 

The committee observed that the treatment of UTL’s NSSF liability as liability of UTL to Government of Uganda and negotiating for its conversion into equity was gravely erroneous. The NSSF liability is UTL’s workers’ money that UTL had not remitted to NSSF. 

The committee further observed from the information obtained from NSSF that the current liability of UTL to NSSF as arrears, interest and penalties was up to the tune of Shs 18,332,570,341 as at March 2017 and not Shs 10.6 billion as reported to the committee by the UTL management. We did the comparative analysis of the arrears and you can see the difference, which is up to about Shs 8 billion.

Uganda Telecom Limited’s Debtors, including Government MDAs

As you can see here in table No.8, the debtors include: 

    1. The Uganda Communications Commission, Shs 3.71 billion; 
    2. ICT Tetra sites, Shs 2.73 billion; 
    3. Uganda Revenue Authority, Shs 1.55 billion; 
    4. Uganda Police, Shs 1.31 billion; 
    5. National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Shs 0.898 billion; 
    6. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Shs 0.793 billion; 
    7. State House, Shs 0.776 billion; 
    8. ISO (President’s Office), Shs 0.746 billion; 
    9. Uganda National Roads Authority, Shs 0.535 billion; 
    10. Makerere University, Shs 0.462 billion.

Madam Speaker, there were about 71 MDAs that owe UTL, including the Parliament of Uganda. The Parliamentary Commission owes UTL Shs 24 million. Parliament also owes UTL about Shs 2 million. In total, the MDAs owe UTL about Shs 24 billion.

Observations

1. 	Most of the indebted MDAs had not paid their UTL bills despite consistent annual appropriations by Parliament and the existence of the commitment control system in Government. 

2. 	The accounting officers for the affected MDAs failed their duty and were irresponsible and, therefore, take responsibility for this anomaly. 

3. 	The top most indebted agency to UTL was Uganda Communications Commission, which is the regulator of UTL. 

Gemtel and Rwandatel Transactions with UTL

Madam Speaker, Gemtel, which is a company in South Sudan, and Rwandatel were also of interest to the committee. I would beg that I go through this part very fast for Members to understand what is embedded in the transaction between Gemtel, Rwandatel and UTL.

One of the causes of financial distress of UTL was the UTL-Gemtel deal. Gemtel is a company that is operating in South Sudan, providing telecommunication services. On 24 April 2006, the Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services of the Government of South Sudan wrote to the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications of Uganda requesting that Gemtel be allowed to use the Uganda country code in the interim for the provision of telecommunication services in South Sudan.

On 26 April 2006, hon. John Nasasira, the then Minister of Works, Transport and Communications, wrote to the Director of Transport and Communications and the Executive Director of UCC seeking advice on the request by the Government of South Sudan. On the 3rd of May, UCC wrote to the minister advising that provided the use of the code +256 was temporary in South Sudan as they awaited for their code from the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), there would be no problem.

Madam Speaker, on 10th of May 2006, hon. Nasasira wrote to the Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services of South Sudan clearing the use of the code. On the 16th of May, Mr Donald Nyakairu, the Corporation Secretary, and Mr Aimable Mpore, the then Managing Director of UTL, wrote to Augustus Caesar Mulenga, the Chairman/CEO Gemtel, notifying him that UTL wished to enter into an interconnection agreement with Gemtel. They further indicated that UTL would grant Gemtel usage of the code beginning “+256 477”, for use by subscribers in Southern Sudan. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, let us make corrections; whenever “Southern Sudan” occurs, please correct it to “South Sudan”. It should be corrected on the Hansard wherever it occurs.

MR OJARA: Madam Speaker, in 2006, South Sudan was called Southern Sudan. It was after its independence in 2011 that the name changed to South Sudan. This report was before the referendum of South Sudan in 2011.

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the important details in this report that we need to know. However, I am also concerned about the time and the security of Members as they go home. Further, I am also concerned about the absence of the line ministries. 

For those reasons, I am inquiring whether it is procedurally right for us to postpone this report to another sitting, so that we can have the right ambiance of our mind and the presence of the ministers to take on such an important report. I so beg, Madam Speaker.

MR MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, there is a minister here and the other one has just gone to the washrooms. (Laughter) So, we can proceed.

THE SPEAKER: I do not how much longer the chair has. Can we receive the report and then we defer the debate? I have made the ruling that we receive the report and defer the debate.

MR OJARA: Madam Speaker, allow me to go through this as quickly as possible. I thought this part was quite important because of the transactions that involved another country.

On 15 June 2006, UTL and Gemtel signed a telecommunication interconnection agreement, which set out the scope of services, interconnectivity charges, payment mechanisms, handling fraud, settlement of disputes and other matters.

The committee established that LAP GreenN acquired 80 per cent of GEMTEL in 2010. The committee also noted that UTL was dragged to court by MTN over non-payment of interconnection tariffs for traffic terminating to Gemtel. You can see some fraudulent dealings here. In April 2011, court ordered UTL to pay MTN the sum of Shs 5.078 billion.

The committee noted that from the review of the audited accounts of UTL as at 31 December 2012, LAP GreenN had settled the outstanding amount of US$ 6,326,705, which was due from Gemtel to UTL through a swap of the outstanding majority shareholder loan. You can see the issue of the majority shareholder loan coming up here, and UTL was losing money to Gemtel.

The committee did not obtain any evidence that there was an economic value that accrued to the minority shareholder from UTL’s transactions with Gemtel.

The committee observed that UTL failed to enforce a commercial interconnection agreement between UTL and Gemtel to recover from Gemtel interconnection fees due to MTN. This was because the owner of Gemtel also owned 69 per cent shares of UTL. This deliberate failure transferred the burden to the minority shareholder, which is Uganda Government.

Rwandatel

Another source of leakage in UTL’s finances was Rwandatel debts. Rwandatel was a company in Rwanda owned by the Libyan Government. Rwandatel was a Government of Rwanda telecommunication company. In 2007, LAP GreenN acquired 80 per cent shares of Rwandatel. In July 2011, Rwandatel was liquidated. A review of UTL’s audited accounts of 31 December 2013 revealed that Shs 189 million related to items purchase by UTL on behalf of Rwandatel was impaired.

The committee observed that LAP GreenN, the majority shareholder, could have used UTL resources to finance its other portfolios in other countries, thereby disadvantaging the unsuspecting minority shareholder, the Uganda Government.

Human Resource and Financial Management

This issue is very clear. We have details on the Technical Assistance and Commitment Agreement (TACA). I think Members can read that. Let us go to the observations because there were fees related to the payment of TACA as articulated in table No. 9 and 10.

The Observations

The following are the observations made by the committee:

1. 	In the UTL books, there was an outstanding liability to UCOM Ltd for technical assistance amounting to Shs 12.8 billion, as well as UCOM technical consultancy to the tune of Shs 3.7 billion. Further, there is a recorded outstanding liability to UCOM Ltd under other technical services of Shs 1.31 billion, and to LAP GreenN of Shs 7.2 billion. This means that the total outstanding amount payable to the majority shareholder for technical consultancies from UTL was Shs 25.01 billion.

2. 	There was no clear chart of deliverables and specific outputs that technical consultants were supposed to deliver or were delivered. We did not get any deliverables on specific outputs from these technical assistances, which were sanctioned by the majority shareholders.

3. 	The payment of management services to the tune of Shs 37.9 billion, after the exclusivity period (2005), was not backed by any laws and thus, the payments were illegal and losses to UTL. The list of the names of the UTL board members who presided over UTL when it was paid out illegal management services fees is attached in Annex V. 
4. 	The rates/amounts UTL paid to the technical consultants and seconded managers were arbitrarily set by the board of directors, which board was dominated by the majority shareholder’s representatives.

5. 	The TACA, under section 1.8, transferred the burden of payment of withholding tax on expenditure for seconded managers to UTL, which was a contravention of Section 120 of the Income Tax Act, Cap 340, which provides that any person making a payment to a non-resident shall withhold the relevant tax.

6. 	There was no clear evidence that the management and technical consultancies paid for by UTL added any value in turning the affairs of the company from bad to good. It would appear that a technical consultancy was a mechanism by which the majority shareholder paid himself dividends to the disadvantage of the minority shareholder, the Uganda Government. 

Turnover of the Top UTL Management

Observations

The committee observed that most of the top managers were leaving UTL through resignation. There were 15 resignations of top leaders of UTL between 2001 and 2015. The committee further observed that without stable management to run the affairs of the company, there was no way the company would have escaped poor performance. 

Remuneration Packages to Staff Recruited by the Majority Shareholder

The committee observed that staff appointed by the majority shareholders are remunerated much higher than the locally recruited staff despite UTL’s financial difficulties. The current chief legal officer recruited by the majority shareholder earns Shs 90 million per month while his deputy, recruited locally, earns a gross payment of Shs 10 million per month. 

The current top four managers of UTL, namely, the managing director, the chief finance officer, the chief legal officer and the chief human resource officer earn a total salary of Shs 319 million per month, which is 17 per cent of the company’s total monthly wage bill. This is unfair.

The committee observed that the generous payments made to the staff appointed by the majority shareholder were not linked to any performance contract or benchmark. 

The committee further observed that the position of chief legal officer and chief human resources and administration officer were not part of those agreed to by the shareholders to be appointed and remunerated under the TACA arrangement. This was because these positions could easily filled by the staff obtained from the local labour market here.

Payment of Rent for Senior UTL Managers

Observations

1. 	The committee realised that it was irregular for UTL to pay the rent of the managing director, to the tune of US$ 5,000, beyond the US$ 3,000 which was his entitlement as per the terms and conditions agreed upon in his employment contract. 

2. 	The committee also observed that the advance payment of rent for the managing director, amounting to US$ 30,000, could have caused liquidity risks for the company. You can read the main text of the body on this.

3. 	Mark Shoebridge, the Managing Director of UTL, must have used his position to exploit the company, making UTL pay his rent directly, beyond the approved rate of $3,000 per month. 

4. 	The responsibility to pay withholding tax was bestowed upon the tenants of UTL contrary to the law and practice where withholding tax should have been deducted from the payee (landlord) and remitted to URA by UTL. We realised that UTL was even paying withholding tax instead of the landlord paying the tax, which could have been withheld by UTL.

5. 	Uganda Telecom Limited incurred the liability by accepting to withhold tax for the landlord beyond the US$ 5,000. 

6. 	Uganda Telecom Limited absconded from its duty as a tax withholding agent. 

7. 	The professional competence of the top managers of UTL - the chief legal officer, chief finance officer, chief internal auditor and chief human resource officer - who should have advised the company on Uganda’s taxation laws, was questionable. Therefore, they stand responsible for the financial loss incurred by UTL from the rent agreement entered into by the company and Charity Mulenga.

Alleged Mismanagement of UTL 

Issuance of Blank Cheques

I think this one is very clear. Madam Speaker, you remember one of the statements made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi was on issuance of blank cheques by the management of UTL. You can read what we have discovered. Let me go to the observations.

Observations

1. 	The committee observed that the blank cheques could have not been prepared to clear rent payment for the new chief finance officer since they said officer was entitled to housing allowance of US$ 2,500. The management was saying that the blank cheque was prepared to pay rent for the chief finance officer. The management could have simply paid the newly recruited staff his housing allowance, which was known. 

2. 	The act and motive of issuing signed blank cheques was dubious, reckless and unprofessional. It exposed UTL to high risks of fraud and embezzlement of company funds. 

3. 	A weak system of internal audit and control at UTL facilitated the irregular issuance of blank cheques. You can imagine the kind of management style that we have experienced in UTL.

Asset Management

Rotting Vehicles

The committee observed that it was reckless on the part of management not to have disposed of the old fleet of vehicles to salvage their value. 

Collusion, Conflict of Interest and Inside Dealings

Bandwidth and Cloud Services (BCS) Group 

Some amount of money was paid here. The committee observed that the agreement was a non-cash agreement to share infrastructure yet there was cash paid to the tune of US$ 347,256. The payment made by UTL to BCS Group had no justifiable basis.

Procuring Legal Services for Processing Transfer of Leasehold Interest from Uganda Land Commission to UTL

These were properties for which land titles were being got. The committee observed that hiring a law firm to process a title on behalf of UTL did not violate any law. The fee paid to the firm of Shs 110 million was reasonable within the Advocates (Remuneration and Taxation of Costs) Regulations, given the value of the property that was the subject of the transaction. Nevertheless, the committee observed that the work contracted to the law firm could have been executed by UTL’s legal department.

Semliki Dairy and Beverages Limited

There was an allegation that this company was owned by one of the management team members in UTL. Let me read through this very fast. 

The committee received and investigated an allegation that Semliki Dairy and Beverages Limited was one of the companies used by the managers of UTL to fraudulently partner and trade with UTL. The whistle-blower had indicated that the company belonged to Mr Stephen Kaboyo, the Chairperson of the UTL Board. 

Upon conducting a search at the company’s registry, the committee established that Semliki Dairy and Beverages Limited is not owned by Mr Stephen Kaboyo but rather by the following people: Dr Doris Mwesigire Mutabazi with 60 per cent shares; Mr Godfrey Mutabazi with 30 per cent shares, who is the Executive Director of UCC; and Mr Mugarura Taremwa with 10 per cent shares. 

The committee interested itself in Mr Godfrey Mutabazi, being the Executive Director of UCC, the regulator. Whereas the committee established that Semliki Dairy and Beverages Limited had been doing business of supplying packing polythene bags, Christmas gift hampers and water to UTL, the same did not put Mr Mutabazi in conflict of interest. In his written response to the committee, he stated that he did not involve himself in the day-to-day running of the company and also declared his interest in Semliki Dairy and Beverages to the IGG as required by the law. That marks the end of Semliki.

Sub-Saharan Group of Companies Chief Finance Officer - James Wilde 

I would rather go straight to the observations, Madam Speaker. Mr James Wilde is the Chief Finance Officer of UTL. There was an allegation about him that he owns Sub-Saharan Group and he was trading with UTL.

The committee observed that an effective board would have relieved Mr James Wilde, the current Chief Finance Officer of UTL of his duties for wilfully and knowingly trade with the company for which he was the chief finance officer. The committee discovered that Sub-Saharan Group was doing business with UTL.

Selling Prime Assets below the Market Value

I think let us look at them one by one. 

a) Nsambya Property FRV 309 Folio 3, Plots 1-7, Nsambya Road

The committee noted that UTL first put the property on sale in 2011 where various companies expressed interest to purchase it. The highest bidder, represented by M/s Guma Company Advocates, offered to pay US$ 3.5 million. However, he was not given the offer, purportedly on the grounds of the UN sanctions against property owned by the Gadhafi regime. The current open market value of the property was determined in 2012 by M/s Survesis as being within the range of Shs 5.5 billion.

In 2014, the same property was advertised for sale and M/s Bageine and Company was contracted to give the value of the property. He estimated the value of the property at Shs 3.1 billion. You can see the value of the property had come down. Following a competitive bidding process, Intercar emerged the highest bidder for the plots at $1,750,000. Other companies bid below – Seroma at US$ 1.4 million and Zion Construction bid at US$ 1.6 million.

Madam Speaker, on the 8 July 2015, the property was sold by UTL to Intercar at US$ 1,567,439. Actually, it is quite below even the bidding price of Intercar itself. 

When the committee inquired why the UTL managing director and corporation secretary sold the property below the offer that was given by the prospective buyer, represented by M/s Guma and Company Advocates in 2011, their response was that-

1. 	The property was sold with approval of the UTL board;
2. 	The property was advertised and everybody was free to show interest;
3. 	The property was sold above the current market value of Shs 3.1 billion;
4. 	There was urgency to sell the property due to the imminent foreclosure on the property by PTA Bank. The bank had given a notice of foreclosure dated 20 May 2015 for three properties - I think you can read this part.

Let me go to the general observations on the issue of property because there was a lot of controversy as far as these properties were concerned, including the ones detailed in (b): LRV 718 Folio 16, Plots 41-47, 5th Street Industrial Area. There were also a lot of challenges in terms of the value at which it was sold because the value that was given at first was US$ 5,150,000 but it was sold at US$ 4.9 million to a company that never bid for the property. 

Observations

1. 	The committee observed that the decision by the board to discreetly get offers for the UTL non-core assets was not in the best interest of the company. 

2. 	The committee further observed that the sale of the property to Magnet Construction Limited, which had not expressed interest in the purchase of the property when it was advertised, was an infringement of the principle of transparency in the disposal of company assets.

Property Disputes

Madam Speaker, table No. 12 shows some of the property which is jointly owned by UTL and Posta Uganda. There is a lot of conflict concerning this property, to the extent that they were claiming some of the property should be divided into two. Even if they were sharing a room, they wanted the room to be divided.

Observations

1. 	A comprehensive due diligence on the assets of the defunct UPTC to ascertain ownership and size was not concluded before the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications issued statutory instruments allocating the said assets to UPTC successor entities.

2. 	The statutory instruments did not come out clearly and there was no policy guidance on how the jointly allocated properties were to be shared by the beneficiary entities. This lacuna has caused conflict between UTL and Uganda Posts Limited. 

3. 	Some of the assets of the former UPTC were allocated to Uganda Communications Employees’ Pension Scheme (UCEPS) to cater for pension issues. However, all the assets allocated to UCEPS have been sold and yet pension issues are still pending. There is need to do due diligence on the properties given to UCEPS as well.

Investment and Technical Operations of UTL

I will not read through this, but the idea here is that UTL has not been innovative because the company still operates using a 2.5G mobile data network and yet most telecommunication companies in Uganda are using 4G and 5G. This means they remained an archaic telecommunication company.

The committee observed that with the current UTL’s obsolete infrastructure, the chances of survival of the company in today’s telecommunications industry is almost zero.

Bank Loans, Supplier of Credits and UTL’s Investment Strategy

Madam Speaker, table No. 13 indicates the loan portfolio of UTL, which is up to the tune of Shs 381.9 billion. You can see the alarming borrowing of UTL there.

Observations

The committee observed that the funds borrowed did not have an investment plan and the projects to which some of the funds were deployed were decommissioned before they were complete. 

Indeed, the Auditor-General in his 2012 report on business viability appraisal conducted by Deloitte and Touché observed that decisions made by the majority shareholders were sub-optimal, may have led to losses and some ill-conceived expensive projects were left uncompleted due to poor decision making and lack of clear strategic direction.

The committee observed that it was highly probable that the borrowed funds were simply stolen. 

The committee further observed that the Government of Uganda’s loan (from the proceeds of the Belgium credit - Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme I (NURP I) and Nordic Development Fund Credit - NURP II) which was lent to UTL in 2001 and 2003 has never been repaid to Government and there was no indication that it will ever be repaid. You can see this from the table that this was a grant given to them to extend their telecommunication services to northern Uganda but UTL did something and disappeared with the money. 

Funds Down Streamed To UTL during the UN Sanctions

This is also another interesting scenario that we discovered. Many witnesses, including the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija; the Chairman of UTL, Mr Stephen Kaboyo; the Director Privatisation Unit, Mr Moses Mwase; and the former acting Managing Director of UTL, Mr Donald Nyakairu, indicated that UTL suffered financial crisis as a result of the UN sanctions on the Libyan regime in 2011. This is because the majority shareholder was not able to downstream funds

However, the committee noted that the schedule of UTL creditors, and also from the evidence provided by the Libyan Ambassador in Uganda, that UCOM Ltd/LAP GreenN continued to downstream capital to UTL during the period of the UN sanctions to a tune of Shs 87 billion. This money seems not to be accounted for. 

The committee was presented with evidence by the Libyan Ambassador that even when the Government of Uganda took over the management of UTL in compliance with the UN sanctions, funds used to flow to UTL.

The committee observed that the funds down streamed during the UN sanctions were part of the reported majority shareholder loan to UTL. 

The committee also further observed that it is critical that managers and board members who were in charge of UTL at the time of the UN sanctions be held responsible for the disappearance of the funds. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of grey traffic, white traffic and black traffic, I would implore Members to just read the details because we have explained what it means. The essence is that in the telecommunications services, there is both legal and illegal interconnectivity between the different telecommunications services. Grey traffic means the point of termination is unofficial but the point of origin is official. You can read and establish this. 

We got concerned and the committee inquired form UCC on the allegation of grey traffic involving UTL or individuals at UTL. The UCC explained that they were aware of the bad practice in Uganda’s telecommunication industry, but the regulator lacked an intelligence network monitoring system. Therefore, the UCC was unable to investigate and pinpoint the exact companies and individuals involved in the bad practices. However, UCC informed the committee that the office of the President was in the process of acquiring an intelligence network monitoring system, which among other things would be able to detect grey traffic.

The committee was informed by hon. Paula Turyahikayo, the chairperson of the sectoral Committee on ICT and a member of the select committee, that the monitoring equipment had already been procured. There was some money that was also lost because of this illegal transaction between the telecommunications services. 

Madam Speaker, point No. 8.1 is basically a narrative of the Government’s effort to save UTL. We also indicated a decision to divest the remaining shares in UTL. Point No. 8.3 is about the takeover of UTL management by the Government of Uganda during the time of the UN sanctions against Libya. This is also interesting because we recall that there was some money they had down streamed from the Libyan Government to UTL even if there were sanctions.

Madam Speaker, if you may allow, let me just go through point No. 8.3. From May 2011 to May 2012, Uganda Government took over management of UTL in compliance with the UN sanctions against Libyan companies associated with the agents of the regime of the late Gadhafi, former President of Libya. During the period when agents of Uganda Government were in control of the management of UTL, the company’s financial health deteriorated; for instance, in 2010, UTL’s revenues were Shs 195 billion and they dropped from Shs 138 billion in 2011 to Shs 131 billion in 2012. Management of UTL was returned to the LAP GreenN managers in May 2012 when sanctions were lifted. The Government did a lot to try to revamp and liberalise the company.

Commissioning of the Viability Appraisal and Business Valuation of UTL 

You can see the objectives listed there. The findings of the business viability appraisal and valuation done by the Auditor- General are also given. The Auditor-General specifically did this business viability appraisal but not the overall audit. Therefore, the Auditor-General found out that the overall performance of UTL declined due to – 

1. 	Competitive pressure from the dominant players in the industry;
2. 	Dilapidated, obsolete and overcapacity network of UTL; 
3. 	Weak corporate governance whereby- 

    a) minority shareholder did not have sufficient authority to influence board decisions;
    b) The board was driven by the majority shareholders who made key decisions, some of which were questionable and may have led to losses. The majority board members made poor decisions and with lack of a clear strategic plan, ill-conceived but expensive projects were initiated but decommissioned before their completion; 
    c) poor financial management with cases of inventory fraud, misstatement of balances, unexplained transactions, worsening liability position.

As a way forward, the consultant advised Government to have a third party capital call to bring in investment capital of about US$ 99 million and thereafter, sell the 31 per cent Government of Uganda shares in UTL to the incoming shareholder. 

Unfortunately, the Government has not implemented the recommendation provided by the Auditor-General as it returned the company to UCOM Ltd in May 2012. In the meantime, the financial meltdown of UTL continued unabated. 

The committee observed that failure by the Government to implement the recommendations of the Auditor-General contained in the business viability appraisal report in 2012, which had estimated that the cost of revamping UTL at about US$ 99 million, led to the escalation of the cost of revamping UTL which the Uganda taxpayer will have to suffer from. The cost of revamping UTL is now estimated at Shs 500 billion.

Cabinet Decisions on the UTL’s Rescue Plan

Madam Speaker, there was a Cabinet decision on UTL’s rescue plan, which Members can read. The Cabinet tried their best to make sure Uganda reclaims UTL from the majority shareholder and owns it almost 100 per cent as a public enterprise. Let me read this highlight on page 54: 

Meanwhile, in April 2015, His Excellency the President guided the ministers responsible for finance and ICT that Government should consider getting on-board a strategic investor with financial ability to capitalise UTL and technical capacity to manage and operate UTL’s business. This was the advice that came after the Cabinet sat down to look at the rescue plan.

Observation 

The committee observed that the rescue plan agreed to by Cabinet was not in consonance with the directive by His Excellency the President. While Cabinet’s decision on the rescue plan was informed by the strategic and security importance of UTL, His Excellency the President’s guidance seemed to be informed by economic considerations. The two positions have not been harmonised to date.

Petition by the Government to the Registrar General of Companies to Allow Takeover of Shares of UCOM 

The Government also petitioned the Registrar General to be allowed to take over UTL. These are Government initiatives, which were quite positive when you looked at them, but most of the positions were not implemented as agreed.

Observations

As Government grapples with the way forward, it should seriously reflect on:

1. 	The economic justification for Government’s continued investment in UTL;

2. 	Whether the decision by the Government to announce the takeover of UTL’s management in February 2017 was in the best interest of Uganda in view of other options available to Government;

3. 	Whether receivership or liquidation of the company would not be the best option available for the minority shareholder; 

4. 	Who the rightful owner of the 69 per cent shares in UTL is, because this is not clear. We later on discovered that there were almost about three companies that were claiming ownership of the 69 per cent shares. Government should judiciously establish who the rightful shareholder of UTL is given that the company registered with the companies’ registry in Uganda is UCOM Ltd, and not LAP GreenN or LPTIC. 

It is in light of the above observations, Madam Speaker, that the committee makes recommendations as articulated in the section below.

Committee Recommendations

Arising from the findings and observations of the committee on the operations of UTL since 2000 that have been articulated above, whereby the committee noted, inter alia that-

    1. Uganda Government has never obtained any dividend from its shares in UTL;
    2. UTL was mismanaged by the majority shareholder who, according to the shareholders agreement, had the responsibility to provide strategic management of the company;
    3. UTL was mismanaged by the minority shareholder and staff who were to offer proper monitoring and advice on the dilapidating state of UTL;
    4. UTL was heavily indebted to the tune of about Shs 700 billion and would require a capital injection of about Shs 500 billion to have its network revamped;
    5. UTL currently enjoys the smallest market share of the telecommunication sector, and has been making losses since 2009;
    6. UTL was insolvent, with its liabilities far outstripping its asset base;
    7. The two shareholders of the UTL have failed to inject capital in the company and have failed to work out a turnaround strategy;
    8. The majority shareholder recently resigned from the management of UTL and refused to extend more funding to the company; 
    9. Government is searching for ways of handling the UTL crisis.

The committee recommends as follows:

1. 	With the current insolvent situation of UTL, Government should be cautious in taking over the management of UTL to avoid possible litigation. This is because Government may not have the money required to clear the current UTL debt of about Shs 700 billion and inject about Shs 500 billion into UTL to revamp its dilapidated network.

2. 	In case of liquidation, the assets of Government such as the spectrum, the frequencies and the numbering codes which had been allocated to UTL by UCC and were withdrawn by UCC after UTL failed to comply with its licence obligations should be clearly put on the Government Asset Registry to guard them from being sold or misused by unscrupulous people. Should there be need for Government to establish a telecommunication company for strategic and security needs, the saved assets/resources, together with the resources of the Ministry of ICT (NITA (U)) such as the fibre optic cable, would be used for the purpose.

3. 	The current caretaker of UTL should present to Parliament within 90 days commitments and evidence of remitting UTL workers benefits including pensions and NSSF contributions.

4. 	Government should commission a forensic audit on the following: i) The entire divestiture process, in particular to help the people of Uganda to understand-

    a) Whether it is wise for Government to have minority shares or shares at all in any company.
    b) How Government should ensure that its interests/stakes in private companies are safeguarded.
    c) Why Section 34 of the National Audit Act, which requires the Auditor-General to audit projects where public funds have been injected has not been operationalized by the Auditor-General.
    d) Whether the Ministry of Finance has the operational and strategic competence to supervise divested companies where Government has shares or whether these companies should be under the strategic supervision of the relevant ministries. 
    e) Whether the PERD Act needs to be overhauled.
    f) Whether the policy of privatization and the ministry in charge of privatization are still relevant to the interests of Ugandan people.
    g) Whether there is still economic value of the privatization of public enterprises.
    h) Whether the current privatization institutions, such as the Privatization Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Parastatal Monitoring Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Divestiture, Reform and Implementation Committee as well as the privatization portfolio of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are still relevant and valuable or should be disbanded.

ii) 	The assets allocated to UCEPCS meant to address pension issues of former employees of UPTC were managed with a view to liquidate the said properties to meet the outstanding pensions for the beneficiaries.

iii) 	The divestiture account and how it has been utilized.

iv) 	Bank loans which led to the mortgaging of all UTL properties. Madam Speaker, I would like to state that all properties owned by UTL have been mortgaged including their head office in Kampala. The forensic audit should look into the mortgaging of all these properties in order to establish whether the said loans were used for investments in the UTL network, and to advise on the economic and strategic need for redeeming the assets, buildings and other infrastructure that are currently held by banks as collateral. 

v) 	The payment of about Shs 80 billion as management and consultancies fees to the majority shareholders, and an outstanding liability for the same purpose of Shs 25 billion to establish whether there were any technical consultancies that were rendered to UTL and whether they added any value to the operations and health of UTL.

vi) 	The funds amounting to Shs 62.91 billion that were down streamed to UTL during the period of January 2011 and May 2012. 

The committee thought that the forensic audit would ask for more information regarding some of these issues. 

5. Drawing lessons from the unfavourable agreements that Uganda Government signed with the majority shareholder in UTL, the committee recommends that in future, Government should not sign agreements that disempower it, like was the case with the agreements signed with the UTL majority shareholder. Secondly, Government should never accept technical assistance or management support agreements since Uganda has enough highly qualified people as management consultants.

6. 	With regard to how assets of the former UPTC were allocated to its successor companies, the committee recommends that the Minister of ICT should revisit the statutory instruments that allocated assets to the successor companies of UPTC with a view to resolving conflicts over the jointly allocated properties and especially to define the boundaries of the jointly allocated properties to Posta Uganda Limited and UTL. The minister should also search and secure properties of the former UPTC that were not allocated to any company or entity. 

7. 	With regard to the sale of prime property LRV 718 folio 16, plots 41-47, located on 5th Street Industrial Area, to a company that did not compete through a transparent process, the committee recommends that members of the UTL board at the time, namely Stephen Kaboyo, Moses Mwase, Ali Bin Amir, Wafik Al Shater, Joanna Roche, Khalid Tarapolsi, Steward Andrew Simpson and Mr Godfrey Kisseka the then acting managing director, be held liable for flouting the asset disposal due process.

8. 	With regard to payments made by UTL to a company, Bandwidth and Cloud Services (BCS) Limited, when there was no basis for such payments, the committee recommended that Mr Mark Shoebridge, the UTL Managing Director and Mr James Wilde, the Chief Finance Officer, who paid money to a company (BCS Ltd) on the basis of a non-cash agreement should be made to refund the money.

9. 	On the irregular renting of a house for the MD, when the former was entitled to housing allowance, the committee recommends that Mr Mark Jude Shoebridge, the MD, and Mr Ayub Mulumba, the internal auditor, should be sanctioned for exposing the company to financial stress by committing the company to rent a house for the managing director, a transaction that was marred by many irregularities as observed above. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ojara and members of the committee for your comprehensive report. It has enabled us understand better where Uganda Telecom Ltd stands or does not stand. 

Is it true that there is a minority report? Okay, hon. Nzoghu, present it very quickly and stand up when you address the House. (Laughter) 

7.56
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will summarise the report. This minority report- (Interruption) 

MR WALUSWAKA: I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I am looking at my iPad and the document that the honourable member is going to present is not there, so I do not have a copy. Shall we be proceeding well when we do not have all the documents? I want to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Did you present it to the Clerk? 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I presented it to the Clerk and I did not stop at that; the committee members are also aware that there is a minority report and it is not being smuggled in, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us receive it. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This minority report is presented pursuant to rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. I just want to say that whereas I strongly agree with the structure of the main report - the introduction, findings and observations - I contend that the recommendations are weak. It is, therefore, the reason I am presenting a dissenting opinion on specific issues and they are basically three: 

1. 	Conflict of Interest of Mr Godfrey Mutabazi, the Executive Director of Uganda Communications Commission 

During the committee’s investigations in the mismanagement of UTL, it was found out that Semliki Diary and Beverages (Uganda) Ltd, a company in which Mr Godfrey Mutabazi owns 30 per cent of shares, was trading with UTL. This, in my strong opinion, is tantamount to conflict of interest, contrary to the opinion of the committee under section 6.5.3.3 on page 41 of the main report.

My opinion is based also on sections 2, 8, 12 and the third schedule of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 and sections 5 and 17 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2012. 

Section 8 of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 provides thus: 

“(1) 	A leader shall not put himself or herself in a position in which his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities.

(2) 	Conflict of interest shall be taken to arise where- 
(a) 	a leader deals with a matter in which he or she has personal interest and where he or she is in a position to influence the matter, directly or indirectly, in the course of his or her official duties.” In this case, Godfrey Mutabazi rightly fits this.
“(b)	the position the leader holds and the services he or she gives to a person or private body is or are in conflict with his or her official duties.” 

It does not stop there; Section 12 of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 also provides for prohibited contracts: 
“(1) A leader, a leader’s spouse, agent, private company or public company or business enterprise in which the leader, leader’s spouse or agent has a controlling interest shall not seek, accept or hold any contract with- 

(a) any government or public body which the leader controls or directly participates in the decision making of its affairs.” 

Madam Speaker, Government has 31 per cent shares, though they are minority shares, and Godfrey Mutabazi being an employee of a Government agency fits well within “conflict of interest”. 

It goes on to say, “(2) A leader who contravenes subsection (1) breaches this Code and is liable to- 
(a) vacate office; or 
(b) be dismissed from the office.” That is the law

Part B of the Third Schedule of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 identifies “specified officers” to include the executive director of a public body. This is well illustrated under No. 22 of the schedule, Madam Speaker. 

Regulation 4.6 of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders of January 2010 provides for conflict of interest thus:  
“(1) In the execution of official Government business, a public officer shall not put himself or herself in a position where his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities as a public officer. The public officer is required to inform his or her supervisor of the nature and extent of his or her interest. 

(2) 	A public officer shall not either directly or indirectly enter into any contracts with Government. This is unethical since it affects the impartiality of a public officer and mars his or her reasonable judgement.” 

Madam Speaker, when they were reading the main report, you realised that there were some instructions which the Executive Director for UCC gave, especially concerning the spectrum of UTL, and you could see that nothing was being implemented by UTL. They would just ignore the Executive Director for UCC. Where did that originate from? It could partly be because he was trading with UTL. 

Madam Speaker, Section 5 of the Uganda Communications Act also provides for the functions of Uganda Communications Commission. I do not want to repeat those ones for purposes of time; so Members will read them. However, I want to address myself to Section 17 of the Uganda Communications Act which provides for the duties of the executive director: “(1) (a) implementing the policies and programmes agreed upon by the Commission.” 

From the analysis of the main report, you see there are a lot of loopholes. Even the executive director himself confessed when he appeared before the committee that indeed they were not able to implement or enforce all the instructions that were given to UTL. When we asked him why, he said there were powers above him.

Madam Speaker, these are the observations on the issue of conflict of interest:

1. Within the provisions of sections 2, 8, 12 and the third schedule of the Leadership Code Act, 2002, I contend that Mr Godfrey Mutabazi is a leader whose business enterprise - Semiliki Diary and Beverages (Uganda) Ltd - supplied goods to UTL, a company he is regulating as the Executive Director of UCC. 
Therefore, I strongly observe that Mr Godfrey Mutabazi breached Regulation 4.6 on conflict of interest in the Government Standing Orders by doing business with UTL, a company in which the Government of Uganda owns 31 per cent shares.

Madam Speaker, it is apparent that Mr Godfrey Mutabazi is the Chief Executive Officer of the Uganda Communications Commission, which is responsible for implementing all policies, programmes and decisions of the commission including those concerning the operations and performance of UTL. Therefore, he could not have performed his duties diligently; for instance, it is possible that he did not appropriately advise the minister on giving out Uganda’s code through UTL to Southern Sudan, a region of the then Government of Sudan, through a company called Gemtel. Similarly, this evident conflict of interest could also be attributed to failure by UCC to shut down UTL after revoking the spectrum.

Recommendation

The Inspector General of Government should investigate the behaviour and conduct of Mr Godfrey Mutabazi, the Executive Director of UCC, for conflict of interest and accordingly hold him accountable for his actions.

Accountability for Funds Down Streamed to UTL during the United Nations (UN) Sanctions
From April 2011 to May 2012, the Government of Uganda directly managed UTL since all the assets, investments and institutions of the Government of Libya were placed under UN sanctions following the war that led to the death of the former President of Libya, Muammar Gaddafi, on 20 October 2011. During this period, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Chairman UTL, Mr Stephen Kaboyo, and the Director of UTL, Mr Moses Mwase, expressed to the select committee that it was difficult to downstream funds to UTL during the period of the UN sanctions. They said that most local and international banks did not allow funds to be channelled through UTL accounts held in these financial institutions.

However, a thorough review of the select committee revealed that funds to a tune of US$ 72,771,142 were down streamed between 2008 and 2014. In particular, funds to a tune of US$ 2,718,888 were down streamed during the period of the UN sanctions as indicated in the table which I have summarized here.

Madam Speaker, I observed that in 2008, US$ 7 million was down streamed; in 2010, US$ 4 million; in 2011, US$ 2 million; in 2012, US$ 8 million; in 2013, US$ 40 million; in 2014, US$ 9 million. The source of this information is the Libyan embassy here in Kampala Uganda.

Observation 

It is apparent that the board and senior management of UTL could have abused funds that were down streamed to the company during the period of the UN sanctions. This could be the reason they explained to the committee that there were no funds down streamed during this period yet it is evident that UTL received the funds in this period as presented by His Excellency the Libyan Ambassador to Uganda when he interacted with the select committee.

Recommendation 

Madam Speaker, I strongly recommend that the Auditor-General should examine how the board members - Mr Ben G. Mbonye, Chairman of UTL Board in 2011; Mr Christopher Mugisha, who was representing the Government of Uganda on the UTL board; and Mr Donald Nyakairu who was the then acting Managing Director of UTL - utilized funds to the tune of US$ 2,718,888 which was down streamed during the period of the UN sanctions.

Recommendations in the Main Report

Madam Speaker, this is another area where I have a dissenting opinion. As earlier expressed in the introduction to this report, I believe that the findings and observations of the main report of the select committee are strong and convincing. However, the recommendations are too weak and do not rhyme with the findings and observations.

I have a contrary opinion, for instance, on recommendation No. 1 on page 60, which states, “With the current insolvent situation of UTL, Government should be cautious in taking over the management of UTL to avoid possible litigation.” This recommendation is somehow vague. It may expose the Ugandan taxpayer to the risk of clearing an accumulated debt burden to the tune of Shs 700 billion.

Further, recommendation No. 3 on page 60 of the main report of the select committee stated, “The current caretaker of UTL should present to Parliament within 90 days commitments and evidence of remitting UTL workers benefits including pensions and NSSF contributions.” This recommendation is redundant since the entire report has no mention of the caretaking of UTL and the select committee never interacted with nor extracted evidence from the purported UTL caretaker. What are we talking about? Which caretaker are we talking about who we did not interact with as a committee?

Observation

By classifying UTL under class III in the Public Enterprise Reform and Divesture Act, Cap 98, the Government of Uganda had no intentions to retain any shares or interest in this company. Thus, there is no legal basis for the Government of Uganda to continue running UTL or to attempt to salvage it from the current financial crisis that has put UTL into a whopping debt of over Shs 700 billion.

Children, women and men are dying of hunger almost everywhere across the country because they do not have access to food. It would be ridiculous for us as Parliament to recommend that the people who are failing to get food to survive an additional day are asked to pay Shs 700 billion for UTL, which is a private company. I commit that I shall not be party to this process, Madam Speaker.

The main report of the select committee equally falls short of mentioning individuals who are culpable for the mess of the UTL crisis. Some board members and senior management team, for example, have not been mentioned and yet Parliament can only get a clear picture on who has mismanaged UTL when all the persons are named.

Madam Speaker, recommendation No. 5 states, “Drawing lessons from the unfavourable agreements that Uganda Government signed with the majority shareholder in UTL, the committee recommends that in future, Government should not sign agreements that disempower it, like was the case with the agreements signed with UTL majority shareholder. Secondly, Government should never accept technical assistance or management support agreements since Uganda has enough highly qualified people as management consultants.” 

This recommendation falls short of mentioning the individual political office bearers and holding them culpable for the enormous mess that they caused to Ugandans. The then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 2000 when this very ugly agreement was signed and the Attorney-General should have been mentioned. Without doing that, Madam Speaker, we will never know who is causing a crisis in our country, Uganda. In 2000, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was hon. Gerald Ssendawula and the Attorney-General was hon. Bart Katureebe.

Recommendation

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda should allow UTL to be managed or probably be dissolved legally to avoid burdening the innocent taxpayers with bearing the debts and losses that have accumulated over the years, to a tune of over Shs 700 billion.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, this minority report has been prepared and presented in good faith and utmost ethical considerations. We must not be party to this in this House. We cannot be party to a process or manoeuvre whatsoever that disadvantages or mortgages our country called Uganda and its humble citizens to the benefit of small but wealthy mafia cliques. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I have documents that support this minority report. I have the Memorandum and Articles of Association for Semiliki Diary and Beverages (Uganda) Ltd. On page 10, it says that Mr Godfrey Mutabazi is duly a member of this company as a shareholder. Actually, it shows that he has 50 shares in this company. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also have a letter which Mr Godfrey Mutabazi wrote to you outlining the issues for which the committee had invited him to appear as witness. One of the issues that he highlighted is No.2 on page 1: “Allegations that I am the owner of Semiliki Diary and Beverages Company and that the said company has business relations with UTL.” 

When you go to page 3 of this letter, it says, “Executive Director’s relationship with Semiliki Diary and Beverage Company Ltd 

Rt. Honourable Speaker, I wish to clarify that whereas it is true that I hold 30 per cent shareholding in Semiliki Diary and Beverage Company Ltd, that company is a separate legal entity from the person of Mr Mutabazi Godfrey, who is merely a minority shareholder therein.” I beg to lay the letter on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also have with me the Leadership Code Act and I have tried to address myself to the Third Schedule, Part B, which specifies the officers who are mentioned in the Leadership Code Act. The Executive Director of a public body is No. 22. I beg to lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also have the Uganda Communications Act and in there I looked at the functions or duties of the Executive Director. They are mentioned here and clearly highlighted and Mr Godfrey Mutabazi should be following them. I beg to lay the Act on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I have a copy of the letter from H.E the Ambassador of Libya to Uganda in which he indicated to us the funds that have so far been down streamed. This is not a mere concoction but it is from the official docket of the Government of Libya. The money that I talked of, the US$ 2 million in 2011, is highlighted here. I beg to lay.

Finally, I have the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, which Mr Godfrey Mutabazi should have abided by. Specifically, I looked at section 4.6 (1), (2) and (3). I beg to lay them on the Table.  For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for the report and the accompanying documents. Honourable members, as you will appreciate, there is a lot of information in both the main and the minority report. There are also those annexure. Therefore, we shall defer debate on this matter and give Members time to read.

MR OKELLO ANTHONY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed this is a very important report for which I would like to personally debate. If we are going to debate this report now-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello, I have just said that I want to give you time to read all the documents and their accessories.

MR OKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that I would almost be sure of making my contribution.

THE SPEAKER: No, do not smuggle; you will debate when we are going to debate.

MR OKELLO: Madam Speaker, now that we are going to defer debate, we might have a full House and my opportunity to contribute diminishes. (Laughter) The point of procedure I am raising is that, given that I have stayed all this time and received this report.

THE SPEAKER: Please, there are other Members also in this House. That is not how we work. Anyway, I know who is here and those who are not here and I want to thank them for their staying power. Honourable members, as I said, go study the document we shall appoint a day for debate.

Honourable members, tomorrow there is an annual general meeting for the Parliamentary Pension Scheme; therefore, you are invited to go to the meeting. However, let us do it in the morning so that we are here by midday to receive the body of the late Byanyima. 

The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2 O’clock but we have a special sitting tomorrow as I have already indicated. Thank you so much for the work and have a good evening. Hon. Pentagon, you will go home safely. Hon. Pentagon was worried about security; you will be secure on your way home.

(The House rose at 8.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 May 2017 at 2.00. p.m.) 

