Tuesday, 18 May 2010 

Parliament met at 11.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that item of administration of oaths will come later although it was intended for today to swear in hon. Jeje Odong who is a minister but had some Constitutional and legal hurdles before he could become a Member of Parliament. These hurdles have been removed and, therefore, he can swear in so that he becomes an ex-officio Member of Parliament. Apparently he is not here and, therefore, we shall deal with it on another occasion. 

I welcome you to this sitting and take this opportunity to thank you for what has been done during this session. This session should have been prorogued in April – we normally prorogue in April to allow you some time to go and visit your constituencies and see what is happening there. But because of the urgent business we had in the House, we had to extend it and we have now eaten into May. 

I thank you for bearing with us without causing many problems. However, very soon Parliament will be prorogued to allow you time to go to your constituencies or to do other things because arrangements for starting the new session have been finalised and in due course, you will be informed when the new session will open. But I think I will need to give you some days again before the new session starts. Therefore, I want to thank you and in particular, I want to thank the Member of Parliament for Madi-Okolo County because even if I have been at a distance, I have monitored his religious punctuality in being in the House. I thank you very much and please carry on. (Mr Arumadri rose_) 

I am adjusting the Order Paper to allow hon. Mabikke to make a statement and then a few Members who have approached me will raise their issues. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT
 
10.41
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you very much. Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to make a statement of personal explanation. Basing on complaints and concerns arising from the ongoing voter registration process, I convened a meeting of all local council I chairpersons, councillors and stakeholders in my constituency last Thursday, 13 May at Kibuli Nursery School. I wrote to the Secretary of the Electoral Commission and invited the Electoral Commission to the meeting. I also wrote to the DPC, Kabalagala Police Station notifying them of the indoor event and asked them to do the needful. I arrived at the venue of the meeting and met an unusually huge presence of police. I called the Regional Police Commander who informed and assured me that the police were at the venue to ensure security and that the DPC was also on his way. 

Minutes before we could begin, a pickup loaded with over 12 men armed with clubs arrived at the scene and immediately started beating up those assembled. Old men and women were assaulted and they sustained severe injuries. Being militarily trained, I retreated to the back of the venue and called several persons to the venue and within minutes the people organised themselves and arrested two of the goons namely; Deogratious Kyalimpa and Byamuhangi. Others were able to escape from the scene but were also identified as Muhangi and Katayira, all boda boda cyclists at Lubuga and Mutajjazi stages respectively in Kibuli. 

These goons were equally roughed up and interrogated. They revealed that they were working in the office of the Deputy RDC of Makindye, Mr Mulowooza Kayondo and they were under the command of the DPC, Francis Walugembe. They also said that they had been trained at Nsambya playground and had been passed out at Kololo. They revealed that they had been instructed to disrupt my meeting. We decided to take them to Nsambya Police Post but on arrival at the post, about 10 other goons stormed the police post to rescue them and in the fracas, policemen were beaten and other vigilantes, including Councillor Abudulkarim Lukoda, were also beaten and sustained injuries. The situation was saved with the arrival of more police reinforcements. I called my cantankerous lawyer, hon. Odonga Otto, who arrived at the scene within minutes and we were able to transfer the two goons to Katwe Police Station. 

On arrival at Katwe, we were amazed that the goons, who are now our suspects, were being accorded a lot of respect. In fact one of the policemen saluted them. When I quietly asked him whether he knew them, he said he did, telling me they were security personnel attached to the office of the Deputy RDC. 

Soon thereafter, another goon was identified as Issa Serwadda, who I also learnt had reported to Katwe on duty. He too was arrested but grudgingly. Statements were recorded and indeed at 10.30 a.m. we were asked to leave and return the next morning. The three goons were released at 11.00 p.m. in the night on police bond but I was told that the case would proceed. I now ask the following questions:

1.	Who is behind the training and arming of this kiboko squad?
2.	Why is this kiboko squad attached to the office of the RDC and why is such a paramilitary outfit under the command of the Police?
3.	Will the Electoral Commission be able to conduct peaceful, free and fair elections in such an atmosphere?
4.	If Police continues to syndicate with the Kiboko Squad, will it be able to contain a situation when the people decide to rise against these squads? 
5.	Why are NRM functionaries like RDCs, GISOs, and chairpersons directing the work of the Electoral Commission and engaging in the registration of under-age people and foreigners? 

Mr Speaker, I will not waver in the struggle for clean and transparent governance. I will not get tired of organising meetings and rallies to consult or even to provide feedback to my constituents on issues dear to them and I can affirm here that my people shall not tolerate such an incident again. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the statement made. It is a personal explanation. I hope those concerned will study it. We do not have debate on personal statements.

10.48
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise a matter of national importance. 

In this House there are about 42 Members of Parliament who are on an independent ticket. We are trying to raise a matter of national importance so that certain constitutional provisions are cleared by the Attorney-General. When you look at Article 83 where a Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament; we are mostly interested in sections (g) and (h). Section (g) says, “… if that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood …” 

THE SPEAKER: Which section?

MR OPANGE: Section (h) –(Interjections)- 83(h) “ … if that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member.” 

Then (h) “… if, having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party.”  

If you look at Article 83(2), it says: “Notwithstanding clause (1)(g) and (h) of this article, membership of a coalition government of which his or her original political party forms part shall not affect the status of any member of Parliament.”

When you look at independent Members of Parliament, they do not have an original political past to form a coalition and by joining other parties, it will definitely tantamount to crossing to that party.

When you look at Article 83(3), “The provisions of clauses (1)(g) and (h) and (2) of this article shall only apply during any period when the multi-party system of government is in operation.” 

What I want to know from the Attorney-General is one; when do the independent Members of Parliament declare to contest in the next election for a particular party and if, for example, in the primaries, a Member of Parliament, who is independent, joins a political party by getting a registration card and gets nominated by that party for primary elections, does he lose his seat in Parliament as contained in this provision? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean independent candidates should not prepare for the next Parliament? Must you remain in perpetuity as an independent candidate? I thought what you are talking about is standing as a Member of Parliament for the next elections? And, therefore, you lose your seat simply because next time you want to stand as a DP or NRM candidate?

MR OPANGE: Mr Speaker, the primary elections always take place around six months before the expiry of this term. And you know our provisions at times say that you can lose your seat but there will be no by-election in that constituency. Those are the provisions we are asking the Attorney-General to clear.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OPANGE: Whether independent Members of Parliament can contest for primary elections, which are scheduled to take place in July -

THE SPEAKER: Next year’s elections?

MR OPANGE: Yes, next year’s elections and by getting a registration card, it means you have joined that party when you are still a Member of Parliament in this House. Does that tantamount to crossing over to that party and virtually you lose your seat here? That is what –

THE SPEAKER: But if you do that, do you think in my records they refer to you as NRM if you join NRM? I will refer to you as an independent as far as I am concerned. Anyway, I think the Attorney-General will help us with that. Hon. Attorney-General, you have heard the question. You may answer it now or later; I do not know. But I think it is a very important question. 

10.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, at first when you raised the issues of the honourable colleague, I was tempted to answer off- cuff but when I heard your observations I thought I would prepare a written position, come with it and present it to the House because this is an important matter. It is recurrent and I will come with a written legal opinion and present it to the House. [MR OPANGE: “When?”] Within this week.

THE SPEAKER: Well, not this week. It will not be possible because we are going to prologue soon.

MR RUHINDI: Yes, because this is a matter we have considered before. The law is very clear and it will not take me time to prepare the position. If I can be given a slot by Thursday, I will present it.

THE SPEAKER: But I think his intention is for preparation for next year’s elections. He can remain as an independent here but for next year’s elections stand as FDC or NRM. Now you say because he has crossed, he ceases to be an independent Member of Parliament here? Hon. Mabikke is now trying to be a president of a political party –

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For purposes of the next elections, I am going to stand as President of the Republic of Uganda and I am in the process of preparing a party; the Social Democratic Party. It is going to be my platform as a stepping stone to the presidency. I think you are right when you say that for purposes of the next elections, we are moving; but for purposes of Parliament, we remain independent. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the Attorney-General will come in with the answer.

MR GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want clarification on an issue, which hon. Mabikke glossed over. A car of one of the candidates in the current campaigns was burnt. I thought that there was need for clarification because it is not only hon. Mabikke who is having problems. In fact, it is also – our party is also having problems where cars of some of our candidates are being burnt openly. 

Therefore, we need all the parties to know that we all need to be together to see that there is no chaos. We need your guidance that really – this is a competition; it is a game and in a game, one should not start using methods, which are not normal. It is not only Mabikke who is saying so. I thought that as a national leader, he should have also pointed to the issue that a vehicle was burnt in Mukono and –

THE SPEAKER: As I said, it was a personal statement. Our rules do not provide for debating it, but I think you made an observation in that it is not only him but others have suffered violence, which is okay. I think we should not debate it; but there are issues; there are questions, which he raised during his statement, which I think may be of interest for the Executive to examine and then give guidance on in future. 

10.56
MR ADISON KAKURU (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance. On 15 May, at night, disaster befell our constituency, Rukiga County in Kabale District. On that fateful night, there was a heavy rainstorm in the whole county, which lasted for more than 12 hours. This storm has left many parts of Rukiga completely devastated. Rukiga is comprised of four sub-counties of Kashambya, Rwamucucu, Bukinda and Kamwezi. 

We have 25 parishes and 293 villages. As of now, we have not yet compiled a comprehensive report covering the total destruction done in Rukiga, but there is no single village that was not affected in some way or the other. 

For purposes of this brief, allow me to highlight a few areas, which require immediate attention. In Ntungamo Village in Karorwa parish, in Bukinda sub-county, Reagan Atwijuka a second year student of Kabale University was killed by a collapsing wall of the house where he was sleeping that was struck by a mudslide rolling down-slope. 

In a nearby parish, two bodies where exhumed by fast moving mudslides and were reburied on Sunday. In many villages within Kyerero and Karorwa parishes of Bukinda sub-county, Ibumba, Nyarurambi and Nyakagabagaba parishes of Rwamucucu sub-county; houses were struck by landslides and mudslides; some people have been left homeless and have relocated to public places like churches, health centres and schools. 

In low lying areas like Muhanga Town Board and Kabimbiri trading centre, buildings were submerged to window level. Household properties in such homes were damaged while others where carried away with the fast-flowing water. Merchandise like cement, sugar, salt and maize flour worth millions of shillings were pulled out of flooded shops and thrown away because they could not be sun-dried. 

Farmers lost different crops in the field and in storage. Gardens of Irish potatoes in valleys were completely submerged, covered with floods and silt. In many areas, you can hardly see any upright crop. Banana plantations and gardens of Sorghum are destroyed by either rolling mudslides or water or flattened by wind. 

In the constituency, it is now completely difficult to move from one sub-county to another. The main roads affected are the road connecting Kabale District with Rukungiri, from Muhanga trading centre through Kisizi. The two sub-counties cannot now connect to that main trading centre in the constituency. 

Vehicles from Rwamucucu and Kashanja will either go through Kisizi to Rubale in Ntungamo or through Rukiri to Kabale, which increases the travel distance by about 40 kilometres. Bukindamaziba, which is in Ndorwa East constituency – there is a road connecting the two constituencies. That road is completely blocked and there is no alternative route. At Kyobugombesindi, the road is completely cut off and Muhanga–Kyogo-Kamwezi Road is completely cut off.

Mr Speaker, water supply in the area has also been adversely affected. Many water sources have either been completely covered by landslides or completely silted while some others have been completely washed away. I would like to make a passionate appeal to Members of this august House, especially those who come from mountainous and hilly areas, to form an association which will work as a lobby group. Hilly and mountainous areas have peculiar conditions and my experience in local government is that the formula used to give grants to central government underestimates the area which is a factor in calculating the grants from the central government. So, I think we need to sit and lobby our colleagues and officials in the Ministry of Finance to understand this problem so that they make a collection of that factor of ruggedness. 

It is also very clear that maintenance of infrastructure like roads is more difficult in highland areas than in flat areas. Actually, I have observed that roads in hilly areas are harder to maintain and most of the time, they are in bad condition. For some time now I have been comparing Kabale District with our neighbouring districts, which are relatively flat; the roads in Kabale are mostly in worse condition. 

I would like to make the following prayers: 

1.	That the Minster of Disaster Preparedness takes keen interest in this matter and provides some relief items to the affected community. 
2.	That the Minister of Works and Transport takes up this matter to enable his field staff to open up these roads as soon as possible. 
3.	That the Minister of Water and Environment takes up this matter to ensure that the destroyed water facilities in the area are quickly repaired. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, those of you who have been to Kabale know that people build their settlements in the middle of the slope and collect water in the valley bottom. So, this flooding and destruction of houses and pit latrines has caused problems because where latrines have been destroyed, the contents have been emptied into the valleys where water is collected. There is a very big health risk in those areas and I think this needs immediate attention. Thank you. 

11.07
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add to what my colleague has submitted. Personally, I was in the constituency and I indeed survived one of the landslides immediately after passing, with my colleague, hon. Shem Bageine. The whole constituency of Ndorwa East is now inaccessible. I tried to move around to most of the areas using a boda boda, which cannot reach some of the affected areas because we have to cross bridges, which have been washed away. I had an experience of just walking across a river on one log.

Three parishes already have nothing to do with water; their food crops were washed away, banana plantations were washed away, bridges were washed away and the whole place is disastrous. I am appealing to the central government especially the Ministry of Works – the Bakiga are hard working; we should have the roads, which have been blocked, re-opened so that people access health facilities. And schools are opening again but the children have nowhere to pass. If the ministry could re-open the immediate roads that have been blocked, maybe we would look for where to begin from.

Unfortunately, when I called the engineer in charge of Uganda National Roads Authority in Kabale, the explanation he gave was that they have one piece of equipment, which fell over a cliff and that his hands were tied. A few weeks ago, because the main road in my constituency called Old Kabale road which had been taken over by the central government is in such a diffused state, the retired Bishop Rwekiranda had mobilised people to stage a demonstration and I sweet talked him into leaving it temporarily. He had given me and the RDC up to the 1st June to have worked on the road or they demonstrate by closing the Kabale-Mbarara road, which would mean even exports and imports from Rwanda would not pass through. We had hoped that maybe by 1st June, something would have been done but now even the area where people were passing has been blocked and I am worried that people may now bring forward their demonstration. 

So, I am praying to the Ministry of Works to look at this as a matter of urgency, then the Minister of Disaster can bring food and relief items for those who have greatly been affected, but the situation is terrible.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I wish to inform you that two Members approached me to tell me what is happening in their areas. I understand this has affected other areas and the minister has approached me that he wanted to make a statement on those disasters. Don’t you think that is enough? He is going to make a statement on this issue of flooding and mudslides. He is making it; definitely he has told me.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you, we could allow the minister to make a statement but Members from specific constituencies and districts that have been affected need to go on record so that the minister covers all areas because Rukungiri District was also affected by a landslide -

THE SPEAKER: They are entitled to this but there are procedures of dealing with these kinds of statements. At least he came to me, he came to me, he came to me and he came to me. Actually, we should observe the rules but I know his statement is going to cover - I think he is talking about what has happened in Mbale. Maybe, I give you just two minutes to just mention what has happened.

11.11
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am from Mbale District in a constituency called Bungokho North. Colleagues, you have seen this, you have watched it on TV. On the same day, that is Saturday night, there was a very terrible incident in my constituency. A lot of rainfall hit the place in the sub-county of Bubyangu. There was a lot of water, which ran through Budwale sub-county down hill near the national park and a lot of houses and gardens were swept away. We lost three children, two of whom were pupils of Bumadanda Primary School.

I will not bore you a lot but what I would like to add on is that normally when such disasters happen, our voters expect a lot from us but Government has limited resources but I have appealed to those people because it happened, when I was home and I went there. People whose houses were damaged have camped in a primary school nearby without food because their houses were swept away. Those whose houses were waterlogged are also camped there, the road leading to that place, Bubyangu is totally damaged, the shops in Machese in the same place are also damaged, the foodstuffs which were there, were swept away. So, my appeal to Government is that if we can get help from the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Water - because there is a place where water is connected to that place, called Bukumi. Those tanks were completely damaged so water is a problem, transport is a problem and food is a problem. 

Already the Red Cross has started taking there a few things, which is something good. I am also happy to note that when I took the report to the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, he told me that they have already dispatched 250 bags of flour and some other foodstuffs -

THE SPEAKER: I think now we know that there is a problem and you want Government to intervene -

MR GUDOI: In short, Mr Speaker -(Member timed out_)

11.15
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to inform the House of the disaster that happened in Rukungiri District. Rukungiri District has a very bad road called Enengo, which is the main artery for communication between the district and Kanungu and the border with the DRC. As we talk, this road is closed; the buses cannot move from Kanungu to Rukungiri and vice versa and there is urgent need for that road to be re-opened. I would like to suggest the following:

That alternative crossing between Nyakinengo and Rugyeyo in Kanungu where the work had started to make that bridge is completed quickly as an alternative route.

Secondly, I would like to urge Government to be proactive in view of the continuing disasters that are happening in mountainous areas, to address people and advise them to move away from these areas so that we do not lose more lives when we are already forewarned since we know that the rains are continuing. I would also like to suggest that the ministries concerned, that is, the Ministry in charge of forestry and the Ministry of Agriculture, should talk to the people and advise them on how to utilise land because we know that these landslides never used to occur because there was coverage by forests and so on. 

Lastly, I would like to suggest that Government also looks into the possibility of resettling people from these areas. I understand that for the people of Bududa there has been a proposal to buy them land in -(Member timed out_)

11.18
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a statement regarding the current situation in Katakwi District. 

As is already known, most parts of North Eastern Uganda are beginning again to receive unprecedented heavy amounts of rain and as fate would have it, Katakwi District is already reporting a number of areas that are being affected heavily. The first victim of the flood-related occurrence is the food crops. Since morning, I have received three calls from the parishes of Aliakamer, Alukucok and areas of Magoro reporting that people are now reacting by rushing to the gardens to uproot the cassava at its very tender age. So, this is really to bring to the attention of the minister that again we are about to experience the issues that we went through in 2007. 

11.19
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Mr Speaker, I also want to add my voice to the honourable members’. We had a hailstorm in my constituency, Luuka, two weeks ago. It destroyed schools and people’s houses and actually three people died. 

I reported to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but I am dismayed that up to now, they have not done anything. The school, which collapsed as a result of the hailstorm, has over 1,400 pupils and we do not even know how they are going to go to school. 

So I wish to call upon the ministry and Government to look for money and intervene in these disasters. Disasters are not only in hilly places where there are mudslides; they are also in flat areas. 

We should take some of these issues very seriously. In my constituency there was a situation in Namulanda, Bukoma sub-county, where a tree fell on somebody’s house and he ran to the kitchen. Another tree fell on his kitchen -(Laughter)- he ran out and actually right now his social way of living has collapsed. I am talking about over 20 houses, and food crops destroyed in Namulanda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is the last one from the Member from Tororo.

11.21
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance regarding people living with HIV/AIDS in Tororo. As you may be aware, the Centre for Disease Control, which is the research arm of the US Government, was operating in Tororo and they were carrying out research on people living with AIDS. They are now closing shop and the lives of over 1,000 people are in jeopardy because there is nowhere that these people will be going because they were being attended to by CDC staff and the ARVs were being taken to them in their various localities. 

So, right now the lives of these people are in danger and I would request the Ministry of Health to look into this matter so that maybe they can add more ARVs to the health centres, which are in those localities in the whole district so that these people can be told to go to the various centres. That is the reason I rose. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Minister, can you make that statement?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members for the information they have given to you and to this House and indirectly to me as well. It looks like last Sunday can be called the dark Sunday because throughout the country, the rains were unusual. On my way from Bushenyi on Sunday, hon. Amama Mbabazi rang me to say there was a problem in Enengo; that landslides had blocked the road and many people were trapped. 

I got in touch with the Chairman LC V, Karokora, who happened to have been in Kampala but who also mobilised efforts to make sure that something happens. I can inform this House that this morning when I talked to Karokora he said by 12 or thereabout the road would be open. What delayed the action was that the vehicle which was going to do the job also had a puncture and it took time to get the puncture worked on. This may sound unusual but punctures do occur and especially when you are in a panic you may even cause a puncture. So, that is why emergencies become emergencies because the normal condition seemed to be unavailable.

Regarding Rukiga, I think the honourable member has given more information than I had but at about the same time I talked to hon. Mbabazi, hon. Hope Mwesigye gave me a call and we also talked about what to do and the idea was to get more information. I think this information that has come in will help us with the intervention. 

I would like to thank the hon. Member for Bungokho North who not only came to my office but also wrote something by way of details and that he himself reached the site where the lives were lost and actually took part in the burial of the dead. 

At this point I would also like to inform the House that we also lost lives in Sironko. Yesterday I was in Mbale and I met the LC V Chairperson who had been to the very area of hon. Gudoi and we compared notes on what to do.

Mr Speaker, the issue of forming camps when a disaster has occurred needs to be considered seriously because you can create more problems by concentrating people than you can solve. This is because the health challenges become paramount. So, when the numbers are not too big, we encourage those affected to be with relatives so that we address their food needs but not the shelter needs, unless it is absolutely necessary like we have the case of Bulucheke where you have thousands living in camps, and even there, the challenge is very big.

Mr Speaker, the Sironko matter was even attended to by colleagues, hon. Werikhe and hon. Wabudeya; they went there and gave us a report. I was with hon. Werikhe yesterday and we compared notes on what to do. 

The reason I am going into these details is because interventions come in when you get information. I would like to point out that – I do not know whether I should now give everybody my telephone number because it is important that I get to know; if we get to know, then we can take action. 

On the other hand, there are certain interventions that can be made quickly, but even then you may not do it quickly. For example, we have sent food to Sironko and to north Bungokho, but we haven’t yet sent food to Rukiga because we need to know what numbers we are dealing with and the areas to address. Therefore, accurate information is paramount. 

Even when you are talking of an alternative road, the time frame is critical. You can look at a bridge, but to build a new bridge is not an intervention that can be made within hours or days or even months in some cases.

I would like to appeal to my friend, the hon. Member for Rukiga, who is talking of forming a lobby group for those who live in the hills or mountains; correspondingly, you are going to have another lobby group by people from the plains. For example, Butaleja is a beautiful setting; but it may even be better to be in the mountains that you can climb; but when you are in the plains, you get overwhelmed. So, the issue is not so much about having lobby groups as much as really being aware that these challenges are going to increase, hence, the need to prepare our people and our minds on how to handle them.

It is true, advice like, “Take keen interest in these problems” - certainly we do take keen interest. I would like to inform Members that the keenest interest that they can express is to let us know. In the event that I do not have a telephone number of any of our colleagues, I have found it convenient to ring State House and they give you the telephone number of an MP or even a minister. They seem to have these numbers - so that the information can come in and we can take the necessary action. 

Lastly, when a matter like the case of Luuka - it is two weeks old and I do not seem to know; then of course it might be my problem that I might not have been in the office. But I also think that since there are two of us, the minister of state and myself, including the PS and the commissioner, I have known and we have standing instructions that when a matter of urgency of this nature comes in, we are informed and we decide wherever we are. For example, hon. Ecweru is now in Mbale to follow up with the groups we sent there and check on the spot. I am also going after here, to make sure that we have a team that goes to Rukiga so that we are on top of the situation. 

I would want you, hon. Members, to bear in mind that sending groups in different directions can also be a disaster in itself. Fortunately, we are now - I will be coming to this House to inform you about our disaster preparedness policy – we are hoping that we will have the capacity at district level to be able to detect and intervene in emergencies, in order to reduce the current vulnerabilities. 

Mr Speaker, this question of resettling people in Kayunga, as was mentioned by hon. Muhwezi; let us be careful because land in Kayunga is not for settling people from Bududa. And the numbers - just like when you talk of the whole Elgon area; but you are also talking of the Rwenzori; and also of Kigezi Uplands. So, the issue of resettlement is a bit more complicated than it can be handled quickly. You have people who should –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what I gather from your statement is that we should let you know when we have disasters and write reports. For instance, hon. Kakuru presented a detailed report. So instead of saying, send investigators, I think we, the Members of the area, should investigate and give details and propose solutions. 

I appeal to honourable members who have these disasters wherever they are to write these reports. I am going to open a file in my office for disaster so that you also send me copies of the statements you are sending to the minister, so that both of us, Parliament and the ministry can follow up. So, please write reports. Thank you very much.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much for that strategy. I would also like to appeal to Members that a statement in the House is good but let the message or the information come to us so that we can act. Statements alone are not enough; in emergencies we need to intervene and do something.

11.34
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact, I really sympathise with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. I have a feeling that the issue of disaster is going to continue, and devastatingly. I have a feeling that there is no way the disaster ministry is going to be treating symptoms and yet the parent ministry in charge, which is the Ministry of Water and Environment, is not taking the lead role. Since we had the Bududa case, how far is the Ministry of Water and Environment taking up the issue of tree planting massively; even to the extent of implementing what was recommended in the Tree Planting Act? Most of the hills are bare and it is going to be even worse on the hilly and mountainous areas. 

So, I feel the Ministry of Water and Environment should be taken to task. These are devastating effects of climate change. Let them act; we need to be seeing them beginning to do something. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the other point, hon. Members, this resettlement of people from Bududa, be it to Kayunga or Rukungiri, requires our effort because people are conservative. In order to remove somebody from Bududa and take him to Kayunga, you will need to convince him. So, we should also tell our people of the problems they face. Otherwise, they will say, “My great grandfather was buried here and I should also be buried here rather than cross the Nile and go to Kayunga”. (Laughter) So, let us mobilise them psychologically. 

11.36
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you. People may be conservative, but because of their conservatism, they will die. So, if somebody traditionally is not supposed to cross a river and there is a landslide, he will perish. So I think that people must be educated; they must be sensitised and encouraged to move to safe areas, conservatism notwithstanding; otherwise we shall have a problem. 

I really encourage the people in the eastern part of our country to move away from the hills and go to areas where there is peace; where landslides will not take place so that they can settle and begin a new life. For me that is very important -(Interjection)- of course, the people of Kabale know their traditional ways of movement, and they are already moving anyway. I am already receiving some of them in my constituency because that is their traditional route of movement. 

But the most important point I would like to make is that the minister should not complain about information. The most important information he has to receive should be from the CAO –(Interjections)– yes, there is the District Disaster Management Committee chairperson, who is the CAO of the district. That is the most reliable and official informer to you as the minister. So, as soon as something happens in Kabale District, even before the area Member of Parliament rings you, the CAO who is in that place should be the person to rush –(Interjection)- or the community development officer at sub-county level should go to the site, gather information and bring it to the district – 

THE  SPEAKER: No, nobody is ruling you out – he is just helping you – no, it is okay; but I think let me close with him and if you have to respond to anything, please come in later – there is no point of order.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: As I was saying, the community development officer gathers that information, sends it to the district and the district should send that same information to the Office of the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. That is the most reliable way of receiving that information.

I am saying this because I know – I have been a minister for disaster preparedness myself. So, I am not just thinking out of – that is the only officially established channel – 

THE SPEAKER: Yeah! But hon. Butime, whereas what you are saying is correct, suppose the CAO does not act, are you saying other people cannot inform – they are just supplementing. If it is his duty to send the information, let him do so; but that should not be restricted to him – other people who come across that information should also present it. 

11.40
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Whereas the power of foresight lies in the ability to recognise that it is not possible to foresee everything, science has enabled us to use some formulae; just using the facts you have for now to predict what is likely to happen in the future. Unfortunately, in each of the areas that are struck by a disaster, people run to the ministry to just treat the symptoms. The ministry also sticks to the idea of treating the symptoms by giving food and resettling people; but after the disaster has been managed, nothing is done about its cause. 

I would like to request the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness to also coordinate with the - on the issue of floods, for example, in a place well-known as Teso, the areas likely to be affected by floods are predictable and the solution lies in constructing channels to control the heavy volumes of water that might come about – there should be a path created for water to move in. Unfortunately, this cannot be done by the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness because this is the work of engineers. 

You also need the services of physical planners and this calls for long term planning. This is possible because we have a number of professionals, some of them I see here. The Makerere University Department of Geology should be brought in; the science of the soil should be studied – this is for the case of landslides – but okay, let me say this, it may sound outrageous, but I think for a mind that can foresee, it cannot be outrageous.

If the problem is the highlands or that the ground is high and there is some loose soil about to fall off, why don’t you use a grader to level the highland? That is formula one. If the people must live there, why don’t you think about leveling the highland?

Two, if the problem –(Interjections)– yes, I mean this is science –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I need your protection. If the problem is that there is some loose soil that is about to fall off, why do you wait for the rain to take off this soil before leveling the place? Why do you wait for the soils to fall off when people are sleeping and are not aware?

The point I am making here is that let us engage science; let us engage our capacity as human beings to minimise the effects of disasters, for example, the floods that affected Teso.

Lastly, if you think this is impossible, you give me the chance to be in Government –(Laughter)– and I will show you how it is done.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this has really taken us long. Can we move on to the next item? Yes, hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker -(Laughter) last time – 

THE SPEAKER: I think I have been away for a long time.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, we have been used – okay, last time when the amendment Bill on pensions was presented in Parliament I promised to provide the Certificate of Financial Implications as required by law. In fulfillment of that promise, I lay on the Table, the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us go to the next one.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS ON THE STATUS OF HIV IN UGANDA

11.46
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Mrs Beatrice Rwakimari): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to lay our report on the Table. 

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in conformity with rule 167(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I have the honour and pleasure to present to this honourable House the Report of the Parliament Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters.

Because of the importance of this report, I hope in future we shall be given sufficient time for presentation, consideration and adoption.

Mr Speaker, today I am privileged to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters on the national response to the AIDS epidemic in Uganda when we are commemorating the candlelight memorial day in the world.  This is a day when we share and honour memories of our beloved relatives, friends, neighbours, workmates and others whom we have lost to the deadly epidemic. 

In this report, it is very clear that we are at crossroads. We are not able to sustain the treatment programme as long as we continue to get high rates of infection. It is a fact that there is donor fatigue towards funding for HIV/AIDS programmes and yet as a country, we do not have sufficient resources to treat the 500,000 people who are eligible for treatment.  

We already have information from our honourable colleague from Tororo that there is shortage of ARVs in this country and this is a very big challenge to this country. And I think as Government, we need to do something to ensure that everybody that requires treatment is treated. 

What we need now is a very strong partnership collaboration and support from all of us to stop new infections by changing – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what is happening now?

MRS RWAKIMARI: I am finishing, Mr Speaker. I want to pass on the message although I will not be able to read the whole report. I am about to finish. I want to inform everybody that it is our responsibility to stop these new infections by changing our behaviour and promoting all programmes aimed at preventing the epidemic. 

Lastly, let me use this opportunity to inform Members that we shall be having a very big ceremony, the Parliamentary HIV/AIDS Prevention Annual Awards in the Parliamentary Gardens on the 31st May and the guest of honour will be H.E. the President of Uganda. You are all very welcome because this is our own and you need to support us. I beg to lay these papers on the Table and thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So, you will be given time to explain the contents of the report later. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee, do you want to lay the report on the Table?

11.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. On 1st April, the Minister of Finance laid on the Table the National Budget Framework Paper for consideration by Parliament. Parliament, through the sector committee, considered the National Budget Framework Paper and reports were submitted to the Budget Committee and a report of the Budget Committee was prepared thereafter and presented to you on Thursday last week for onward transmission to His Excellency the President. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table recommendations of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the Medium Term Macro-Economic Plan and Programme (MTEF) for economic and social development for fiscal year 2010/11-2014/15 and the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of the government for the Financial Year 2010/11. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to inform colleagues that this report that I have laid on the Table is already in your mail box. I would also like to request that a future date be accorded to me to give a summarised report that I will read to the House in due course.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That will be done.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 10.21 MILLION AND US $9.70 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND AND THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK RESPECTIVELY FOR FINANCING THE RURAL INCOME AND EMPLOYMENT ENHANCEMENT PROJECT

11.53
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Erinah Wangwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, the Committee on National Economy scrutinised the request by the Ministry of Finance for Government to borrow UA 10.21 million that is the equivalent of 1.31 million from the African Development Bank (ADB). This request was brought to the House and forwarded to our committee as per the Rules of Procedure.

I will do my best to summarise the report, but I will also try to bring out the important points.

First, I want to lay on the Table the documents that we used in our committee as stated on page 2: 

1.	The Project Appraisal Document.
2.	The Project Implementation Plan.
3.	The two Draft Loan Financing Agreements.
4.	The Aide Memoiré of the IDB Mission in Uganda.
5.	The Technical Assistance Agreement for the Grant.
6.	The Staff Appraisal Report by the Islamic development Bank.  
7.	The Minister’s brief on the loan request.

In the background, Rt Hon. Speaker, sentence two says that an assessment of the microfinance industry in 2007 revealed that its clientele base increased from 300,000 in 1997 to 3.5 million in 2007 of which 60 were women. And the study also made several conclusions as you see on page 3. 

Rationale for Bank Involvement

The rationale for bank involvement is based on the Government of Uganda proactive policies to support rural-based economic growth; analysis on projections estimate and increase in demand for rural financial services by at least 35 percent of the population by 2015. 

As Government of Uganda rolls out its PFA programme, which focuses on reforms related to employment generation, increasing food security and regional trade and private sector investment opportunities, it is estimated that in order to continue on the path of sustained economic growth, broad-based participation from the small and micro entrepreneurs will be imperative both for the service and productive industry.

As such, the RIEEP will respond to Government’s plans to meet emerging needs for increased access to financial services contributing to economic growth in priority sectors. It is estimated that at least 2,934 new wholesale loans will be generated by 2014. It should be recognised that the proposed project is the third operation to be financed by the Bank in Uganda.

The MSC was created by Government of Uganda in close collaboration with the Bank, with the aim of establishing a viable and sustainable institution with the potential to expand outreach and increase access to financial services by the rural poor in Uganda.
 
And hence, during its implementation of the two previous operations, the Bank learnt important lessons that will enhance the achievement of the project objective which is, “To facilitate access and utilization of affordable financial services to about 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans.”

Furthermore, the proposed Bank intervention is guided by the comparative advantage already in place, which includes the existence of basic microfinance infrastructure and the Bank’s long, sustained engagement with the Government of Uganda in the development of financial industry policy and a regulatory framework. 

Therefore, this new financing is part of the Bank’s continued support to the microfinance industry in Uganda and also demonstrates the Bank’s commitment to Government of Uganda strategy of enhancing the delivery of microfinance services to the rural poor in Uganda.

Project Overview

The microfinance industry in Uganda was a natural offshoot of the general dynamics of the country’s economy, which left rural and other low income people lacking financial services in the last three decades. The economic background of the 1970s and 1980s caused many banks to close up-country branches, and community-based financial institutions like SACCOs closed down too. Attempts to reverse this through massive branch opening by the then Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) in the 1980s was not successful as many of the branches made perpetual losses and were closed down. This was exacerbated by the massive failures of four banks in 1998 including the Cooperative Bank which then had the second largest branch network and agency arrangements for its microfinance sub-branches.

The issues highlighted above, left rural and other poor people in Uganda without formal financial services. Microfinance was and is still seen as a vehicle to alleviating poverty. Hence, the Government’s economic policy framework and development strategy deliberately identifies microfinance as a vital tool in addressing one key development challenge; the prevalent absence of suitable financial services in rural areas.

Therefore, the proposed project is expected to contribute to the Microfinance Support Centre’s (MSC’s) Strategic Plan 2009-2014. This project is also unique in that it is the first to establish a countrywide microfinance infrastructure, which focuses on the under served rural areas in order to enhance incomes, employment and productivity. 

The direct beneficiaries of the proposed project will be about 1.4 million people of the rural population in Uganda; particularly women, who do not have access to financial services. 

The project will further build rural financial infrastructure and enhance their linkages to mainstream financial institutions such as commercial banks, through linkage banking and sharing client information.

The Project Objective

The overall goal of the project is to contribute towards reducing rural poverty in Uganda while its specific objective is to facilitate access to and utilisation of affordable financial and business development services to about 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans throughout the country. 

Components of the Project

1.	The financial services - and they are detailed in that paragraph;
2.	The institutional and business development services, which are also detailed on page 8.

Project Implementation

The project will be implemented by the Microfinance Service Centre through the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which will be designated as the project executing agency. 

Sustainability 

The interest income and fee structure is expected to generate additional income to cover operating costs and accelerate the project’s financial self-sufficiency and sustainability in the three years of the project life. 

The Loan Terms and Conditions

We have loans from the African Development Bank and their terms are: 

1.	The loan will be UA 10.21 million, equivalent to US$ 15.31.

2.	The maturity period of the loan is 50 years; with 10 years grace period. 

3.	A service charge of three-quarters of 1 percent which is 0.75 percent will be charged per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances of the loan, and a commitment charge at a rate of 0.5 percent per annum will also be charged on the undisbursed portion of the loan, which shall begin to accrue 120 days after the date of signature. 

4.	The principal of the loan shall be repaid in equal consecutive semi-annual instalments; the first of which shall be payable on the 1st of May or 1st of November, whichever immediately follows the expiration of the grace period. The conditions for financing are explained in that paragraph. 

Also, from the Islamic Development Bank:

1.	The loan amount is US $9.7 million.
2.	There will be a grant portion amounting to US $0.3 million and the maturity period of the loan is 30 years, including 10 years grace period. 
3.	A service charge of three-quarters will be charged per annum and the actual amount of the service fee shall be calculated after the implementation of the project provided that the actual amounts so calculated shall not exceed 0.75 percent on the loan amount.

Conditions attached to financing are also explained in that paragraph on page 11. So, these are the observations and recommendations of the committee, on page 12.

THE SPEAKER: Is it page 12 or 13? What is it?

MRS WANGWA: I am sorry. It is page 12. I hope we are together. 

Observations and Recommendations

1.	The committee observed that the criteria used for selection and distribution of funds to SACCOs is not clearly stated and this could lead to various SACCOs being disadvantaged and hence, low attainment of the project objective. 

	So, the committee recommends that the Microfinance Support Centre develops a clear selection criterion that will ensure equal and fair distribution of the project funds to the SACCOs involved, in order for the overall objective, which is, “To facilitate access and utilisation of affordable financial and business development services to about 1.4 million rural poor to be attained.”

2.	It was noted that larger amounts of funds are going to be spent on capacity building – that is US $3.36, not taking into account the staff turn over. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Microfinance Support Centre considers a bonding agreement with the staff trained using project funds until the end of the project life to avoid repetition of recruitment and training when the trained staff leave the institution. Further, in regard to training, the training of trainers’ methods should be adopted in order for it to be all inclusive and meaningful to the grassroots’ rural poor. 

3.	The committee noted that with the operations and expansions of the various mushrooming microfinance institutions, their self-sustenance is still of concern, and a clear lack of a regulatory centre for ensuring satisfactory performance of such institutions and the protection of poor people’s savings. The committee recommends the establishment of a regulatory framework for the Tier 4 segment of Uganda’s Microfinance Industry that will be helpful in protecting the savings of the poor and in ensuring that weak MFIs do not undermine the stability of the financial system. 

4.	The committee noted that some SACCOs and MFIs only lend money to their clients on terms that aren’t conducive for agricultural activities despite taking agricultural loans from the Microfinance Centre. Further to note is that the recovery process of the loan money on the agricultural process is not clear. So, the committee recommends that the microfinance centre sets uniform guidelines for the operations of SACCOs and microfinance institutions in regard to on-lending, especially for agricultural activities. Further, the committee recommends that Government considers setting up an agricultural bank to cater for specifically agricultural activities. 

5.	It was observed that the Microfinance Support Centre lacks clear indication on how it will deal with losses of public funds through embezzlement and corruption. So the committee recommends that the ministry sets up anti-corruption tribunals at sub-county level to deal with the issues of embezzlement and corruption.

6.	The committee noted that the interest rate charged by the MSC to SACCOs and MFIs that is ranging from 9 percent to 13 percent is quite high; hence the high rate charged by SACCOs or MFIs to the beneficiaries. This indicates the fact that the project beneficiaries who are the rural poor may not be able to access the loans properly. The committee recommends that the Microfinance Service Centre considers setting a standard interest rate that is universally affordable to all rural poor, to whom the project is intended.

7.	The committee observed that the absence of performance monitoring and evaluation tools for the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union whose overall purpose is to foster the organisation and development of savings and credit cooperatives in Uganda and to improve their internal operations. Further, it was noted that UCSCU lacks the capacity to perform its mandate. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Microfinance Service Centre closely monitors and evaluates the performance of UCSCU with a view to building its capacity and enhancing its performance. 

In conclusion, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the government request to borrow units of accounts 10.21 million equivalent to 15.31 million from the African Development Bank and of the African Development Bank Group, and another US$ 9.7 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the rural income employment enhancement project. 

Mr Speaker, we also urge the minister of finance to do proper supervision and also the sessional committee to do its right oversight work. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, especially with the observations and recommendations. I think these are good ideas to the lay person. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. I rose on a matter of procedure and I think that the House will better be guided on a matter of procedure by you and that we will be smart, predictable and guided by precedents that we set. 

Last week, the Committee on Agriculture read a report here and we did not debate it, and we were advised that a report according to rule 177(i) should just be presented and then discussed after three days. The same rule was applied to the CHOGM Report. I am now wondering whether we should proceed to debate this report or we should subject it to rule 177 which we subjected the report of Agriculture and the Public Accounts Committee report so that the debate comes after three days. I just want us to be predictable so that we know how to move in the House. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: It is a question of emergency, that these loans which have a timeframe within which they have to be approved – that is why you see we have lined up a number of loan requests simply because they would abort if we do not consider them now. I have considered that reason and I thought that we deal with these loans and clear them because we need the money to be able to carry out these projects that we want. 

I quite appreciate what you are trying to say and that is why we have these things – I thought that as a matter of priority, we give priority to these loan requests and finish them because I am about to prorogue Parliament. Actually, I should be proroguing it today or tomorrow.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you - 

THE SPEAKER: Otherwise, we shall miss them and then -  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am seeking clarification from the minister of finance. This is not the first time that the House is being rushed to approve a loan request because it is expiring. Why should the ministry wait until the loan is about to expire and then come to rush Parliament? Consistently, why should they do that?

MR MUKITALE: I would like to volunteer information as Chairman of the Committee on National Economy. The timing when these loans came, Parliament was very busy with Parliamentary reforms and we gave priority to electoral reforms. As a committee, we have been waiting to present these reports and the only time we have got is now, and I thought we should understand that the calendar and the congestion of the electoral reforms did not allow us to proceed at that time. I thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The Members opposite should appreciate that the Legislative timetable has been really crowded. This report was distributed to Members a long time ago. It is not –(Interjections)- yes, it has been on the desk just outside and Members have had the chance to read it. 

Let me emphasise your point, Mr Speaker. Some of these loans, as the chairperson has mentioned, are appraised and negotiated but the Constitution requires that no loan can be concluded unless you have the authority of Parliament. Consequently, there is a time-bound provision in these loans that states that by this date, if the legal opinion, which is always sought from the Attorney-General, does not include the authority of Parliament for Government to borrow, that loan will lapse and we are competing with the rest of the world; we will lose the money as a Government.

MRS OGWAL: I thank you. If we could go back a couple of years, you realise in practice that every time when we are about to prorogue Parliament is when requests for loans come running in – that is a practice and I want you to check your Hansard because every time Parliament is about to be prorogued, loans are rushed to Parliament and some of us have stood here and expressed our concern. I am surprised that instead of the minister of finance admitting their weaknesses in making presentation of this report, he is actually saying that the report has always been with us. 

This practice must stop and we should ensure that priority business takes priority and not loan requests. Those requests have been with the ministry of finance all along and the attention of the House should have been brought to those loan requests and not at the time when we are about to prorogue Parliament and when we have urgent matters to discuss. I beg that this practice be put right so that we do not continue having these kind of repeated mishaps from the ministry. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have nothing to add except to agree with you that it should stop. Let us consider what we have today because I am about to prorogue Parliament and we may lose the money – it is not in our interest – we will be punishing ourselves – those who are innocent; the people who are going to benefit from this loan are the ones who are going to suffer. I entirely agree with you that it should always be brought in time. Yes, do you want to debate? 

MR BYANDALA: Is it procedure?

MR WACHA: Yes.

MR BYANDALA: Oh, sorry.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Alaso drew our attention to a particular rule which would have stopped us from debating this matter until after three days. Could somebody, therefore, move that this rule be suspended so that we go ahead and discuss this matter? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: The motion has been moved by hon. Wacha that we suspend –(Laughter)- the rule. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: He brought it and that is why –(Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: I thank the committee for the report and Government for thinking about this loan for the rural poor. The loan is definitely going to answer - if properly used - our people in the rural area.  I just have one point on which I need clarification from the minister. I find it a bit strange to borrow US $25 million and you see, if you look at 5.1, the project objective - that this one is going to handle 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans. Mr Speaker, US $25 million is a lot of money and I think we can distribute or target more people with this money. This to me, should be looked into to cover more people - this is my only objection to what is in here; I find US $25 million too much money for only 1.4 million Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we may do it by finding out how they reached this figure of 1.5. What is the average that you are giving to each of these people? Maybe that may help us to understand. 

MRS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, on page 3, I mentioned that there was a study that was done by FINSCOPE-Uganda. They are the ones who came up with the figure and all the objectives. For example, the paragraph number – okay, let me read the findings of the study –

THE SPEAKER: Which paragraph?

MRS WANGWA: On page 3, under the background, it says that lending to agriculture remains the least covered by formal financial services. It also says that the community-based institutions such as Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs) are very important and there is limited supply of credit in the agricultural sector and they are targeting the credit programmes to play a critical role in assisting the rural households in accessing the credit. So, FINSCOPE came up with the figure. If you read the details here, they tell us how it came about.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, personally I am not satisfied that there is a study saying US $25 million is going to be utilised for 1.4 million Ugandans. If that study is there, it should be thrown away. I do not believe it and nobody in this House, who sits down critically to look at it, can accept this.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, if you look at the report that has been presented by the chairperson, it simply says this loan will facilitate access to affordable financial services for about 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans. Well, the study does not reveal the urban ones. 

Secondly, if you look at the nature of its disbursement, the Microfinance Support Centre lends the money to micro finance institutions for lending to their clients - I can see this money is going to reach more than 1.4 million. Only that in the report, they mentioned “about” and about is not exact. About is rural and it did not include –

THE SPEAKER: So, are you suggesting that the number could be higher than the number put here?

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our biggest problem is haphazard planning. I do not want the minister to start haggling with the engineer. Suppose this money was to benefit 1.4 million rural poor, what is the problem? What is the labour force in the rural areas? Supposing – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I suspect that the honourable member brought it up because he is mentioning US $25 million. Now if you distribute that money to 1.4 million, what will be the average take of each person? I think that is his worry.  

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker that is the logic I want to deal with right now. Because really, what is the work force in the rural areas and what is the effect if you scatter this money into small, small bits? Suppose we have 1.4 million industrialists in rural areas and then you give them the money to employ a workforce of about five million people, isn’t it a better deal? What I want to know is: what is the target group and what is this target group doing in the rural areas? Because, for instance, RECO is an industrialist in Kasese; if you gave him US $3 million, you are going to spend on capacity-building, he will be able to expand his industry and employ more people hence enhancing employment in rural areas. But should you scatter this money into little bits, you will not see the impact and in most cases, it will come back to Kampala and people will build their bungalows. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, can hon. Kibanzanga go to section 5.1 of the report, which has the project objective and read it? Let him not just assume what is – let me read it. It says: “The overall goal of the proposed programme is to contribute towards reducing rural poverty in Uganda while its objective is to facilitate access to and utilisation of affordable financial and business development services to 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans.” So they have told you the figure; it is 1.4 poor rural Ugandans. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I can only give information. One is that the Microfinance Support Centre does not deal directly with households. It does onward lending to our SACCOs in our constituencies depending on their level of organisation and how many groups they have there.

Two; this programme is also intended to deal with the emerging weakness through the same circles. So, there may be other interventions for very progressive people who are above the threshold of the 350; but the 350 is intended for my grandmother and the other weak group in my village, which is trying to come up. So it is not intended for those who want to borrow US $3 million and US $4 million. I thought I should volunteer this information.

12.25
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, thank you and I want to again thank the committee. I would like to address myself to what I consider key in the matter of this loan. I am concerned that the committee can propose to us that we adopt the report and authorise borrowing, approve the loan when they themselves are very concerned about the criteria for disbursement of this money. This is lots of money; this is a serious commitment for the next 30 years! Again our children will be paying back this money. 

I think this House should be addressing itself to matters of policy. Under what policy framework are we borrowing this money? Who knows these SACCOs? How do you choose them? Yes, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, how do you choose these SACCOs that benefit from this money? And when you finally give this money to the Microfinance Support Centre, what criteria do they use for sourcing out the households that are beneficiaries of this money? I think these are important questions that must not be ignored by this House. 

The Minister of Finance was once part of a government that presided over a cooperative movement in this country and there was a clear framework in which the cooperatives would work. Today, we are looking at SACCOs and you do not even know whether your SACCO is entitled, or whether it is the movement chairman’s SACCO – this is the same thing happening with NAADS! We said that there will be six households, but how the six households are chosen, nobody knows to the extent that now there has to be six households of the movement chairman in the sub-county. So if he has six wives, those are six households. 

Mr Speaker, this is very dangerous for this county; there must be a framework. I know that this Government abolished cooperatives but –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, first of all, can I be protected from hon. Alaso? Is it in order for the hon. Member, who is also the Secretary-General of FDC, to come here and assert before the House and the whole country that the NRM Government abolished, killed the cooperatives, when she knows that this Government has been highly supportive of the cooperatives and cooperative movement and the cooperative statute is actually still on our books, and on several occasions this Government has come out to provide financial support to many cooperatives that are in need of financial support like Bugisu Cooperative Union, Teso Cooperative Union, Nakasongola Cooperative Union and so on? Is she in order to continue telling blatant lies when she knows that truth?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate, please?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Not that I know too much but the little that I know is that once upon a time, in the 1980s and before the coming in of the Movement System of governance, this county had a very prosperous and vibrant cooperative movement to the extent that we grew up when the cooperative movement in Teso could provide the cotton ginners with opportunities. In fact, we were educated using the cotton proceeds offered by the opportunities of the cooperative movement; we were not as disadvantaged as the children of the NRM era who cannot pay school fees and who cannot afford a good education –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Alaso. As you may know, I was born in Masaka and my father was an active member of the cooperative movement there. During the time of the bush war, Masaka Cooperative Union in particular was invaded by serious negotiators who said they were going to pay in future. They took coffee, money in cash and Leyland Lorries. 

In addition, there are individuals like Mikayiri Mulindwa of Butenga –(Interjections)- the minister is saying that he was compensated, but Mikayiri Mulindwa has documents that have gone up to the Office of the Prime Minister, crying for his repayment for the coffee and the money that was taken from him. 

It is painful for one to stand here and say that it is not true to say that the cooperative unions were not murdered! That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, if you say that they took coffee and money, when was that?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, my expertise at that time was not so much in figures, but that was the time when the military was approaching Masaka; that was round 1985/86 – I am sure if a committee were interested, we would invite hon. Ssendaula, he has a lot of information in that direction.

THE SPEAKER: The argument they are going to use against that reasoning is that that was not a government.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, there were agreements and Mikayiri Mulindwa, whom I have mentioned, has written agreements; they are in the Prime Minister’s Office. He is a pauper! 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, in the first place, I am a child of the cooperative movement of those days: Bunyoro Kitara, Kakumiro Union, Wamala Growers and so on. 

On why the unions went down – I do not want to use the word “die” – was simply because the structure of our economy changes. Once we pursued the policy of liberalisation, the unions – I was the chairman of Kakumiro Growers Cooperative Union for ten years from 1986 to 1996. I was the chairman of Uganda Cooperative Alliance for five years; I was also the Chairman of Uganda Transport Cooperative Union. So, the story I am telling is not concocted. 

The competition between the private sector and the unions became so acute that the unions, which were operating in business like government departments, could no longer compete favourably and eventually had to suffer the consequences. 

Secondly, I want to inform hon. Kyanjo that I, Matia Kasaija participated in picking the coffee from Masaka Cooperative Union at the end of 1985; that was during the bush war. I am not hiding this; it is a fact. The government did compensate. Hon. Kyanjo, I propose you ask hon. Kahinda Otafiire who was the chairman of the compensation committee. Government compensated; if we did not compensate, it means that what the cooperative perceived to have been taken is very different from what we took.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister who has been exceedingly helpful to my argument. We want to see proof. There are individuals who are going around, like myself, saying that you did not pay. Please, help this House prove your point by bringing the certificates of payment and laying them here so that our people can rest assured that their money did go to their banks and they just did not receive it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: The supplementary information I want to give is that compensation was done through the Office of the Prime Minister, chaired by the Rt Hon. Kategaya, and the money was paid through the Ministry of Justice. All school Lorries, Banyankole Kweterana Cooperative Union, Wamala, Masaka and all of those were compensated. If there is an individual who wants personal compensation that is a different matter but if you are talking through Masaka Cooperative Union then it is Masaka Cooperative Union that was compensated and you can go to the Ministry of Justice. It was actually hon. Jack Sabiiti who was paying that money because he was Under Secretary in the Ministry of Justice at that time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, we have really a lot of work to do and you should realise that in this report, I think page 14, the weaknesses of the systems that we now have have been identified and a remedy is suggested. Can we leave the history and move with what is obtaining now instead of going back to 1985. Let us see things as they are now and proceed with the loan. We should approve the loan then we continue to monitor the activities of the SACCOs we have, rather than wasting time on the history.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I would like to implore Government to pay particular attention -

THE SPEAKER: But look at this page, they have talked about this.

MS ALASO: Yes, to pay particular attention as recommended by the committee to the issues of criteria, to the issues of structure because once we leave criteria as ambiguous as it is now, we risk first of all losing the money. I do not think that you expect a repayment that is up to date when criteria for selection and for beneficiary definition is as ambiguous as it is.

This country is very familiar with Entandikwa. The Entandikwa had similar problems and, Mr Speaker, you know we almost recovered no coin from Entandikwa and this loan for which we are committing our young people, our children who will be 30 by then, should be put to good use. We also asked sometime back that Government shows a policy on Prosperity-for-All. I stand to be informed whether there is a policy on Prosperity-for-All; whether it was presented to this House, whether we know it because we continue to appropriate lots of money in regard to some of these initiatives.

Lastly, the capacity building, which is going to take the bulk of this money, I think is something that is unfortunate. In Uganda today, when technocrats want to find what to chew, they call it capacity building. I am one person who is so much against workshops these days and I think that we started this work of dealing with SACCOs sometime back maybe for the last three or four years we have been at it or even more, so which capacity are we thinking about? The technocrats who implement these activities were trained sometime back. Why should a huge chunk of this money again go to capacity building?

Therefore, I would like to propose an amendment to the committee’s report to the effect that this bulk of the money allocated to capacity building should actually be shifted and sent to the beneficiaries directly. That is my proposal and I thank you.

12.40
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my sister for the report, the observations and recommendations made by the committee.

Like hon. Alaso was saying, in the report Government is being directed to execute an understanding that the money will go to the Microfinance Support Centre. We are not told how the Microfinance Support Centre will be sending these monies to all the rural poor in Uganda. 

My fear is that as long as that is not well set out right from the beginning, not all areas will be targeted because levels of poverty in Uganda are different. Even areas that are prepared to absorb this money are not the same; some are at different levels. In fact, there are areas in Uganda where they may not need this money because of the advancement of the cooperative movement and they may be having their own money. How are we catering for those areas that are weak because here is Government borrowing money for Ugandans? Is this money going to be handled like other programmes like NAADS are being handled that every sub-county will get or it will be only those areas that have capacity to absorb it that are going to get? The money is being lent to MSC at nine to 13 percent to the SACCOs and then at the commercial rate from MSC to the SACCOs.

Government in this year’s budget provided for money to agriculture in the banks to be lent out at 10 percent to anybody who wants to get loans.

Why didn’t Government, through the Ministry of Finance, also make arrangements for the rural poor who also have to access financial services to also get money at a better rate than the commercial rate they are giving because they are not limiting it? It means that it will keep changing as long as these SACCOs have to make a profit on the money they will be borrowing at nine to 13 percent. Why is it that we are availing it to the people at a commercial rate while Government is availing money for people who can carry out agriculture through banks at a cheaper rate? Why are we preparing our rural poor to borrow at a higher percentage and yet we are providing money for others who can borrow at a lower rate? There is money which was also available in Post Bank for people who want to buy land and carry out agriculture at 10 percent. Now, can’t Government also make this money available so that these poor people of ours can also borrow at - since they are poor already so that they can come out form below the poverty line and become richer?

I have been through the amount of money that will be available; when you remove the over US $3 million for capacity building, which I do not approve of, each constituency, if it were to be given to constituencies, will be getting like Shs 150 million, which I think is very small in terms of developing an area. If we are talking of real serious development or accessing of financial services in the rural areas, can Government consider increasing this money even if it means using our own funds so that the rural poor can also access money and do better farming and business so that people everyday are not selling their land and produce at very cheap prices to enable them pay fees for their children but rather borrow and do better business? I thank you.

12.45
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for bringing this report. Anything that supports the rural poor is very dear to our hearts and we cannot reject it. However, I am concerned about the lack of clear policy in addressing poverty in rural areas. It is very important that the government should come up with clear policy. Handing over money to the rural poor will not solve the poverty problem. What we require is good price for the products and that is the only way that every rural poor, who produces anything that he can produce, be it beans or maize or cotton or coffee, can improve on his/her welfare. This is failing Government. By handing over money directly without the rural poor understanding what to do with that money, the government is likely to lose the money. I think this is a point we need to focus on when we are giving this loan to the rural poor.

The second point I would like to raise is that when some of us stood on the Floor of Parliament and opposed the sale of UCB, we did realise that UCB was targeting the rural farmers and very many rural farmers, however poor, were able to open accounts with UCB whether for 50,000 or 100,000 and they were able to benefit from commercial banking activities. Unfortunately, when that was closed the population lost the culture of banking. So, we actually injured that culture which was being inculcated in the population and I hope that the government will continue to repent to the people of Uganda for having sold the UCB knowing very well that it was going to hurt the rural poor. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have not yet debated the SACCOS Bill. We need to know the regulatory framework; we need to know the law which we are following in disbursing this money. This is a lot of money and we are just giving it away. I am raising this because in 2001, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is not listening to me, burnt his fingers by going to Lango to try and campaign for the Movement candidate and he was telling the women, “Be in groups and we will give you SACCOs’ money.” He burnt his fingers; he repented when I came back. 

And recently, I watched on TV, the former Vice-President going to Mukono and telling these people, “Do not elect Nambooze; we will give you SACCOs’ money. Be in groups we will give you SACCOs’ money.” Is this the SACCOS money that you want me, Mrs Ogwal, to approve here? I have witnessed at some weddings where SACCO cheques have been given out. I think really we need a regulatory framework; we need to understand the law which is going to guide the disbursement and the utilisation of this money. I thank you.  

12.49
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. As my friend, hon. Butime, talked about compensation from Masaka -

THE SPEAKER: Can you forget about those issues? (Laughter)

MR KAWANGA: Yes, I am just making -(Laughter)- I felt like asking him to say when and to whom it was done. I hope one day he will tell me.

But be that as it may, with regard to this loan, of late this country has put every stress to savings cooperative unions or societies. What happened to the production cooperative societies? Why do you want to lend money to people who are not producing? Why don’t you encourage people to create producing cooperative societies? After they have produced then they can borrow. 

I do not know what has gone wrong. It is because perhaps the concept of the cooperative movement has gone haywire in this country. We grew up with production cooperative societies - the ones they have been talking about. People used to produce and earn money for themselves. Why do you want to lend money to people who are not producing? That is something, which has not yet been answered and I find it very strange wherever I go because the people you want to lend money to do not even understand what they are really going to do with the money. So, really -(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, hon. Kawanga, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that actually the whole concept of co-operatives, and in particular SACCOs, has been distorted because the SACCO by its very definition is a savings and credit cooperative organisation. Now, what is happening is that we are getting money to give these institutions whereas the institutions are supposed to attract savings from the owners and then lend out. So, people must produce and save and then borrow. So, I think we should do it the other way round: finance production for people to save and then they can borrow. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, let us be very clear; a savings and credit society or SACCO is a financial institution which lends clients, including producer co-operatives. As financial intermediaries, the SACCOs receive bankable projects both from individuals, co-operative societies and institutions and the money is not distributed without any financing activity being looked at. It is not handing money to clients; it is giving money to finance bankable projects through a SACCO as a financial intermediary. So, it is not true that they are giving money out.

MR KAWANGA: I would advise the hon. Minister of Finance to listen to what hon. Tashobya has said. For as long as people are not producing, lending them money is a useless exercise. We are saying this because we know where we live. We are dealing with people on a daily basis. The problem is not lack of institutions to lend money to people; the problem is lack of production in this country -(Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to give information that indeed this loan is aimed at making people borrow but not to produce. If you look at the overall objective of this loan, it is to contribute towards reducing poverty and facilitating access and utilisation of affordable finances and business development. It is not intending to increase productivity; it is intending to have people access and borrow money they have nowhere to invest. 

Mr Speaker, we have an example of the youth entrepreneurship scheme where we obtained a loan and we gave young people money without having project proposals and even planned activities for that money. The youth are the most unemployed people. Even this loan does not focus on the youth employment creation, whereas as a country we had adopted financing cottage industries and small-scale industries. That one will be productive in terms of producing skills for the young people and even having production that is aimed at increasing financial gains among the people and yet they can save and borrow based on what they have earned. So, this loan is not empowering communities to produce; it is empowering them to borrow but not to be productive. 

MR KAWANGA: I think that point has been sufficiently made for Government to take note of. I will move to the next one and that is what my dear sister hon. Ogwal pointed out.

This question of SACCOs not having an appropriate legal framework within which they operate is a very serious problem. People are creating co-operative societies financed left, right and centre for all sorts of reasons. And they are robbing money from people! There is no way of dealing with it but it appears either Government does not have the willingness to do it or the ability to handle this kind of situation. So, whenever you talk about having raised money for SACCOs people create the SACCOs and the idea is to receive the money. Now, after they have received the money they just take it and it does not reach the people for whom it is meant. So, surely before we push this matter further can you kindly create a legal framework within which this SACCOs can operate? Otherwise, we are just wasting money and the people are not going to benefit from it.

I am a legal practitioner and the embarrassment I get on a daily basis is people who come to my office having borrowed money from a SACCO and the SACCO has taken all their property. They come to you and say, “But these people have taken all my property and I had been paying them.” When you look for the SACCO, the SACCO is no longer there. It is not properly registered anywhere. You cannot reach it! 

On the other hand, sometimes the SACCOS themselves come saying, “We have lent money to people but they haven’t paid back. We want to get to them to recover the money.” You ask: “Where are you registered; how are you operating? What is your framework?” They too have difficulty explaining who they are if they have to be assisted. Surely, we must find a way of handling this aspect. Otherwise, we are getting money to throw it down the drain. I thank you.

12.58
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have a few concerns. First of all, when you look at the project objective for this loan, it targets 1.4 million rural poor Ugandans. I do not know how you arrived at this. How did you identify this 1.4 million? Because we have heard -   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, that was the first matter we handled of the 1.4 million, how it came about. Now, can we increase the number? This was actually the first matter we discussed.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am bringing mine from a slightly different perspective. Recently, the President was in my constituency. He was supposed to go to one sub-county but when they went there, there was no NAADS beneficiary. So the meeting had to be shifted to another sub-county. And I told the President, “Do you know why the meeting has been shifted, it is because when people went to the other sub-county, they could not identify any beneficiary. So, they had to look for where they could easily identify a NAADS project.”

Eventually when the President asked for the beneficiaries to come out - he really wanted to know the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries who came out were people who had ever benefited right from the beginning of Entandikwa all through. It was the same people. This is why I am saying that when you talk about this 1.4 million, are we targeting the same people who are always there to wait for such kind of money and grab it, and they leave the entire population poor? I think we need to evaluate all the other projects. What impact has this project had in reducing poverty in rural areas? If it means we quantify and say, “In this constituency a number of people have benefited and they have been able to move away from poverty and, therefore, the next target would be this category of people”, let us do that. Because just to come here and sit and pass money, I think we are just benefiting a clique of people. 

Secondly, even the leadership of this project, when they finally come out - as hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, let us sometimes behave above politics. Let us be nationalists. Let us serve our country. This thing of politicking each and everything - for example, why should you put the former vice-president to be in charge of a project she is heading now? And this House knows the record of the valley downs when she was the Minister of Agriculture and the Vice-President at the same time. Why don’t we look for people who are not politicians, people who are not tainted; people who do not have any other bad record so that they deliver to the people of Uganda? Why must we look for people who have been scratched in the past?

MR SEBUNYA: I can only give information because I am a member of the committee but what I am going to say is that MSC is a professional organisation; take it like Post Bank. Much as it is headed by a chairperson, who is the former vice-president – the reason why people are complaining that they are not getting money from MSC, it is because the SACCOs that benefit from MSC are professionally profiled, appraised; they are not start up SACCOs. You must reach a level whereby you are willing and able to pay back a loan. 

Much as politicians go and say, “We are going to give you” - that is where they stop. MSC goes and profiles these SACCOs. We have been to the south, north and we have heard people complain that they are not receiving MSC money. It is because they are not doing fine; their books are not proper. So, the extent to which politicians interfere is very minimal. I thank you.

MR OKUMU: But you have listened to those politicians on radio, even last night on TV, so you will really bear with me. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal also raised the issue of policy. Sometimes I do not know what Government’s priority policy is in terms of development strategy. Because when you are coming up with something like this and you want to reduce poverty, it must fit the framework of your development strategy. 

As far as I know, the major focus of Government today is industrialisation. How does industrialisation trickle down so as to reduce poverty? Why can’t we borrow such money and we focus on small scale industries in the rural areas so as to improve our products so that our people can access the market with better terms? If we just come and say, “We want to give people money so that people wake up” - in other areas, what people need is how to improve what they are already producing and for them to be able to access markets. 

My appeal to Government is that when you are going out, it must fit within your overall development strategy. And in as far as I know, this Government is focusing on industrialisation. Therefore, this industrialisation should be able to trickle down to improve the produce of our local people because if we improve their produce this will be the only way they will access the market and be able to get value for money. This is the main concern and I think it cannot be universal for the whole country; it needs to be focused. There are other areas where cattle keeping is practiced and their targets are different. 

There are areas where people grow cassava, beans, maize, rice and their targets would definitely be different. There are other border areas where people engage in trade, like in the North where people are trading in Southern Sudan and we should look at empowering our people on how they can improve the quality of their produce so that they can be able to access the market in Southern Sudan and compete with other neighbouring countries like Kenya, which is now moving into Southern Sudan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you have heard the reservation expressed by the Members on this particular loan - the demands under which SACCOs operate. I think these are the main issues that have come up. Maybe you have an answer.

1.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I have the answers and I can quickly go through them as raised on the Floor. 

The issue of 1.4 million people, who will access this money, has been partially answered but I can add by explaining an issue which relates to the structure and the whole machinery of disbursing this money.

The objectives are very clear: to reduce rural poverty and facilitate access to finance. So, to access finance, you must have a financial landscape reaching out to the rural population and Government has a policy of establishing a SACCO in every sub-county across the country. That is the policy – it is very clear and it is there.

Two, the Microfinance Support Centre is a wholesale financial institution. What happens is that the SACCOs at every sub-county apply for funds from the Microfinance Support Centre. In applying to access these funds, they are appraised to establish their capacity, records, staffing and institutional capacity on loan recovery depending on the savings they have.

And after the assessments based on all these, the money will then be disbursed to the SACCOs; it is not the client. The client does not directly access this money; they have to go through their SACCOs. And in accessing this money, you submit a proposal, which should show that what you are asking for is bankable. In turn, by accessing finance income-generating activities, you will have reduced levels of rural poverty. This is very clear and that is the purpose and objective of this loan, and I am sure it is going to increase and improve on accessibility of finance and reduce rural poverty. That answers hon. Alaso’s query on policies and the one on linkage banking. I am saying this because SACCOs also have linkages in commercial banking. So, the whole financial sector is linked through that arrangement.

On the issue of interest rates, I would like to say that the report shows that SACCOs borrow from the Microfinance Support Centre at nine percent per annum. The SACCOs will then lend to the clients at 13 percent. So, the margin, which the SACCOs get, is only four percent. 

And when they also lend for agricultural activity – let me address this issue because the whole purpose of this loan is that they lend at nine percent to the SACCOs and the SACCOs lend to the clients at 13 percent per annum. This is the lowest interest rate obtaining in the market today –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Minister. According to the terms of the loan, it is to be serviced at one percent per annum for the first 11 to 20 years because the first ten years comprise a grace period and from the 11th to the 20th year, it is one percent. And from the 20th to 40th year, it is three percent. 

My sense is that it is not logical or affordable when you say the charges will be at nine percent. This loan would have been at least six or seven percent because it is cheaper as said by its terms or the cost itself that is involved. What I am querying are the rates or interests being charged. I want a clarification on that.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also thank the minister for giving way. I support the idea of borrowing this loan because the SACCOs from my area are benefiting - at least three of them are getting money from the Microfinance Support Centre. However, what I have seen on the ground is that their interest rate has not changed; they are still charging three percent per month because of the overhead costs. When shall we reduce this interest rate? When we secure this loan, shall we have the interest rates reduced? The money is still lying there because of the high interest rates. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. minister. After the SACCOs have accessed this money – I would like the Minister to help this country – is there any regulation that forces the SACCOs not to charge high interest rates? I am asking this question because I know that at SACCO levels, if you borrow Shs 100,000, you have to pay it back with Shs 10,000; so you pay Shs 110,000 and the Shs 10,000 is the interest that accrues per month. But imagine you borrowed that money for a whole year. 

When we ask for a regulation, the framework should go further beyond the SACCOs merely accessing money from the Microfinance Support Centre. There should be something that forces them not to exploit their own members who are the subsequent beneficiaries of this loan. This is important because one will end up with an interest of over 300 percent per year. That is why people end up selling away their saucepans and bicycles when this money is being recovered.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I will answer this question directly so that the way is cleared. The SACCOs have mainly two types of monies. They have their own money that is collected from mobilised savings from the membership and the borrowed money from the Microfinance Support Centre. And they might have some other monies too.

When they borrow from the Microfinance Support Centre, it is under these conditions and terms, which will have a repayment period as well as the interest charge. In fact, I can say to you that when the SACCO applies to the Microfinance Support Centre at nine percent, they will lend agricultural loans at 13 percent and give two years within which to pay. The issue and where the confusion is –

THE SPEAKER: But interestingly, hon. Member, bear with me – I would like to inform you that in the public gallery we have local leaders and members of Dolwe Island Development SACCO in Bugiri District. They have come to follow what we are doing now. You are welcome. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, as I was explaining, I would like the confusion on interest rates cleared. When the SACCOs borrow from the Microfinance Support Centre, it is done on conditions and terms and I can confirm to this House that the standard loan, if it is an agricultural one, is borrowed at nine percent and on lending, at 13 percent for a two-year repayment period. They intermediate that loan in accordance with those terms.

But they also have their own money that they lend out at three percent per month. They are free to lend that money because these are small loans with high risks – some of the borrowers do not have any collateral yet the administrative costs of recovering are very high. But this depends on the SACCO – some of them have been in business for a long time. They have gained capacity and can intermediate their loans at much cheaper rates than those that are just starting. That is why you find them running different rates that are parallel. I think that can shade light on some of the issues.

On the issue of the law – this is a very critical issue. The regulatory framework for these SACCOs –(Interruptions)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to seek clarification from you. You have informed the House that the SACCOs have a mark-up of four percent. I would like to ask you to clarify to the House on whether you are aware that the recovery rate in most of the SACCOs is about 90 percent for those that are doing very well. So, the 10 percent is not recovered in time and yet SACCOS are required to give post-dated cheques of all the money they owe to the Microfinance Support Centre so that the money they are borrowing is paid in full and yet they are not able to recover it. In the actual fact, they end up eating into the capital of the SACCOS and that is one of the reasons why a number of SACCOS have gone down. I would like to seek clarification from the minister.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, purely from banking, if a SACCO borrows from the Microfinance Support Centre at nine percent in accordance with the terms -(Interjections)- yes, they borrow from the Microfinance Support Centre at nine percent and then lend that money to their clients or members. When they lend, they charge their clients 13 percent. So, they will have a margin of four percent to cover their administrative costs. And four percent is very little money when you think about what they do. 

THE SPEAKER: But how do you make sure that that is the rate of interest that the ordinary person is charged? I think that is their concern. Do you have the mechanism of monitoring that? I think that is all. Because you may have an understanding that they will charge 13 percent but then they charge 17 percent; how will you stop that?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, when a SACCO goes to borrow, you sign a loan agreement in which all these terms are specified - this is very true. So if -

THE SPEAKER: We are asking you about enforcement mechanisms.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I am coming to that one, Sir. But let us go step-by-step. One, is that when a SACCO borrows from the Microfinance Support Centre, it signs an agreement and within that agreement the terms are spelt out - the interest and repayment period and so on. 

When the SACCO takes this money and lends it to its members and clients, there are guidelines for enforcement. But like everything else where illegality will be committed, people commit illegal things not because the law does not exist, but because they are deviants. So, there are some SACCOs which violate the terms of their borrowing and lend at different rates. But when that is discovered - because they are monitored - they are punished for it. That is all I can say at the moment.

On the legal framework - because this is also significant and it has come up time and again - we have a whole financial structure in tiers. We have Tier I - Bank of Uganda; Tier II - commercial banks; Tier III - microfinance deposit taking institutions; and we have Tier IV - the rest. At the moment, as I am talking to you, Mr Speaker, the law for regulating institutions in Tier IV is being drafted. The discussions are in advanced stages and in the meantime, every SACCO is registered –(Interjections)– I wish Members could allow me confirm this. Every SACCO is registered under the Cooperatives Law of 1992. 

But there are some institutions which pose without registration and those clearly break the law. And I can assure my distinguished Old Boy, hon. John Kawanga, that indeed as a lawyer, there are guys who do things outside the law. There are some people who organise themselves without being registered and cheat; but when they are caught, they are punished. All you need is bringing them to book because every SACCO is registered under the Cooperative Law, 1992 and by registration there is a whole machinery for monitoring them.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Minister, I would just like a very brief clarification on the issue you are about to touch regarding monitoring and its supervision. In the wisdom of the committee, when you look at page 15, paragraph seven, if I may read this to you directly, “The committee observed that there is absence of performance monitoring and evaluation tools for the Uganda Cooperative and Savings Union (UCSCU) whose overall purpose is to foster the organisation and development of savings and credit cooperatives in Uganda, and to improve their internal operations. Further, it was noted that UCSCU lacks the capacity to perform its mandate.”  

And yet we have been talking to you about this issue over and over again. We have had several interactions with the ministry regarding this particular issue. We even advised that Uganda Cooperative Alliance (UCA) should be brought on board, but you have deliberately ignored it. These are people who are on the ground and who have the experience and are widely spread throughout the country. I do not know why you are continuously refusing to include them so that our people can be served. I would like that clarification. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: I see a problem here - the Microfinance Support Centre, which is actually borrowing this money, is not responsible for capacity building. That is the work of UCSCU. So, some of the recommendations we are making are not aimed at directly affecting the approval of this loan. What we are saying is that the Ministry of Finance has the responsibility to follow up and see what UCSCU is supposed to do. Because as for the Microfinance Support Centre –(Mr Byarugaba rose_)- I am agreeing with you. It has put in place procedures of how to get their money and people out there are complaining that it is very hard to get their money.  And they only give it to those who qualify; actually they are saying that the risk of losing is very slim because they are very strict. 

The committee of finance that we interfaced with has actually been in the field and is having a comprehensive report on SACCOs, which I think will be coming much later. The vice chairman is also here; he could actually add when I am done. So, what I am trying to say is that the Microfinance Support Centre which does onward lending to those organised SACCOs is doing its best. 

The problem is in areas like UCSCU, which Finance has engaged to do capacity building and are not doing their part, the way they should be doing it. So, should we punish the Microfinance Support Centre because of policy issues and problems in other sectors? That is what I thought I should bring forward to the House to understand; that these other recommendations are there for the line ministry to follow up, but not necessarily for the Microfinance Support Centre to act on. And, therefore, it should not stop the loan because it is not a mistake of the Microfinance Support Centre. I beg to make that plea.

MRS OGWAL: On page 13, the committee expressed concern over lack of clarity in the selection criteria. How do you explain it if we are not even comfortable with the manner in which the beneficiaries are selected? Then it is already a faulty start because, one, we have no policy; two, we have no clear method of selection of the beneficiaries; three, we do not even have a law to regulate the management and disbursement of these funds. So, can this minister clarify to us when we can have a law to regulate all this money? When can we have a law to regulate the management of the SACCOs? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, when I look at page 8 of the report, some of the concerns of capacity building are really addressed. 

Secondly, the recommendations of the committee pointing out all these areas - we will address them as a sector ministry so that –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can we say that this request you are making has been subjected to the comments, observations and recommendations made here in the House so that we attach those conditions? I think this would help you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much for your guidance. I concur. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that subject to the comments, observations and recommendations made in the committee and those made in the House in considering the report, the request be granted. Will that satisfy you?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been approached by the Minister for Local Government that he has an urgent meeting, but I understand when you were debating municipalities last week, a municipality of Rukungiri came up but there was no formal motion that had been made by the minister. So, the Minister was given time to consider it and bring it back. Can we really accommodate the minister’s business so that he can go before we break for lunch?

motion for a resolution of Parliament under section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act, to provide for the creation of Rukungiri Municipality

1.28
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Much obliged, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. As you rightly said, when we adopted a number of municipalities last week, the Deputy Speaker referred this matter for further presentation by way of motion, which I am here to do and the motion is for a resolution of this Parliament under section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act, to provide for the creation of Rukungiri Municipality. 

“WHEREAS section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act empowers district councils, with the approval of this House, to create a municipality within its area of jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Third Schedule to the Local Government Act; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the Municipality of Rukungiri for the effective administration and organised delivery of services to the people, proper planning and expansion of the area to ensure orderly development; 

HAVING taken into account the multiplier effect on the economics of the areas, the economic viability and the wishes of the people of the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that Rukungiri municipality, which will cover the present Rukungiri Town Council and the parishes of Karangaro, Ndorero, Kanyinya, Kyatoko and Rwentondo from Kagunga sub-county; and Kigaaga and Kitimba from Nyakagyeme sub-County in Rukungiri District be created. I propose that the effective date for this municipality be 1 July 2010.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no particular animosity to Rukungiri Municipality, but I am just concerned about the wording of the motion. As you conclude, the motion is moved by the Ministry of Local Government. I thought it would have been moved by the Minister of Local Government because a motion by the ministry would undermine the interests of Rukungiri Municipality. I don’t know whether this is the usual thing. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think what she is actually suggesting is that you should have said the “minister.”

MR MWESIGE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I accordingly amend my motion and the motion is hereby moved by the Minister of Local Government. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Has the committee looked at it? Do you have any advice to give? 

1.31
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, last time the Minister of State for Local Government and now the minister have moved an amended motion under section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act providing for the creation of Rukungiri Municipality. The motion was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments for consideration and thereafter report back to Parliament. 

The committee now wishes to present its findings and recommendations –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to follow what is happening in the House. I seem to be at a loss and I really need your help on that.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what really happened because I think what she is going to raise is that the motion has just been tabled. I don’t know what happened. Can you explain?

MS ALASO: I have just received the motion and immediately the chairman is reading a report saying that it was considered. But I haven’t seen a committee meeting and, Mr Speaker, you have not referred this particular motion to the committee? So how come the committee chairperson is now proceeding to read a report of the committee when I haven’t even heard it being referred there and I do not even have a copy of the committee report? I always ask for neatness in the way we do things.

THE SPEAKER: As I said, I do not know what happened last time. 

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This motion was moved last week together with others, but the Deputy Speaker in her wisdom requested that the committee comes with another report because Rukungiri Municipality had not been discussed and since then, the committee has met and has a report, which they are presenting now. Thank you very much. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is exactly what happened and this is what I am doing.

THE SPEAKER: You have formally moved the motion now and what we can do is to give time to the committee to consider this formal motion and then they can come back tomorrow. I am going to extend our activities to tomorrow so that you can come with the report. Therefore, I formally commit this motion to the committee to consider and report tomorrow. 

1.35
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We want to thank the Ministry of Local Government through the minister for handling the issue of Rukungiri Municipality so expeditiously and I support it because of its merits. When the honourable minister was last on the Floor, he told us that he was processing more districts including the district of Namisindwa. I want to find out whether he is ready so that these things can come tomorrow and we pass everything without again delaying - including the other counties. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Since it has not come, I think let him take his time. But hon. Members, I suggest that we break for lunch and the next loan request we shall consider is this of Atiak-Nimule Road Project. I appeal to Members to go through the reports during lunch time so that we take a shorter time in considering it. When we start, the chairman can make a brief summary of their findings. It is now 20 to 2.00 O’clock – maybe we come back at 2.30 p.m.? Will that be sufficient time? 

MR MIGEREKO: I thank you for your guidance. You have guided that when we come back, we deal with the upgrading of the Atiak-Nimule Road project. I thought you could also mention the others that are following like the electric grids interconnection –(Interruption)  

MS ALASO: They are all on the Order Paper.

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, I know why I am saying this – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You are suggesting that we consider two more? 

MR MIGEREKO: Actually if we can consider - 

THE SPEAKER: Atiak – 

MR MIGEREKO: Actually if we can consider all of them omnibus, it would be very helpful –

THE SPEAKER: Let us see the priorities as far as you consider. I thought the Atiak Road is very important and then there are the electric grids of the five Nile -  

MR MUKITALE: I would like to agree with you and make a plea to Members that the two loans; one for Atiak-Nimule is actually a top up of what we already discussed here and passed, but there was a deficit of 38 miles. The same applies to the Great Lakes transmission lines - we already passed the bigger part of the loan but remained with the small JICA top up loan. And then the technical schools for the 14 regions – selected criteria of 14 districts which do not have any technical schools - 

THE SPEAKER: That is very important –

MR MUKITALE: The loan is also ready. And then the repair of Unyama-Gulu and Lira UTC and Mbale Elgon technical schools; I pray those loans are passed before we prorogue.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, you go through this so that when you come back, we spend little time on the reports. Okay? We suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m. prompt. I thank you very much.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.39 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.52 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST TO BORROW JAPANESE YEN 3,395,000,000 FROM THE JAPANESE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) FOR THE UPGRADING OF ATIAK-NIMULE ROAD PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Before the report, I looked at the order paper and the kind of loan requests on it. I do not know, but you will think about it maybe when other Members come in. I notice that item No.6 is dealing with the roads and item No.7 is dealing with electric grids. Those are two different subjects, but when you look at item No.8 and item No.9, these deal with education. It is about putting up schools, expansion and development of national technical colleges and the other one is to equip 14 technical institutes in the technical vocational education. So, you find that the subject in the two is the same. We will be talking about education; equipping, expansion, facilities. 

My view, but we shall decide it when other Members come in; is that when we reach item No.8, 9, and 10, we might as well just have them introduced to us and then we talk about policies of education. And once we have concluded, then we can make our decision. I thought it would be faster that way. 

The other one is a different subject; that is, Uganda Development Bank - we shall handle it alone. However, before we start on item No. 10, I see a figure of US $567 million. Is it an error or [Prof. Kamuntu: “It’s an error.”] so we should be able to correct it. 

What we can do, as we wait for other Members to come in, is to proceed with item No. 6 and then as the numbers increase, I shall explain what I think we should do. Let us move on to Atiak-Nimule Road.

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I now present the report on the request by Government to borrow Japanese Yen 3,395,000,000 from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for the upgrading of Atiak-Nimule Road project under the Transport Sector Development Project. 

I want to state from the onset that this is a top-up loan. We have already discussed the Transport Sector Development Project in detail here on the Floor, where we even brought the nationwide map - how much Ministry of Works is doing. We even delved into issues of the roads in the North and other regions. We even brought here the performance of all the loans in Works; we have a written report which we brought here. We even gave you details of the roads in our constituencies - the level, design stage, repair and those to be constructed. 

So on this road, the transport sector loan by World Bank did provide money up to Atiak and left the gap from Atiak to Nimule. Therefore, most of the issues were debated then. So, allow me to summarise as much as I can. 

The request was presented to this House by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 14th April and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration as per Article 159 and rule 152(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

We did interface with the Ministry of Finance, which is the lead ministry in the borrowing; the Ministry of Works; UNRA; we did interface with the Parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the committee further studied the following documents; the project appraisal document; the project implementation plan; the draft loan financing agreement and; the minister’s brief – again last week, I brought more copies of the minister’s brief and I put them on Table as we expected to be on Order Paper last week. 

The objectives

Allow me to lay on the Table the following documents prior to proceeding; the minutes of the meeting of the standing Committee on National Economy; the brief to Parliament; the project appraisal of upgrading Atiak-Nimule Road; the loan agreement; and the minutes of discussions between the Uganda Government and JICA. I now lay the documents on the Table. 

The RSDP objectives are:

•	To provide an efficient, safe and sustainable road network to support market integration and poverty eradication;

•	Improvement of the capacity for Road Safety Management; and

•	Improved transport sector and national road management

This is actually the road, which connects us to the Juba market, which our brothers in Kenya are also fighting hard to access.

Project overview

The Atiak- Nimule Road (36kms) which is part of the Gulu–Atiak–Nimule Road (the original 98kms) is currently a Class C gravel road located in Amuru District in Northern Uganda. Atiak Town is located 70kms north of Gulu town and about 420kms north of the capital Kampala via Gulu town. The Gulu–Atiak–Nimule Road is part of the national roads network. It contributes significantly to the economic prosperity of Northern Uganda and it provides an important international link to Sudan.

The Gulu-Atiak–Nimule Road is to be upgraded to Class 2 bitumen standard in two sections:

i)	The Gulu-Atiak section to be financed by the World Bank, which we already passed and discussed in detail. 

ii)	The Atiak–Nimule section to be financed by JICA, and that is why I am calling this request a top-up. 

The project objective is to strengthen the transport capacity through improving the condition of the road between Gulu and Nimule. This will help contribute to the improvement of the socio-economic situation and poverty reduction in the area; and further promote economic integration and activation within the neighbouring country.

Project Components

Civil Works 

This will include among others; upgrade from gravel to tarmac the existing road from Atiak to Nimule; expand the road to a width of 9.5 metres - You know here we have been insisting on the size of the road; improvement and reconstruction of drainage, culverts and other structures; construction of safety measures such as guard rails, road markings and sign boards.

Consulting Service

This will comprise of project supervision and monitoring; environmental and social monitoring and the auditing as required by the project.	
Project Implementation

The UNRA will be responsible for the implementation of the project. During the project execution, UNRA will be responsible for: 

1.	Procurement of works and services
2.	Project monitoring, reporting and evaluation
3.	Contractual relationships with IDA and other co- financiers; and
4.	Financial management and record keeping; accounts and disbursements.

A project co-ordination committee will be set up prior to the commencement of the project. It will be chaired by UNRA and will comprise of JICA, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Works and UNRA.

UNRA will be required to submit draft progress reports prior to meetings which will be held every three months. Further, it will also be required to steer and coordinate the project and submit quarterly progress reports to all the members of the co-ordination committee. 

The project cost is in that table and as Members can see, most of the finances are for civil works. 

The Loan Term and Conditions

The amount is Japanese Yen 3,395,000,000 and the maturity period is 40 years, including 10 years of grace. The interest rate is 0.01 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding amounts.

Conditions Attached 

Submission to JICA of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on the legal validity of the loan documents to the Republic of Uganda.

Government to ensure that the implementing Agency - UNRA adheres to procurement and disbursement considerations as required under the financing.

Submission to JICA and all other co-financiers quarterly progress reports and annual progress reports in a format and content agreed upon by the financiers and also submission of annual financial audit reports for both the Transport Sector Development Project and UNRA.

Committee Observations

I want to state here that as a committee of Parliament, which is responsible for scrutinising loans and making recommendations, we make specific recommendations to support the loan but we also find other areas of policy, other sectors which affect the smooth running of this programme and we do state them here so that different line ministries can do their part and the Sessional committees can also do their oversight. I thought I should make this clear because when we make some of these recommendations, people say we are raising a complaint recommendation but as Parliament, I think we need to do scrutiny and keep Government on alert where there is need. 

The committee raised concern over the element of partial financing, in this case the World Bank (Gulu-Atiak) and JICA (Atiak-Nimule). Our development partners now have – I do not want to call it a habit, whereby they agree how much each development partner will contribute to a particular development programme. So, you find on such a road, we thought it would be easier if the World Bank had financed the whole of it but JICA already undertook to finance part of it. 

So we are saying that in future, Government should consider comprehensive financing for a given project either from one development partner or several partners but jointly so that when it is presented here, it comes together and says, “We have a line up of World Bank, JICA, on this programme.” And I think this is in line with resource concentration in the National Development Plan. We are saying this could delay project implementation because we are dealing with different finances. 

The committee noted Government’s continued disregard of its recommendation that the road carriageway widths should be increased to a minimum of 6.5 metres, plus the shoulders of 1.5 metres on each side. So, here we are talking about 9.5 meters to cater for increased flow of traffic.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government considers making it a policy for the minimum road carriageway width to be 6.5 metres plus 1.5 metres on each side of the road shoulders. 

The committee further noted that most road shoulders are made with inferior gravel hence they deteriorate faster than the road itself and this too affects the structural design of the road in the long run.

It is recommended that contractors are urged to construct the shoulders with the same material used for the main road to ensure their durability; further still, double layers should be applied. 

The committee noted the lengthy stages of the procurement process, a minimum of 18 months, which will eventually impact on the project’s commencement and therefore implementation. 

The committee recommends that Government considers exploring ways in which the procurement processes can be expedited, in order to curb issues of delays in project implementation. We have said this every time that we have a road sector loan. The minister has promised an improvement but we want to see this happening more so when we undertake to do designs using our own money. 

The committee further observed that UNRA normally does forward road maintenance on roads already tendered for construction and yet it should be the work of the contractor responsible for the particular road unit.

The committed recommends that UNRA should consider factoring in a clause for forward road maintenance in their contracts so that this becomes the responsibility of the contractors.

We want to share this with the Committee on Infrastructure; if there is a contractor working on Masaka-Mbarara Road, why should UNRA also be doing maintenance on that road? The contract should provide that that contractor should be responsible for onward maintenance. We think this is an area which needs to be looked into. Otherwise, it would be budget maximisation by those concerned. 

It was noted that some road contractors block the roads for hours and this normally causes a lot of delays and inconveniences for the road users.

On the other hand, some contractors have been known to close off access roads to utility centres like schools and hospitals during construction. 

We are saying that the contractors must be held responsible and they should make sure that if they are working in front of a school or hospital and they have say worked on a big drainage, they must provide an access for the ambulances or patients to get there. At times, even when it comes to our rural roads, and this is not specific to this road, you will find that some access roads have been left hanging when the contractor has already been paid. It is recommended that UNRA ensures that contractors provide access roads and/or diversions while they are carrying out construction works. And if a diversion has a problem, it is still the contractor who is responsible. He should make sure that those who are using the diversion are safe and are moving on a dry road, but not to leave them stuck there as has been the case. 

The committee observes the state of disrepair of most of the roads that need rehabilitation. We, therefore, urge Government to consider the option of adoption of  low cost seals for resealing works. 

The committee further observed the lack of road signs on roads under construction. The committee urges UNRA to ensure that contractors put up road signs to reduce the rate of accidents accruing from lack of signs. 

In conclusion, the committee appreciates the challenges and efforts Government is undertaking to form the road sub-sector in the country, including steps taken particularly to source for funds for financing the Transport Sector Development Programme.

The committee has always urged line ministries to make sure that when this money is secured - when Parliament approves this loan request; it is the responsibility of the line ministry to make sure that we get value for money. Where they do not do that, we request that the oversight sessional committee takes up the responsibility of following up the loans. 

As I presented last time, there are loans, which have done very well and there are those which have not. I think we cannot make a general judgement of all loans and say they are not performing. We need to take a case-by-case and the sessional committees take interest in the performance of these loans.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve Government’s request to borrow Yen 3,395,000,000 from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for financing the top-up of the Atiak to Nimule project under the Transport Sector Development Project since the World Bank only covered Gulu to Atiak. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.14
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Usually, I am not enthusiastic about loans but for once I will put my weight behind this. This road is leading to Southern Sudan. There is another link from Arua to Koboko to Oraba also leading to Southern Sudan. It is deemed that in the not too far future, Southern Sudan will be a major trading partner of our country. So, I support this loan.

My misgiving is that many of our roads are between the widths of six to seven metres. The cost of a road, among others, depends on how wide the road is going to be. I only hope that the width of 9.5 metres quoted here will be observed to the letter, otherwise we shall be getting a very raw deal. We are paying for 9.5 metres but we might end up with only six metres. So, those who will oversee this work have to be very particular about it.

Construction of roads, major highways like these, leading to our neighbouring sister countries, should also have the element of railway transport so that heavy haulage of commodities is restricted to the railway sector to save our roads. Similarly, if we just construct roads, which will carry all the weight, the expected lifespan of these roads will be minimal.

Karuma to Packwach to Arua Road was recently commissioned but there are potholes already because the weight it carries is so much that they cannot hold for long. In the same breath, I am asking our Government to think ahead and start looking around for a way of extending the rail network from our country to Southern Sudan in order to save this road for which we are going to pay dearly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Any loan to do with the roads – I think all of us must support it. As a surveyor I move around the country and I know the usefulness of good roads. 

I do not support borrowing for the sake of borrowing and I am beginning to doubt our capacity as a country to utilise the loans that we get. If procurement takes 18 months and we are borrowing this money now; in December next year the process of procurement will be concluding. When will this road be delivered? This is a situation we cannot encourage. Government should immediately reverse this trend and in future, a timeline should be attached to loans. 

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the last time I met as a committee member with the Minister of Finance, he was apologetic that quite a number of loans already approved by this Parliament were not utilised because of some technicalities here and there and we were paying heavily for these loans. So, I really concur with you that Government should present to us the situation. How do we stand as far as utilisation of approved loans is concerned? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, on page 9, even the committee has pointed out under 4 that, “The committee noted the lengthy stages of the procurement process (18 months), which will eventually impact on the project’s commencement/implementation. The committee recommends that Government considers exploring ways the procurement process can be expedited.”  I think that is the same point you are making. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. Member for the information. I am insisting on this because if you look at our reports, since the Sixth Parliament, the recommendation is the same. Next year, you will find this same recommendation that Government should expedite. When? When will Government start changing this situation?
 
THE SPEAKER: But I think even according to the Budget Act, they are required to periodically report to us about the position of loans. We should insist on those provisions. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not like to spend too much time on this because this is an extension of the previous loan and I beg my colleagues to say “aye”. I thank you.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER & ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the report and for the good recommendations. The need to tarmac this road is long overdue and I want to thank the committee for expediting the process of studying the request from Government and for bringing the report to Parliament. I would like to urge my colleagues to support this motion without any further delay.

The road from Gulu to Atiak to Nimule is in a very sorry state. The same applies to the road from Atiak to Adjumani and Moyo up to Afogi at the border with Sudan. These are both very busy roads particularly today when business in Southern Sudan has picked up.  The soils in this area are very soft once it rains. So, during the rainy season, you pity the people and vehicles that are stuck on this road due to flooding. When a big lorry or trailer is moving; the road is so narrow, so when another one comes to overtake, it slides on the other side of the road, that is the end of everyone travelling on that road because it blocks the road completely and it is difficult to find a way through the bush because the moment you try that, you get stuck there. 

Some of us who travel on these roads have suffered a lot. Until now, whenever I call hon. Nasasira, the first thing he says, “Hon. Eriyo, are you stuck on the road?” Whenever I am stuck on that road I call him. So, I know my colleague understands the need to tarmac this road and I support this motion.

All the people from Uganda who go to Juba use this road. The people from Gulu that want to go through Atiak to Nimule and other parts of Amuru would use the same road. Many people are frustrated. People from Adjumani use this road because we travel from Adjumani to Atiak, which is 22 kilometres and then we have to go to Nimule. And because the road is in bad shape, our people go through Arinyapi; but there is a big river there, which is more or less seasonal because during the dry season the water is little. But as soon as it rains, even if it rains very far away from that area of Arinyapi, the river floods, and every rainy season, we have lost lives in that area. 

Therefore, tarmac this road; even though the distance will be far for our people, because the surface will have improved, the people will be able to come and travel through here and reach Juba safely. 

We are waiting for the tarmacking of the road from Atiak to Adjumani and Moyo because the road is in the heart of the people from this region. Recently, I was on radio and someone called me and said, “If Government does not want to tarmac this road, let us, the people, contribute. How much does it cost to tarmac this road?” 

So, this is long overdue. I request that the committee chairman puts this among their priorities in their discussions with Government. I know that there are a number of priority roads in the country but this one is a major one. 

I agree with the committee on a number of recommendations and I would like to emphasise recommendation No. 4. The absorption capacity of funding is very much affected. This is affected not only by the procurement processes, but also because of supervision by staff of the Ministry of Works. Sometimes, when contractors bring their certificates so that some money can be advanced to them, the engineers have to go on the ground to supervise before they can approve. So, sometimes there are delays in doing that. If these staff of Government could also expedite their supervision, it would improve on the absorption capacity. Actually, a lot of money gets locked up in the bank.

On the issue of road signs, when construction is going on, this also becomes a big problem because many accidents occur because people have not been warned that there is road construction going on ahead. But also a warning to tell people to divert should be done some distance away: “If you are going to such an area, you should take a diversion from here; otherwise the road is on construction”. Those are the observations I want to give. I support the loan request. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that subject to the observations and recommendations by the committee and the Members during this debate, the request to borrow Japanese Yen 3,395,000,000 be granted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY THE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW JAPANESE YEN 5,406,000,000 (US $55 MILLION) FROM THE JAPANESE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) TO CO-FINANCE THE INTERCONNECTION OF ELECTRIC GRIDS OF THE FIVE NILE EQUATORIAL LAKE COUNTRIES

3.29
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on a request by Government to borrow Japanese YEN 5,406,000,000 (US $55 million) from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to co-finance the Interconnection of Electric Grids of the Five Nile Equatorial Lake Countries. 

Just before I plunge into a quick summary of the report, I would like to inform this House that this is again a top-up loan on what Government had previously requested for. This House needs to take note of the fact that on 24 September 2009, an amount of units of account 7.99 million from the African Development Fund was approved by this House. So, this is just a top-up following the request as provided for in this project document.

I also want to lay on the Table the minutes of our meeting, the minister’s brief, the implementation plan, the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and ADF and the bank appraisal report. These are all contained in this document. 

This request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 14 April 2010 and it was accordingly referred to the Committee of National Economy.

The methodology is as outlined on page 2 but suffice to mention that among other documents, the committee made reference to the following; the minister’s brief, the Loan Financing Agreement, the Project Appraisal Document and the Project implementation plan.

Page 3 of the report, it gives the highlights of some of the areas that the committee visited. These were on spot checks to areas of the Bujagali interconnection project where the UETCL has compensation disputes. The site visit was basically to assess the progress of a similar project handled by the implementing agency that is UETCL and the areas that we visited as a committee included Mutundwe, Kawanda sub-station, Nsansa, Komamboga, Kabanganda and Namwezi.

Further to this, on page 3, you have the background to this project which I recommend that the Members accordingly read but it is important that the project is in line with Government of Uganda Sector Plan developed in 2006 and whose specific objectives are:

1.	To enhance public private partnerships in power generation and supply.
2.	Enhance financial sustainability of the energy sector in light of rising energy costs arising from escalating petroleum prices.
3.	Increase inter-regional power trade; and
4.	Address the declining Lake Victoria basin hydropower supply by diversifying the sources of power supply.

Also important to note is the fact that the Project is further included in the NEPAD Infrastructure Short Term Action Plan. 

The project overview on page 5 is well detailed and I recommend that Members read and on page 6 under 4.1, the rationale for the bank’s involvement. Again this is what honourable members can read.

I now take you to page 7 of the report, the project description. As indicated in the Nile Basin Initiative strategic action plan, the project consists of the construction and upgrading of 769 kilometres of 110 KV and 220 KV line as well as the construction and reinforcement of 17 transformer stations.
 
It consists of the Uganda Rwanda interconnection, the Kenya Uganda interconnection line and upgrading of the Burundi, DRC and Rwanda interconnection. Further details are contained on that page.

Under 6.0, we look at the project components. The project consists of six components as shown in the table below. Members can also interest themselves in the table but summarily it talks of construction and upgrading of the transmission lines with the relevant amount onto it; construction and upgrading of transformer stations; operating and maintenance of the equipment; environment and social impact and referencing to the studies and finally the project administration and management. The total of this is summarised at the bottom of that table as UA 160.20 million. It needs to be noted that these are Units of Accounts.

Further to the details of the components, we look at the project costs and financing. The total cost of the project excluding taxes and custom duties is estimated at UA 160.20 million comprising UA 106.31 million in foreign exchange and UA 53.88 million in local currency. These costs include an annual provision of seven percent for physical contingencies and 3 percent for the escalation of foreign and local currency costs. 

There is another table 2.7 on page 10, which also indicates project costs and financing by country. It outlines what Burundi is contributing, Kenya, Uganda, the DRC, Rwanda totalling to UA 160.20 million.

The ADF loans and grants will cover 62.28 percent of the total project cost and a portion of the foreign exchange and local currency costs of goods, works and services of the project. The remaining financing will be provided by the other donor that is World Bank 9.74 percent, JBIC 37.48 percent and the governments of the five countries concerned by the project will contribute 4.39 percent.  

On page 12, we look at the project area and the beneficiaries. Obviously we are highlighting as a committee that the estimated population that will benefit is around 135 million inhabitants. These are from all the five countries.

Under 6.3, that is the way leaves on the same page 12. It is important to note that the way leaves for the transmission of project line routes should be acquired within the framework of the applicable laws of Uganda including the Constitution of Uganda of 1995, the Land Act Cap. 230, the Electricity Act Cap 145, the Land Acquisition Act Cap 226, and other regulations. 

On page 13, the committee took note of the resettlement and compensation requirements. These are also well outlined there, the Members can read.

We move on to the project objectives on the same page 13. The main objectives are, therefore, to:

1.	Develop the Nile Basin water resources in a sustainable and equitable manner to ensure prosperity, security and peace in the region; and

2.	Promote joint action between the member countries so as to eliminate poverty and strengthen regional economic integration.

On the same page 13, we also took note of the project implementation. I recommend that Members read this. The implementation arrangements are very detailed and run up to page 14. 

Loan Terms and Conditions

Legal Instrument

For the financing of this project, the bank will use two instruments: loans for Kenya and Uganda, and grants for Burundi, DR Congo and Rwanda, in accordance with the eligibility conditions of these countries. 

The loans and grants will be awarded to the countries and on-lent to national electricity companies, which will be the main beneficiaries, under terms and conditions acceptable to the ADF. Besides, a grant will be awarded to the NBI for the building of technical and human capacities of the project implementation agencies.	

Additionally, under the terms:

1.	The borrower shall repay the principal of the loan over a period of 40 years, after a ten-year grace period commencing from the date of this agreement, at the rate of 1 percent per annum from the 11th to the 20th year inclusive, and at the rate of 3 percent per annum thereafter.

2.	The borrower shall pay a service charge at the rate of three-quarters of 1 percent (0.75 percent) per annum on the principal amount of the loan disbursed and outstanding from time to time.

3.	The borrower shall pay a commitment charge at the rate of 1 1/2 percent (0.50 percent) per annum on the un-disbursed portion of the loan which shall begin to accrue 120 days after the date of signature of this agreement.

4.	The principal of the loan shall be repaid in equal and consecutive semi-annual instalments; the first of which shall be payable on 1 April or 1 October, whichever immediately follows the expiration of the grace period. The service charge and commitment charge shall be payable semi-annually on the same dates.

Protocol Agreement on ADF Grant to NBI

Conditions precedent to effectiveness:
These conditions are very important to be reflected here, Mr Speaker, and I will quickly summarise them as:

1.	To provide the ADF with evidence of the establishment of a Project Coordination Unit (PCU). 

2.	To provide the ADF with evidence of the opening of a special account in a bank acceptable to the ADF to receive the counterpart funds for the project.

Under 8.3 on page 15, we also look at the protocol agreements of ADF grants to Burundi, DR Congo and Rwanda, which I commend the Members to read.

You further look at page 17, the conditions precedent to the first disbursements. Members can read that. 

And now I turn to observations and recommendations on page 18. 

Observations and Recommendations

1.	The committee noted that the government is seeking partial funding for the interconnection of the electric grid to complete the project that is partially funded by the African Development Fund.

The committee recommends that Government tries to desist from acquiring partial loans and should instead go in for comprehensive loans in order to avoid the transaction costs associated with acquiring top-up financing.

2.	The committee noted that Government is spending a lot of funds in compensation charges for land and way leaves and this too has delayed most of the projects as in most cases the money is not readily available and on the other hand the process of valuation before compensation is too lengthy.

The committee recommends that Government reconsiders the legal framework on land acquisition for public use, especially for utilities such as power and water, in order to mitigate the above mentioned challenges.

3.	The committee was further concerned over the leasing of land under way leaves where in some cases construction has already taken place and businesses are operating, for example the Internal Container Deport (ICD) at Kyambogo.

The committee urges Government to investigate and put a stop to such a practice.

4.	A concern was also raised on the continuous technical power losses through the transmission process; this being partly contributory to the escalating power tariffs.

The committee recommends that Uganda Electricity Transmission Company (UETCL) finds ways of mitigating the losses by lowering them through the rehabilitation of the transmission infrastructure.

5.	The committee observes that this is a multi-national project being shared among the five Nile Equatorial Lake countries and as such, the committee recommends that continuous joint assessments be periodically carried out by the partner states involved in the project.

6.	The committee noted the lack of a comprehensive plan involving power mixes on how to eventually evacuate/export power to the neighbouring countries. Note was also taken that the exploration into alternative sources of energy by the Ministry of Energy was long overdue.

The committee hence recommends to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to fast-track the development and actualisation of a comprehensive design involving usage, exportation and management of power mixes such as hydro, thermal and gas. Further, the committee highly recommends the inclusion of more less degradable and environmentally friendly energy sources such as wind and biogas, among others.

In conclusion, the committee notes that the Government has taken a valiant strategy in the participation of the Multi-national Project on the Interconnection of the Electric Grids of the five NEL countries, which will increase cross-border energy and power trade, and thereby improve the transient stability of the system, security and affordability of supply as well as flexibility in the operation of the interconnected networks of the five countries.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, given the strategic importance of this project, and the objectives mentioned therein, the committee recommends that the House approves Government’s request to borrow JPY 5,406,000,000 (US $55.0 million) from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to co-finance the Interconnection of Electric Grids of the five Nile Equatorial Lake countries. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairman and members of the committee for the report. Yes, hon. Member. 

3.51
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chair for the report well written, and I support the motion, but I have some issues that I would like to get clarified, especially from the issues that we raised before.  

One issue that I need to be assisted on, especially in this Nile region; we are all aware that the Nile Development Cooperative Framework has not been signed by the two countries, that is the Sudan and Egypt. How sure are we that this project will run smoothly when this agreement has not been respected by all the parties? I just need to be helped to understand whether this project will run on time because we know that if we borrow money and it is not utilised in the timeframe that we give it, then it accumulates interest, which is a liability to the country. 

I would like more clarification on the issue of way leaves. Though the committee talked about it that it will be solved according to the Ugandan laws, my observation from the different projects that we have been running in this country, we have been bogged down by the issue of way leaves. The land tenure system we have in this country makes it difficult for even the government valuer to be able to establish a certain price to this land. And the tendency is that many times when people know that transmission lines will pass over their land, they tend to put up infrastructure in order to get a lot of compensation.   

So, I would like the minister to help me understand the plan we have as a country to make sure that the issue of way leaves does not stand in the way of the implementation of this project? And in any case, can we be guided by maybe a standard amount of money that will be needed for this project in any area? How best can we make sure that we can minimise the expensive ventures that many people have been putting up and even those that refuse to let these way leaves pass in the areas that have been planned? So, I just needed some clarification on those issues. 

But the issue of transmission lines and electricity is very important if we are to realise any meaningful development in this country. And certainly, as we move as a region, it gives us the strength to be able to work together as countries and meet the targets that we have set for ourselves in the region. Therefore, I support the motion, but I would like the minister to clarify on those two issues. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.55
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I also concur with my colleague who has just supported this loan. But I have one important observation, that is, as to whether the Minister of Energy has planned for this country, because I thought that he would prioritise getting some finances to, first of all, connect all parts of this country before moving to other countries. 

In my view, it appears that the aim of this loan is to make money. Why can’t we think first of our people? It is like someone who feeds his neighbours and starves his family. So, Mr Minister, could you please clarify as to whether you have a plan to send power where people need it in this country because people are still lacking power? For instance, in West Nile we are in darkness. There is no clear policy for power generation in West Nile. Although it is stated in the budget, you find that at the end of the day, money is not availed for West Nile. In my view, the minister, who hails from there should have given priority to such an area. I am surprised that he has given priority to Rwanda and Congo - I do not understand the whole concept of borrowing this money, really. 

In my district, Yumbe, for instance, we have not had power since independence. And now the issue is that we are looking for money to take power to Rwanda and Congo; what logic is this? (Laughter) So the ministries should prioritise their areas of operation such that the people of Uganda benefit before sending power outside the country. In my view, if this loan were not for additional funding, I would have opposed it but being additional money to supplement the project, let it pass although I am not happy. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.57
MRS NABILAH NAGGAYI SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to retaliate my fear not only as a member of the Natural Resources Committee who is reacting to a project that is going to benefit the sector, but to also query the financing of these lines of five countries by Uganda. Where are the clauses that – are they going to pay part of this money, because we are borrowing? It is not our money. We want to know the clauses that tie them to paying back this money? We do not want to borrow on behalf of five countries and yet we do not know particular clauses that are going to tag that money to the economies of those countries. So, I want the –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to give information to my honourable colleague and friend that one, the Interconnectivity Project is being implemented by different governments under a different implementation arrangement, and we have mentioned it here that different countries have a different implementation arrangement - it is there on page 10. But what I want in order to be together with my brother from West Nile - my neighbour who really has a deficit - is that the advantage of the interconnectivity under the Nile shared vision and spirit of cooperation is that should you have a country with a deficit of power and your neighbour has more, like it is in the EU and other developed countries, you should be able to evacuate power from countries of excess to countries of deficit. 

And also -(Interjections)- very interesting for Uganda where we have been complaining about the high tariff cost, if your country is having a high tariff cost, people will consume the cheapest from a neighbour. So, it is actually good for the future when it works. I thought that I should give that information. 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, my Chair, but at least I am more perturbed by your information because when you look at the page which you are talking about, Uganda is meeting more costs, why? So, I think we are very perturbed that as a country we think we can be donors in the region. And we want to be clarified - because if you have those other agreements that we are going to co-finance, why don’t we have some copies so that we see what exactly they are also going to commit to. 

It is very important that the committee does not just tag a loan to this country on behalf of other countries without providing access to information to those other agreements that you have talked about. That will also help us to know that we are doing this on behalf of the region, but they are also committing to something that is going to be beneficial to the whole region. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But what I do not understand on page 9, there is project cost and financing. I know that, “The capacity of five countries will contribute to the financing of the project ….” I thought that they also have a contribution to make -

MRS SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, what I wanted to say is that we need all the information to be comfortable to commit to a loan that is going to benefit all the countries. If we had the information in totality, we would be comfortable and would not be asking that because we would see the mutual benefit that we are going to derive from this cooperation as we show how they are going to benefit from these loans. 

4.02
MRS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Regarding the tariffs, Uganda has always given Kenya a lower tariff and within here, the community is paying so much. Our electricity is so expensive and we cannot afford it. I do not know whether there is going to be away of harmonising the tariffs across the region because without that, I do not see how we are going to operate. 

On page 9, they are telling us that the bank will fully finance the investments of Burundi and DRC. Why are we not being financed if the bank is fully financing other countries? Why are we asking for a loan and yet others are going to be financed and I don’t know whether through loans or grants. I would like to be educated on that.

4.03
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion, but also get clarification from the minister concerned. One is on the way leaves. Initially, I thought that road reserves were meant for –(Interjection)– because here the committee recommends power, water and so on and where it is too small, then a diversion could be made; but what I see in most areas is that the road reserves are not being used. The lines now go deep into people’s land. Is that intentional? I am raising this in regard to the digging that has been going on. I have seen it in Soroti and Mbale. People are digging all over deep into people’s gardens and yet that line could actually follow a road reserve. I wanted to hear from the minister on whether that is intentional or not because that could be used as a means to get money. And even in some cases, there is no compensation at all when that is being done. So, are road reserves meant for way leaves and if not, how can we reduce encroachment on this land?

Secondly, I also wanted to take this opportunity to hear from the minister about transmission lines with high voltage. I have seen many high voltage lines pass over people’s roofs and Soroti is a very good example. There are high voltage lines and people are constructing below those lines. When we were going to Arua, we saw houses very close to those high voltage routes. Is there a mechanism that we can use to ensure that those people in whose houses the high voltage lines have passed are compensated so that they can move away from such areas or is the ministry creating awareness so that our people do not get the effects of high transmission lines passing over their heads and their roofs? And in many cases, even if there is a break in the line, that house just gets burnt. Is there a way we can prevent such disasters from happening? Is there a way in which the minister can coordinate with the Minister of Local Government because this happens mainly in municipalities? There are plots in municipalities which are being sold – like in Soroti - which are directly under the high transmission line. I am giving an example of Soroti because that is where I have seen this happen. 

Finally, now that we are talking about electricity, hon. Minister, what has happened with rural electrification? My friend Ashraf Olega is talking about rural electrification in the West Nile. Did it start and end in the West Nile? Hon. Gabriel Opio is assisting me on that because we do not seem to be seeing it in Teso. It is rural electrification and we have not seen it anywhere and there is nobody telling us of its progress. So, we would like to hear from the minister on where rural electrification is and where it has ended. Thank you. 

4.08
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also seek clarification on one or two issues. The first one is the logic of giving a loan with two portions – a small portion is the grant and the other portion is the loan. I want the committee to explain to me what the logic is. If you compute the interest on the loan and compare it to the grant, are we really getting anything free? I need that clarification. 

Secondly, the committee on page 19 recommends to Government to reconsider the legal framework on land acquisition. Mr Speaker, this is a constitutional matter. Government can only acquire land for public use and it is stipulated in the Constitution and it is in all other relevant statutes. I want to know from the committee what exactly the committee has in mind. What should be reconsidered; is it amending the Constitution so that the government gets free land? What is it –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, my father-in-law. The committee is in line with what hon. Otekat has just raised of the challenges of public works in Uganda. Every time we have a loan for roads, they have to acquire land. Every time we have a loan for ICT cables, they have to acquire land. As we speak, the National Pipeline from Eldoret is having challenges because we need to acquire land. For transmission lines, it is the same problem and it seems even the Road Fund and the energy fund has a risk for financing land acquisition. So after finding this road block every time, as a committee we think that a constitutional amendment would be the best. If seriously we think that – and I think this is a matter of a common good; it is not a partisan matter that - if this country with a National Development Plan is going to have resources to develop, we should provide once and for all for the areas we require for future roads, for railway, for optic cables and possibly learn from other countries whereby public work is responsible for providing for all these other utilities including water -

MS ALASO: I am seeking a small clarification and not a simple one. I was looking at the table and since the chair of the national economy had got up – there is a table on page 10 and the table is about project costs and financing plan by country. Since he is talking about a broader picture of national development, roads, power and issues like that, I am reliably told that the cost of constructing a kilometre of tarmac road in Uganda is many times than the same distance for the other countries in the region. 

I am now looking at this plan here; Burundi’s total is 15.17; Kenya is 35.22; and Uganda is 48.14. Is it the same standards that are applied here so that we are always on the more expensive part of financing? 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the chairman of the national economy and also my son-in-law for that information. There is no development that can take place without land. Land is the passage for any development. So, if you are going to carry out development, the first item in your layout is land and so it should not be a road block. You should consider it first before you consider anything else. Public utilities like roads are for everybody. Why would you like a few land owners to sacrifice their land for the entire world? They should be compensated. I think it will be unfortunate if we recommend a change of the Constitution on this matter - 

MR MUKITALE: Can I give information?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Let me conclude -  

MR MUKITALE: Okay.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, my last – 

THE SPEAKER: Even when you make changes in the Constitution, you will have to pay compensation.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: We cannot do without it. I thank you. (Laughter) My last point is the nature – 

THE SPEAKER: It is even saying that you can compulsorily acquire land. Compulsory acquisition can be done provided compensation is paid before occupation.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Not only compensation, but “adequate and prompt.” (Laughter)

My last point is on the nature of this loan. This is an East African loan and I do not know whether the committee queried before wanting to consider this. To me, this report should have gone to the East African Legislative Assembly -(Laughter)- it is not ours. Why should we borrow money for a utility that will be used by five countries – it is not our baby. We should actually not approve this loan. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, I stand here specifically to ask for your indulgence in this matter. In the Seventh Parliament, hon. Nelson Wambuzi Gagawala was sitting in the third row behind here. Every day he would get up and say, “I cannot continue to sit in this House and debate other matters when Government has refused to give Kaliro a district.” It was so continuous until you intervened and told the Prime Minister, “Mr Prime Minister, why don’t you consider this matter so that we are ridded of it?” (Laughter) On behalf of the people of West Nile, I want you to do a similar thing – our cry in West Nile has been so persistent and we are in darkness. This loan for electricity is also going to be paid by the people of West Nile. Can you do the same Sir? (Laughter) I thank you. (Laughter) (Applause)

4.17
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I have been perusing this report that has been presented here to look for benefits that will accrue to Uganda from this very big project. I am seeing there that the project will cover an area so large that it is even beyond the size of Uganda - that is 286,350 square kilometres. We are also saying here that the population to be affected will be 135 million inhabitants, which of course is far in excess of what Uganda actually has as its population. Uganda is going to borrow some money to finance all these big benefits that may accrue to other people other than us. I am wondering and I want a bit of clarification. 

When I look at the conditions precedent to first disbursement and to other disbursements, I looked at the committee recommendation on page 20 that says that, “The committee hence recommends to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to fast-track the development and actualisation of a comprehensive design involving usage, exportation and management of power mixes (such as hydro, thermal and gas).” Through the implementation of this project using all this money that Uganda is going to borrow, are we prepared at all to take the maximum benefit of this, especially with respect to the development of our own hydro electric schemes?  The committee is just recommending to the minister of energy. Is the minister of energy prepared for this challenge? It is important that we are assured of this because as you have heard the cries of the people of West Nile, the people of other areas like Buliisa are all crying out wanting more and more power generated and distributed to them. Will this facility help them or help us to meet the cries of these people? 

We have had problems which are attributed to the Sixth Parliament and so on about power generation. Is this a solution? So, I actually need a bit of clarification on that from those who are peddling this particular loan request. I thank you very much. 

4.21
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA KIBIRIGE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I commend this loan to be passed. I am also an interested party in as far as they talk about compensation. Way leaves are supposed to evacuate electricity from Bujagali to Kawanda, but as we mentioned in this report, around Kabaganda, there is a professor -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Procedure – 

MR SEBUNYA KIBIRIGE: This is to do with my constituency –

MRS OGWAL: Our rules say that if you are a Member of the committee, you cannot contribute on the subject. I am wondering whether you are aware that the Member on the Floor has actually signed the report!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for making me aware. I am now aware. (Laughter) It is okay. It is your report you are discussing. (Laughter)

4.22
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to go on record that I have a lot of reservations as far as this loan request is concerned.

Just like Members have expressed their concerns –

THE SPEAKER: But I think one point you should note when making a contribution is that it was introduced to us that this loan request was an addition. The project started but it was found out that the money was not enough. They need more to complete the project. It is not totally new. This is a supplementary loan to finish up the project. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With that guidance, I want to also be on record that let the Minister come out clearly to inform us of how the ADB loan that we approved under REA is performing because he denied us a list of the benefiting schemes when we were approving that loan here. He was promising everyone and when we approached him he said, “Your constituency is catered for, your line is catered for.” When we go to the ministry here, everyone is putting you off by saying, “Your scheme is not there”. These schemes have been on since 2003. We have moved left and right but now we are approving this. The public out there are yet to judge us regarding how we are appropriating for international connections when the local ones are not catered for.

THE SPEAKER: I think what hon. D’Ujanga has to do is to come and present a statement later telling us what you are really going to do with the country so that we also benefit from what is happening here. I task you to prepare that statement when we come back to start the last session in June - we intend to start a session on 2nd June. I think you should come and cool down what is happening here. You have heard the cries from West Nile; they are not benefiting at all. I think you should present that statement.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We will come here in June with a concise report on that. But can I use this chance to react to some of the other issues, which were raised here?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, this loan, as you have guided, was approved here and there was a lengthy debate. What we are doing today is to get some more money to top up.  Nevertheless, I would like to inform the House about certain issues that were raised.

One is on page 10. There is a table there and Burundi 15.17, Kenya 35.22, Uganda 48. These amounts are proportional to both the length of the lines and the voltage level. If you have noticed, in Burundi they are referring to 110 kilo volts and in Uganda, it is 210 kilo volts. The bigger the voltage, the bigger the tower and the more costly it is.

Two; we are building a line from Tororo to Bujagali and the other piece from Mbarara to Mirama Hills. If you add the two lengths, they are more than twice the total length across Burundi. So it can be seen that Uganda must contribute more. 

This is a transmission network as I explained last time. It is different from rural electrification. In June, I will come with the programme of rural electrification. We have a manual we are following and all the Members who were raising issues about their constituencies one way or the other are included, even West Nile. There was talk here that rural electrification started in West Nile and ended there, but I must inform the House that actually, West Nile is in darkness.

THE SPEAKER: And Bukoto Central in Masaka District?

MR D’UJANGA: If in doubt, they can ask hon. Ashraf Olega. West Nile is in darkness. Something is being done. We have difficulties there. This Nyagak we have had difficulties with the contractor. I am glad to say that now we have stopped that contractor and found another one. Last week, I think the agreements were initialled; you will soon have a contractor on site. We also have enough money now to build lines in the rural area. 

With respect to ERT (Electricity for Rural Transformation), when that report was brought here, all the areas to benefit are listed there. We will reproduce that report so that Members can refresh their minds.

Finally, hon. Okecho asked whether we are indeed ready, on page 20 to apply the energy mix.  The answer is yes. With our gas and oil policy, we are going to have 700 mega watts and we are going to have this in addition to Karuma’s 700 mega watts and Bujagali’s 250 mega watts. The other co-generation projects like Kakira from Bagasse, Kinyara in Masindi and Lugazi all these are going to give us the energy mix.

As I said earlier on, last time when we were discussing this loan, these lines are not for export; these lines are for security of supply in the region. For example, if we have heavy rainfall in Ethiopia and we have drought in Tanzania, we would like Tanzania to be able to access the cheap energy in Ethiopia and that would be done by this line. Rwanda is developing gas from Lake Kivu. The capacity of gas generation there is much more than what they can consume. We are saying in case there is a shortage in Kenya, Kenya should be able to get access to the cheap energy from gas in Lake Kivu. This is what we are trying to do in this region as a result of the problem we had recently. We would not have load shed heavily in Uganda if we had this network in the region.

It is different; it is not for export; it is to allow electricity to flow around the region. It is not rural electrification; it is transmission like a highway of electricity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a top-up as you have heard. The project started a long time ago but it is necessary to have these funds. 

Now I put the question to the motion, subject to the recommendations and comments made here that we grant the request by Government to borrow the sum of 5,406,000,000. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, there is something, which I explained earlier before many of you came in. This concerns items No. 8, 9 and 10. These are loans but the purpose is actually education. Therefore, whatever you are going to say will concern the policy of education like giving vocational institutions and so forth. Maybe the committee should introduce their recommendations on the three loans then Members start contributing. This is what I brought but we did not decide. Do you think we can do that?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Agreed? The first one is about development of national technical colleges; the other one is about construction and equipping of 14 technical institutes in the technical vocational education and technical training programme. The tenth item is supplementary financing to enable the completion of the construction of students hostels in Islamic University in Uganda. So you can see that all are related to education; this is what I was saying. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no serious objection, but technically, these are three motions. I hope that at approval time, we will treat them as separate motions. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they are different sums, but that gives you the opportunity; when addressing us on technical colleges, you can also talk about the others. That is the idea. 

Briefly, can you tell us what these loans are on understanding that finally, we shall separately approve them? 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $13.57 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR SUPPORTING THE NATIONAL EDUCATION PROJECT THROUGH THE EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL TECHNICAL COLLEGES

4.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (MR Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, I now rise to present a summarised report on behalf of the Committee of National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US $13.57 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for supporting the National Education Project through the Expansion and Development of National Technical Colleges. 

Before I proceed, allow me recognise the contribution of our technical staff at Parliament: our clerk, Judith Taaka, our Budget Officer and Research and Legal officers. Most of these loan requests came during the budget time; they came at a time when we had electoral reforms. 

I also thank my honourable colleagues, who after working here on Thursday, went to the field to make sure these reports are ready. You must be wondering how these reports can be read in less than six weeks. So, I thank my honourable members of the Committee of National Economy for their team work and that is why you can see it even at the presentation stage; I am not presenting all the eight reports alone. 

It has been agreed that we summarise. This loan request was brought here by the Minister of Finance on 8th April and the committee interfaced with both the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Ministry of Education. We visited the sites in the field. Therefore, I want to lay on the Table the project appraisal document, the project implementation plan, the draft loan agreement, the Minister’s brief to Parliament and our minutes for the meetings we held.  

Uganda’s revised Educational Sector Strategic Plan 2007–2015 is underpinned by the country’s stated national goals for education: 

1.	To promote citizenship, moral, ethical and spiritual values.

2.	To promote scientific, technical and cultural knowledge, skills and attitudes;

3.	To eradicate illiteracy and equip individuals with basic skills and knowledge and with ability to contribute to building of an integrated self-sustaining and independent economy.

Let me read just the first paragraph to give you the data. The revised Educational Sector Strategic Plan 2007 places science and technology spending among the spending priorities of the secondary sub-sector. More specifically, the Educational Sector Strategic Plan emphasises strategy such as recruiting teachers and improving the quality of science teaching at all levels. 

Further, Government decided to increase the percentage of students studying sciences at tertiary level from 15 percent to 30 percent in the medium term and 70 percent in the long run. 

Government further recognises the importance of teachers as the backbone of education. Teachers in Uganda are trained in primary teachers’ colleges, national teachers’ colleges and universities and this is complemented by the continuous teacher development programmes which are a key stone to ensuring that teachers are continuously informed about the changing demands of teaching.

The national education project targeting support of the expansion and the development of the national teachers’ colleges was, therefore, designed against a background targeting issues of quality, specifically there is a need to address the low levels of learning achievement in science and technology subjects including mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, agriculture, technical drawing, metal work and information and communication technology. 

Let me go straight to the rationale. Islamic Development Bank (IDB) is fully committed to supporting the Government of Uganda to achieve its national development plan and targets. Currently, the IDB plays an important role in the development of education, water, capacity building, micro-finance and agriculture. 

The proposed project is an outcome of the IDB technical mission policy dialogue between Government of Uganda and IDB in the financial year 2008 and 2009 respectively. Both parties agreed that IDB intervention should support primary education in Uganda since the country has made significant progress in UPE. 

In a competitive environment, IDB is also responding to a request of an important member country that values its long and sustaining engagement in the education sector. 

The proposed project is timely and responds to the needs – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, they can read that.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance.
 
Rationale

i)	Improving the quality of teachers’ education and providing adequate teachers for both primary and secondary education.

ii)	Creating a business, technical and vocational education and workforce with practical work skills, entrepreneurship skills and orientation that is essential for employment.

The project scope

1. 	To support and improve quality of BTVET through -
i)	rehabilitation of two existing technical colleges;
ii)	Supply of furniture and equipment;
iii)	Curriculum development; and
iv)	Skills development. 

2. 	To improve the access and quality of teacher education sub-sector through:
i)	Expanding and rehabilitating the National Teachers’ College in Unyama;
ii)	Furniture 
iii)	Supply of equipment, tools and text books; and 
iv)	Training of teachers.

3. 	Project management comprising support to PCU, consultancy services, audit and start up workshops. 

The project components are as below on page 6 –

THE SPEAKER: I think you can now go to project area and beneficiaries. 

MR MUKITALE: You can see the components. The support of improving the quality is US $4,816,200 million, support to improving access and quality is US $5,955,950. The component of the project is only US $1.2 million. So, clearly you can see on the table that most of the component is really support to improve the quality of education and access and project management takes the smaller percentage of 9.25 if you check the table on page 7.

Page 8 has the following project area beneficiaries:

i) 	Elgon Technical College in Mbale District representing the Eastern region;
ii) 	Lira Training College in Lira District for Northern Uganda; and
iii) 	The NTC to be supported is Unyama that is a teachers’ college in Gulu District still Northern Uganda.

The selection of colleges is based on the following:

i)	The selected colleges are located in the poorest region in Uganda.

ii)	The Northern is a conflict-affected region where a significant number of youth come back from the conflict and are unemployed. Therefore, the government is reintegrating the child soldiers into the society as one of its top priorities.

iii)	The regions have the lowest enrolment rate of teacher education. I thought that is very clear.

Project Objectives

1. 	To improve access to quality education through the expansion and rehabilitation of two existing Uganda Technical Colleges and one National Teachers’ College. The committee actually visited all the three and I must say they are in a very bad state and they are very deserving.

2. 	Provide facilities for students to learn technical skills; and

3. 	Improve the quality and relevance of teaching through refresher courses for existing lecturers/tutors and supply of appropriate and relevant equipment and instructional materials. 

You will realise that some time back the question of in-service training had become almost neglected - I think this is in line with bringing of elements of retooling and re-orienting those who are in the service.

Project Implementation

I do not think I should read the detail. You know who is going to implement this.

On page 10 are the loan terms; the IDB terms, we have been discussing them here. 

The loan amount is known equivalent to US $12 million. The period is 25 years including the grace period of seven years. It will carry the lump sum service fee to cover part of the actual expenses -

THE SPEAKER: Go to observations and recommendations.

MR MUKITALE: So I now move, with the Speaker’s guidance, to observations on page 12 because we have three reports in the education sector and a lot of these issues will keep coming in.

1. 	The committee observed that a number of national technical colleges lacked adequate infrastructure like libraries, lecture rooms, laboratories, computer rooms, tutor offices, sick bays - actually all these colleges have improvised sick bays - student and staff accommodation, office blocks and required workshop for the delivery of quality education. 

	The committee recommends that Government should look for more funds to rehabilitate all other national technical colleges and also construct new technical colleges in districts where they do not exist. 

2. 	The committee observed that some of the national technical colleges to be rehabilitated actually need to be rebuilt as the structures are heavily dilapidated and cannot stand the test of time if just rehabilitated. Furthermore, the Unyama Teachers’ College was roofed with asbestos material which is hazardous. The architectural designs of Unyama National Teachers’ College, Kamuli Teachers’ College, Lira Technical College and Elgon Technical Institute were outdated and hence unable to meet the day to day educational needs of the colleges. 

	The committee recommends that the rehabilitation of the national technical colleges should ensure a revision of the architectural designs and more so the use of hazardous asbestos roofing materials should be removed altogether. 

	The Ministry of Education and Sports is also urged to carry out feasibility and needs assessment study in the project areas in order to be able to fully assess the practicability of either renovating or constructing new structures. The heads of the colleges should be consulted and involved before committing to any works as this will help in the needs assessment exercise.

3. 	The committee further noted that some national technical colleges had not yet finalised with securing land titles for their institutions and as a result had their land boundaries encroached and here we are talking of Lira Technical College where some church already has acquired a title in the periphery of that big land. 

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the respective district authorities should work together to ensure that all national technical colleges have their land titles secured. 

4. 	The committee noted with concern that whereas the responsibility of maintenance of national technical colleges lies with the administration of the respective colleges, the colleges were unable to fully fulfil this function due to funding limitations. This contributed to the continued dilapidation of existing infrastructure.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should consider putting in funding for assisting the national technical colleges in order for them to effectively carry out maintenance of existing infrastructure.

5. 	The committee also noted that the project component for Lira Technical College was not in line with the priority needs of the college when they interfaced with the ministry and the bank at an earlier stage. The project component was to undertake renovation of the college whereas the college was in favour of construction of new buildings to solve the problem of limited infrastructure in form of departmental workshops and lecture rooms.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should explore the available options for flexibility from the funders in terms of the implementation of this project with a way of ascertaining whether the college priorities can be incorporated into the implementation process of the project.

Mr Speaker, the committee appreciates and notes the progress Government is making in mobilising resources for the purpose of supporting the BTVET programme in the country so as to facilitate the training of trainers institutions to deliver and thus increase on the supply of skilled manpower for our economy.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the government request to borrow US $13.57 million from the Islamic Development Bank for supporting the national education project through expansion and development of national technical colleges.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Hon. Members, does this require any debate?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question -

4.50
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One thing I have noticed, which is not included, is emphasis on the girl-child in Northern Uganda because these girls who lost out on formal education - and I believe that the Government should go an extra mile to mobilise these girls to benefit from the facilities that are being created. 

I am also interested in the message, which the committee came out with on page 13 where the project component is not in line with the priority of Lira Technical College. I think that is one aspect which must be corrected so that whatever we come out with should be solving the problem rather than creating a structure, which may not be very useful. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, subject to the comments and recommendations and the additional observations made by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we grant leave to the request to borrow this money for this noble purpose. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $12,700,000 AND ANOTHER US $22,950,000 FROM THE SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT AND OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESPECTIVELY FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF 14 TECHNICAL INSTITUTES IN THE TECHNICAL VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMME

THE SPEAKER: Can you tell me where these schools are?

4.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, this is a request for setting up brand new - if I can call them that - technical schools in areas where they have never existed and the districts are the following:  Adjumani, Bukedea, Kiboga, Kyenjojo, Lyantonde, Mukono, Kamuli, Namutumba, Nakasongola, Hoima, Amuria, Pader, Yumbe and Masaka. 

On behalf of the Committee of National Economy, I now want to summarise the report of a request by Government to borrow US $12.7 and another 22.95 from the Saudi Fund for Development and the OPEC Fund respectively for financing the construction and equipping of the 14 already mentioned technical institutes in the technical vocational education and training programme.

The methodology is as usual. We visited these areas. Possibly, I should read the background.

Education in Uganda was formally oriented towards white collar jobs. The Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET) on the other hand was very limited and designed to produce manual workers who were predominantly drawn from the under privileged sections of society hence the stigmatisation of technical education.

However, in the last two decades, Government has taken deliberate steps to reverse this trend. It instituted an Education Policy Review Commission in 1989 which produced a Government White Paper on Education in 1992 which is now the major basis for planning for and programming Uganda’s education and training activities in the economy.

Its mission is to, “Guide, co-ordinate, regulate and promote quality education and sports to all persons in Uganda for national integration, individual and national development”.

The Business Technical Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) sub-sector in Uganda is constituted by formal and non-formal public and private institutions, Private Training Providers (PTP) and private companies. Whereas formal BTVET covers business, technical, vocational, health, agriculture, paramedical and paraprofessional fields, non-formal BTVET takes place everywhere and integrates school-based provision with other non-formal training arrangements.

You can read the programme overview.

The Project Description  

The project will cover:

a)	Design and supervision
b)	Construction of new facilities at new sites
c)	Provision of equipment and furniture; and
d)	Coordination

The technical institutions will further provide multi-skills training opportunities for lower secondary students who will not be able to proceed to upper secondary.

You are aware that this year our USE graduates are sitting exams and we have a very big challenge. 

In addition, every technical institution will have planned capacity for accommodating 540 trainees.

Every institution will offer six out of the following 10 courses:

1.	Building and Concrete Practice
2.	Carpentry and Joinery
3.	Electrical Installation and Electronics
4.	Metal Fabrication and Welding
5.	Agriculture
6.	Motor Vehicle Mechanics
7.	Plumbing/ Pipe Fitting
8.	Painting and Decoration
9.	Home Economics and Tailoring
10. Petroleum Technology

The selected courses in each district will respond to the practical skills requirements of the local communities. I can say that when we visited Hoima to check on the site they would want areas like petroleum technology so that those young people out there who come out of S.4 can benefit from such skills and related fabrication and welding courses. 

The project will further focus on capacity building, institutional management and inclusion of ICT programmes relevant to BTVET institutions and finance, construction of facilities namely; workshops, dormitories, classrooms, administration blocks, library and ICT rooms, multipurpose science rooms, staff houses, multi-purpose hall, sickbay, drawing offices and store houses, sports facilities, rainwater harvest tanks, manual boreholes, kitchen, toilets and solar power system.

Further still, every institution will receive assorted text books, a tractor with a trailer, a 30-seater bus and water supply equipment.

The Project Components

One is engineering, designs and works supervision. The second component is civil works and that covers the new construction. At every site, we shall have the following: 18 classrooms, six workshops - (Interjections)- can I skip this? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR MUKITALE: Supply of Equipment and Tools:

Equipment to be supplied under this component will include, furniture for all the new facilities listed in component 2:

a)	Workshop equipment and tools for six courses
b)	Multi-purpose science room equipment
c)	Reference textbooks for all the 10 courses
d)	31 computers and appliances
e)	A 30-seater bus
f)	Institute tractors
g)	Sports equipment
h)	Drawing equipment

Component 4: Co-ordination and Management

This component will provide necessary support for the effective implementation of the project through the Ministry of Education and Sports and the other partner institutions. The project will, therefore, finance the following:
a)	Salaries of skeleton staff and other activity allowances;
b)	External and local travel costs;
c)	Telecommunications and postage;
d)	Project coordination office costs;
e)	Equipment running costs and maintenance;
f)	Stationery and;
g)	Purchase of two coordination vehicles.

6.1	Project Cost and Financing

The total estimated cost of the project is US$ 25,006, 510 which translates into Shs 50,013,019,280.

The project will be co-financed by the OPEC Fund for International Development and the Government of Uganda counterpart funding. Government of Uganda will contribute 10 percent of the total project cost. Below is a summary of the financing. And as we mentioned, you can really see, construction and equipping take the bigger percentage of the project. 

6.2	Project Objective

The over arching project objective is to contribute to the expansion of equitable access to quality Post Primary Education and Training as part of the Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) programme.

Specifically, the project will improve access to quality education in nine technical institutions through stimulating intellectual and technical growth of students in order to make them productive members of the community, and to produce craftsmen, technicians and other skilled manpower to meet the demands of industry, agriculture and commerce as well as the teaching of technical and vocational subjects.

The selection of the nine districts will take into consideration the following factors:

a)	Regional balancing that is, Eastern, Northern, Western and Central;
b)	Districts without a technical institution, but still targeting the region;
c)	Availability of public land with a title deed; and
d)	Wide catchment area, that is, the district should have many secondary schools to provide senior four graduates to join the proposed technical institutions.

Based on the outlined criteria, the proposed districts are as follows: Namutumba, Nakasongola, Yumbe, Hoima, Masaka, Mukono, Amuria, Kamuli and Pader.

Project Implementation

The project will be implemented in the financial years as indicated in the table on page 7.

The institutional implementation arrangement is based on the existing structure of the Ministry of Education and Sports. Relevant departments and units namely: Business Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET); Education Planning(EPD); Construction Management Unit (CMU); and the Public Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU), will share roles and responsibilities in coordinating the implementation of the proposed programme. The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, will be the accounting officer and will be responsible for the overall organisation, coordination, supervision and management of the project.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist within the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) shall coordinate the monitoring and evaluation of the project activities.

Loan Terms and Conditions   

The Saudi Fund for Development (SFD)

•	The loan amount shall be an amount of 45 million Saudi Riyals.
•	The term of the loan shall be 30 years including a 10 year grace period.
•	The loan charge and other charges shall be payable semi–annually on 31st March and 30th September each year depending on which one falls first.
•	The borrower shall pay a loan charge at the rate of 1 percent per annum on the principal amount of the loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time.
•	The closing date shall be 31 December 2012 or such later date as shall be determined by the Fund.

The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

•	OFID agrees to lend to the borrower the loan amount of US $22,950,000.
•	The borrower shall pay an interest at the rate of 1 percent per annum on the principal amount of the loan withdrawn and outstanding.
•	The borrower shall pay a service charge at the rate of 1 percent per annum on the principal amount of the loan withdrawn and outstanding.
•	Interest and service charges shall be paid semi-annually on 15th April and October 15th of each year into the OFID account.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted the issue of land acquisition where there were those districts that had land and did not have the land titles, and those that had land and were pursuing land titles. So, they are not in a homogeneous state.

Districts should be urged to acquire land for the proposed project in order to avoid delays when the project commences.

Government should consider a review of the education sector to cater for the high rate of S.4 dropouts who come out ill-equipped of any vocational skills. Hon. Members, you remember those who studied earlier did some technical drawing (TD) and other more business related subjects including Home Economics, which is rare in schools today.   

Government is urged to consider a shift in the Education emphasis and further provide seed vocational schools per district. This includes the newly created districts. 

The committee further noted that ignorance of some of the conditions attached to the construction of the institutions, for example, in Mukono District where the condition of the contributory factor of public titled land by the district was not known. So, more sensitisation should be carried out to enlighten both the district leaders and the local populace over the importance of these institutions in order to get backing.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and  hon. Members, the committee notes and appreciates the progress Governmnet is making in mobilising resources to finance the TVET programme in the country so as to increase the supply of skilled manpower in the economy.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the two requests by Government to borrow US $12,700,000 and another US $22,950,000 from the Saudi Fund for Development (SFD) and the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) respectively, for financing the construction and equipping of 14 technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education and Training Programme. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do we need to debate? I think I should put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, these were clear. We want employment and these institutions are providing it to us. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UP TO US $567,000 AS SUPPLEMENTARY FINANCING TO ENABLE THE COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF STUDENTS HOSTELS IN THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you proceed, is this figure US $567 million?

5.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Charles Oleny): By way of correction this should really be 567,000.

THE SPEAKER: Million dollars?

MR OLENY: No, thousand dollars.

THE SPEAKER: Only? Okay, then it is very clear; can you tell us what it is? And this is merely a guarantee. 

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, once again, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to guarantee up to US $567,000 as supplementary financing to enable the completion of the construction of the students’ hostel at the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU).
 
The request was accordingly referred to the committee and the committee applied the standard procedures in considering the request. 

Background

I am referring to page 3 of the report. You will bear with me that I am trying to summarise this report. 

Parliament on 05 February 2005 authorised Government to guarantee the borrowing of up to US $5,214,009 by the Islamic University in Uganda from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the students’ hostels.

The hostels that are being referred to provide accommodation for up to 1,056 students, of which 528 are for males and another 528 for females, and the actual construction did take place beginning September, 2007 and students already reside in the facilities referred to herein.  

During the construction, however, the project experienced cost overruns totalling to US $1,042,000, the equivalent of Shs 2,296,879,727 as at 20 May 2009. The main causes of the increase in project costs are herein cited on the same page, and on page 4, there is an attempt to itemise the affected materials. The table on page 4 provides all of this information. It refers to cement, steel reinforcements, fuel (diesel and petrol), timber and the aggregate stones. 

After various consultations, the IDB and Government agreed that:

•	Reallocation of a balance of US $480,000 from the old loan to meet part of the costs of the civil works be effected; and 

•	Provision of supplementary financing by the IDB of up to US $567,000 to cover the remaining cost overrun.

On page 5, you will note that we chose to report on the status of the loan repayment. IUIU has been servicing the loan with IDB in accordance with the schedule agreed upon in the loan agreement. So far US $224,768 has been repaid and there are no due instalments that have not been serviced. That is a very important point for the House to note. So, their repayments are on schedule. 

The loan terms are also on page 5 and these are:

The IDB will extend a supplementary loan of up to US $567,000 to the IUIU from its ordinary resources to be repaid in 25 years in half yearly instalments, including a grace period of seven years, plus a service fee not exceeding 2.5 percent of the loan amount to cover the expense of administering the loan.

The conditions to the loan are also detailed on the same page under the subheading “Conditions attached to the loan”, which Members can refer to. 

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee noted and commended the efforts of IUIU aimed at achieving self-sufficiency through endowments such as King Fahad Plaza, grants from the Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC), in addition to fees collected from the students’ hostel.

The committee also noted and appreciated the quandary accruing due to the cost overruns.

The committee further commended the university and the negotiating team of the loan on the amount of work done vis-à-vis the finances spent. The finances spent approximately stand at Shs 11 billion, bearing in mind that the works could have cost the university a lot more than that as indicated in the Annex 1 attached herein. 

The committee further noted that the Arab Contractors have so far injected into the project a total of about Shs 1.7 billion of their own finances. This has enabled the students to access the hostels and reduce on the risks of insecurity in the area where students have been attacked in some instances.  
 
The committee recommends that the supplementary financing sought by the University be expeditiously passed to enable the university refund the well-meaning contractors and to complete the remaining works.

The committee noted that although the contractor handed over the site, he is being charged interest per month and he was contemplating actually taking the university to court, but because this process had been started, he chose to wait so that he is paid. That is why we inserted the word “expeditiously” to appeal to this house. 

Concern was further raised on the Government’s delay in implementing the students’ loans’ scheme. The Government is urged to fast track the proposed students’ loans scheme in order to enable more students acquire university education. 

In conclusion, therefore, the committee has noted the progress made by IUIU in implementing the project and has further appreciated the reasons advanced for the cost overruns which affected the project and hence, finds the supplementary financing justifiable. We, therefore, recommend to this House to approve the Government proposal to guarantee up to US $567,000 as supplementary financing to enable the completion of the construction of the students’ hostels at the IUIU. I beg to report.

I also wish to lay on the Table the details of documents we used in the scrutiny and I must say that this was one of the loans with which the committee never found any problem. All the details are herein contained. We have the loan agreements, the guarantee agreements, the contractor for the project consultancy, and the contract for the civil works. All these documents are herein contained together with the minutes of the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, this is to guarantee; it is not borrowing and the next point you should note before you embark on debating this matter is the status of the loan repayment report on page 5, where the university has done very well. It is not avoiding its responsibility to pay. While many people borrow and start hiding, this is not the case. We have seen the pictures of the construction. One thing I think the Minister of Education may tell us is about the students’ loan. Otherwise, personally I do not see what contribution other than accepting this report.

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. I have no objection. At the start of this submission, you wondered what the figure was; whether the Member who is presenting had got the figure right and when we looked at the details, it actually turned out that the figure is only Shs 2 billion. This House is on record to support private universities. 

Last financial year, we actually gave one private university, the KIU Ishaka Campus, Shs 4 billion -(Interjections)- yes, a grant from our basket fund – our local revenues. Should we now even be contemplating just a guarantee? Why don’t we pick this money from our local revenue and give it to our university which is doing very well. The money – they have demonstrated that they are not misusing funds; not stealing; they are very honest people and it is little money. Shouldn’t the Uganda Government just uplift the spirit of the Islamic University in Uganda and just give them Shs 2 billion like we gave the other university last time. That is my prayer. 

MR ARUMADRI: When the request for this resolution was being brought here, I raised preliminary objections. I said this was very little money at the exchange rate of Shs 2,000 per dollar it amounts to US $1 million. I am on record – it is very little money. How can we as a whole country guarantee such little money? We can look for this money, find it and give it to the university. What will be the effect? The cost of occupying these hostels by the students will drop because the loan will now be shelved. This is our contribution as a country. We really do not need to debate this much further.

THE SPEAKER: I think your point is well made. But the business we have here is the continuation of Government to guarantee this loan, which has been paid before and they want more. What we can do is that I think we are marketing this idea to the Executive so that at least they should send some token by giving a grant to this university although it may not come now, especially as we are going to consider the budget very soon. I think that is where we can pursue it for the ministry to put this one. But for this one, we leave it as that because the requisition from the university was for the government to continue to give them a guarantee and apparently they are doing it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I just wanted to draw your attention to the provisions of the Constitution: “Government shall not borrow or guarantee, raise any loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority, person except as authorised by an act of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Minister, they are aware of that – honourable, they are aware of that, but because they have seen the way this university has taken its responsibility of paying, they said, “This is a good administration.” So, they were trying to say that can we turn this guarantee and give them? I think that is what they are saying. The problem is that you may have to say, “We have gone back to the Executive – to Cabinet to discuss this.” I think we rather approve what was requested by the university and then later we appeal to Government to consider some kind of assistance to the university. (Applause)

So, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I now ask the Minister of Education to explain something about this students’ loan?    

5.27
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): I thank you very much. As you all know, the Government has been looking around on how best we can fund university education. Members would realise that the numbers of young girls and boys who are qualifying for university education is increasing yearly and it is going to increase even more with the USE programme now ongoing. But the revenue we have as a country to cover all of those who qualify for university education is still meagre. 

I would also remind my colleagues that we started a private scheme at the universities some years back just to increase access to university education. Members will remember that the government used to pay for 2,000 students only, but then when we realised that there are people with some money - for people who can afford, a scheme for private students was introduced at public universities.

I will further remind my colleagues that private universities are also coming up. So, in order to increase access to university education, the government has been working very hard to see that we adopt a system where loans are given to students and they are required to pay when they get jobs after their completion. Plans have been on the drawing board for so many years, but I would like to say that this financial year, we at least have money to start on that process by creating a secretariat. The secretariat is going to work out all the modalities and legalities because this will require some laws - criteria which is transparent - and identification of the source of the capital to invest in that scheme. So, for the current financial year, Shs 250 million was put in the budget, not to run the loan, but to operationalise the secretariat with a board and an executive director and so on, to work out the legal framework to be able to run this scheme properly. 

The same secretariat will work out the criteria because I know that we shall sit there and say who qualifies and so on – they are going to draw out all that framework, of course, by reading the literature from other countries, and the same secretariat is going to look around for sources for capitalising that scheme because we shall need a lot of money in order to help a large number of students. I think the good news is that at least the secretariat has been put in place and they are going to work out all the modalities we require and then we shall see how best we can move ahead. That is the report I can give at this stage and I believe with the assistance and contributions from the Members, we shall identify the source of the capital because we shall require quite a large sum of money.

THE SPEAKER: Very good. May I request you, if possible, to facilitate the Members with a statement of the position as it is now so that when they go to their constituencies and they ask them to do this and the other, they can explain what is in offing about this problem. I thank you, very much.

Hon. Members, I think we have cleared 10 items today. There is one I know, but since I have not prorogued Parliament today as I had intended, we shall continue tomorrow in the morning and deal with the last item plus the Rukungiri and any other important matter that may come up tomorrow. I had already asked Cabinet not to sit tomorrow morning. They can sit in the afternoon after we have concluded our work so that we convene here tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to finish the work we have. But before we rise, I would like hon. Tashobya to present a statement of importance to us.

5.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am pleased, on behalf of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and on behalf of the Speaker, to inform you and invite you to attend and participate in the Consultative Assembly of Parliamentarians for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Rule of Law sixth session, which will take place in the Parliament of Uganda in Kampala from 27th to 28th May, 2010. It will be hosted by the Parliament of Uganda. 

The Consultative Assembly of Parliamentarians for the ICC and the Rule of Law is the only global gathering of legislators focussed solely on international justice and the rule of law. A project of the PGA parliamentary campaign for the effectiveness and universality of the Rome Statute of the ICC, its meetings represent a unique opportunity for legislators from all continents of the world to discuss and define strategies to advance strategic goals, liberalising in support of the fight against impunity and the prevention of the most serious crimes of international concern namely: Genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the crime of aggression.

As pointed out, this meeting will be a prelude to the ICC Review Conference, which is going to be hosted by the government of Uganda. Hon. Members, we are inviting you to attend this important conference on the 27th and 28th here at Parliament. The Speaker has provided us with the venue and refreshments and meals for those two days. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

5.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, in response to your request, there shall be no Cabinet tomorrow, so all ministers are requested to come here at 10.00 a.m. sharp. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I really thank you; we have done a lot of work today to clear these outstanding loans. (Applause) I thank you very much for your contributions, and co-operation. We now come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 19 May 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)

