Tuesday, 26 May 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We are running fairly late and the timeframes are getting tighter but we are still hopeful that we will be able to deliver the Budget within the timeframe given by the law. I thank the committees and their leaders who are working very hard to make sure that this timeline does not escape our target. In that spirit, let us proceed. Item five.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Any Member of the committee? Next.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

2.11
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, the leadership of the committee and the clerk are uploading the report on the system.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does it have to be - it is already on. Please proceed and go to the recommendations. You have 10 minutes.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the fiscal year 2015/2016.

Mr Speaker, since I have been given 10 minutes, we will move straight to the observations and recommendations –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I suggest that since the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson of the Internal Affairs Committee are around but they are not here in the plenary, we can suspend for 10 minutes to allow these Members to organise and then we come back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is presenting the report. Chairperson, proceed.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the former chairperson of the committee and I am also a member of the committee and the rules permit any member to stand in. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee oversees a number of sectors including: 
    1. Vote 004: Ministry of Defence 
    2. Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs
    3. Vote 120: Directory of Citizenship and Immigration Control
    4. Vote 144: Uganda Police Force
    5. Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service

On page 4, we have committee observations and recommendations. We have unfunded and underfunded priorities on page 4. We have supplementary expenditures that were sought and the committee recommends that additional allocation to cater for wages in the financial year 2015/2016 be availed to avoid supplementary demands as this would have been foreseen. This is an observation that we should provide for resources instead of seeking for supplementaries.

The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda engages the UN and African Union (AU) to make timely releases for the requisite funds. Mr Speaker, this one is to do with AMISOM where funds are always released very late. As a result, our troops that are out there are always in arrears and making demands and we keep getting complaints.

On the issue of operations in South Sudan, the committee urges Government to continue engaging Inter Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) members such that a mutual force is deployed. This is because the continued presence of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) in South Sudan is proving to be a very high cost to the Ugandan taxpayer. 

We have issues on domestic arrears. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendations that MDAs should adhere to the existing commitment control system and forthwith stop committing Government but instead prioritise payment for arrears. In future, Parliament should not approve any budget for arrears under utilities.

On the East African Community Defence games, the committee recommends that Government should provide this required funding to avoid last minute panicking and possible embarrassment to the country. 

We have some specific observations. The committee appreciates the efforts so far undertaken by the ministry but urges it to expedite the establishment of the military hospital. The committee recommends endeavours to brief the committee on tangible progress on the construction and completion of the military referral hospital.

Honourable members, on several occasions, this House has kept pushing Government that instead of sending our injured forces abroad, we should look at having a military hospital. There is a recommendation on financing for the same because it is cost saving.

On classified expenditure, the committee recommends that the Auditor-General should ensure that value for money is observed in the utilisation of funds for classified expenditure.

Regarding payments to retiring soldiers, the committee recommends that Government of Uganda should provide for gratuity and pension arrears for the retired soldiers.

Production in the UPDF 

The committee recommends that the process of appointing the Managing Director of the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) should be expedited. The Ministry of Defence should grant NEC business opportunities. The committee also recommends more funding to NEC because the money provided is insufficient.

NEC Pharmaceuticals Limited and NEC tractor 

The committee recommends that NEC Tractor Project Limited/NEC Tractor Hire Scheme Limited and NEC Pharmaceuticals Limited should be adequately capitalised and positioned to partake of business opportunities of capitalising other segments of Government.

The committee therefore recommends that NEC be capitalised to the tune of Shs 10 billion per annum for the next four fiscal years so as to ameliorate dependence on the national budget.

Uganda Air Cargo Corporation 

The committee recommends that the corporation should expedite efforts of trying to ensure that it meets the ICAO requirements such that the licences are given back to them to resume operations. The Ministry of Defence should engage the Ministry of Works and try to help Uganda Air Cargo get back its licences. 

Uganda Air Cargo should explore avenues of diversifying its license such that it can engage in passenger transportation business as well.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase its subversion to Uganda Air Cargo Corporation or should guarantee Uganda Air Cargo to secure a loan from Uganda Development Bank, as it had earlier requested, such that it can capitalise the corporation.

Desertions from the UPDF 

The committee recommends that the law on desertion should be enforced and alternative approaches explored to attract deserters back into the force.

The committee further recommends that beyond the study to ascertain the factors driving desertions, there is need to address them from time to time. Retention is an integral part of the management of people resources.

Disarmament operations in Karamoja 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence should fast-track the handover to Uganda Police. 

The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) 
The committee recommends that Government should further engage the DRC Government with a view of encouraging the remnants of ADF to surrender and benefit from amnesty.

In addition, Government should further engage using the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to pursue a sustainable solution to the ADF problem.

UPDF participation in the NAADS programme 

The committee commends the UPDF for the service it is undertaking to participate in the NAADS programme.

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

The observations and recommendations are on page 15.

Prevention of trafficking of persons 

In view of the escalating problem, the committee recommends strengthening both internal and external mechanics of dealing with the vice, including inter-agency collaboration.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should look for the Shs 5 billion to fund the Office of the Coordinator for Prevention of Trafficking in Persons.

Although the minister reported that they are intensifying civic education to combat trafficking of persons, the committee was not convinced because it did not reflect this position anywhere in the ministerial policy statement.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should design a more intensive civic education campaign to be carried out across the entire country.

Monitoring of NGOs 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the NGO Board should strengthen their monitoring and supervision functions to ensure that wrong elements do not use NGOs to spread inappropriate practices and engage in activities detrimental not only to the security of the country but also to the moral fabric and societal values.
The committee further recommends that the ministry expedites the tabling of the NGO (Amendment) Bill for consideration and scrutiny by Parliament. Mr Speaker, this has been overtaken by events because it was tabled. 

Creation of a separation vote for Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) 

The committee recommends fast tracking of this matter in order to ensure timely and accurate reports from DGAL for easy administration of justice in the country.

National focal point on small arms and light weapons 

The committee recommends that due to the increased violence in the country and the use of firearms, this activity should take the first call on the sector budget for financial year 2015/ 2016.

Resettlement and re-integration of reporters and transitional justice system 

The committee notes with concern the ever long duration for the ministry to expedite the Transitional Justice Policy Framework. Therefore, it recommends that the ministry expedites and brings to the House the Transitional Justice Policy Framework and the attendant laws for appropriate action.

The committee further recommends that in the absence of the Transitional Justice Policy Framework and law, part of the amnesty law should be retained.

Construction of Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters building 

The committee reiterates that Parliament lobbies necessary funding to build a befitting home for the headquarters and the Directorate of Immigration.

Vote 120 - Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control


The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control be allowed to utilise some of the funds to boost its potential and be able to efficiently operate –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please go to the conclusion and figures.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the figures are: 

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence 
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	-  	Shs 859,073,000,000 
    b) Development expenditure 	- 	Shs 701,314,000,000
    c) Arrears      	-	Shs 5,106,000,000

Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs 
    a) Recurrent expenditure	-	Shs 13,380,000,000 
    b) Development expenditure	-	Shs 2,110,000,000 
Arrears are not provided for.

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force. The total is Shs 435,969,000,000 
    a) Recurrent expenditure	-	Shs 352,233,000,000 
    b) Development expenditure	-	Shs 71,660,000,000 
    c) Arrears 	-	Shs 12,076,000,000

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service. The total is Shs 132,979,000,000. 
    a) Recurrent expenditure	-	Shs 100,853,000,000 
    b) Development expenditure	-	Shs 20,729,000,000 
    c) Tax arrears 	-	Shs 542,000,000
    d) Arrears 	-	Shs 11, 392,000,000

Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control. The total is Shs 143,440,000,000 
    a) Recurrent expenditure	-	Shs 14,216,000,000 
    b) Development expenditure	-	Shs 129,224,000,000 
Arrears are not provided for.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson for those figures you have read. You did not read the total for the Ministry of Defence. Would you like to read the total? The total is not captured. 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, the total for the Ministry of Defence is Shs 1,565,493,000,000. Like I said, my colleague the chairperson is requesting to make some amendments on the Uganda Police Force. We pray for the indulgence of the House.

2.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I am sorry for doing this and I am sorry for coming in late. We were still harmonising some issues especially on Vote 144, Uganda Police Force.

Mr Speaker, we just want to note that when we analysed the budget for Uganda Police Force, we found out that money for policing the national elections for 2015/2016 was not catered for in the report. We thus beg this House – [Mr Nzoghu: “Procedure”.]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can we hear what the honourable member is saying first?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, this is not a different report, it is part of our report except that we were given time to read only the recommendations and by the time we came to the part for Uganda Police Force: Vote 144, there was no time to go through this.

Mr Speaker, we feel that it should not go without the notice of this House that there is no money, which has been provided for policing national elections come next year. That has remained as a non-funded priority even when you look at our report that was uploaded. This is a very big issue that was noted by the committee and we are requesting that Government provides Shs 204 billion to cater for policing of the national elections.

Mr Speaker, we are doing this as a committee as we feel concerned that we must make sure that we increase on the security of our country and the preparedness for security, especially when we are going for elections. I just wanted to bring this out because it is part of the report but we were unable to read it due to the limited time we were given. 

Mr Speaker, it is our request that we find money for policing elections, which is not catered for at all in the budget. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me say it at this time that we have a problem with time and it is a big problem. If we could agree and finish with the ministerial policy statements by tomorrow so that on Thursday, we can make referral to the Budget Committee who will look at the figures and harmonise all the changes that have been proposed. They would use Thursday and finish and then on Friday morning, we supply.

When we do that, the appropriation and all the other processes can take place. We really do not have time. I therefore seek your indulgence that we finish with these ministerial policy statements as fast as we can to allow the Budget Committee to deal with the figures properly and advise the House on how we can proceed with adjustments and harmonisation under the rules of this House. That is really what I am seeking from you, Members - your cooperation so that we do not stretch out the time that is already so badly stressed.

We are supposed to have passed the Budget by 31 May 2015. 31 May is on a Sunday and we are going to find ourselves working, even possibly on Saturday, to make sure that we at least beat this deadline and we have these matters clarified. I really seek your cooperation on this matter; the cooperation I have got ever since this transition between the laws has been stressing us and I have been getting this cooperation from you. I continue to seek that cooperation. 

Therefore, for this particular vote, if you allow, honourable members, I will allow the shadow minister and the minister to say something and then I put the question so that we go to the next report. 

2.33
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Muhammed Muwanga Kivumbi): Mr Speaker, this vote encompasses two ministries: that of Internal Affairs and Defence and Security. I will restrict myself to only Internal Affairs because my colleague is around. I will be very precise. 

Mr Speaker, there is nothing new in this ministerial policy statement. It is a continuation of the same funding priorities that failed to solve Police problems in this country. I see no budget allocation for the welfare and maintenance of Police barracks in this budget at all. All I see in this budget is funding, not of improvement of Police salaries and wages, but on the public order management component of policing. 

Mr Speaker, it is amazing that the Police Force of Uganda wants us to fund them to a tune of Shs 203 billion just to police the next general elections. While the budget of the entire Electoral Commission is about Shs 300 billion, Police alone wants an extra Shs 203 billion. We think that is an obnoxious figure.

Mr Speaker, when you go to Prisons, an inhuman policy, the basket policy, is not being eroded in the prisons. Many prisons still have the basket policy for the night and that is inhuman. I think in this century [The Deputy Speaker: “Did you say basket?”] - it is a bucket policy, I am sorry.

Mr Speaker, last year, we made serious recommendations regarding what we think is very fundamental on policing; the so-called private security firms. They are 113 of them and only 43 meet the required standards and the Police Force has not done anything at all. What is also worrying is the ownership and directorship of these security firms. 

It is high time we examined whether owners of private security firms are not serving officers of Police and the Army because we must take care. What if Gen. David Tinyefuza also owned a private security firm and today he is opposed to Government and there is a demonstration? What if what is happening in Burundi happens in this country and one of the officers in the Army is on the Opposition side and owns a private security firm? We think that requires to be urgently revised.

What we would also like to revise are the so-called crime preventers. We would like a regularised policy on crime preventers because we have a community policing policy in this country that we are being loaded with crime preventers. However, they are not regularised and we do not know how these fellows will be retired. It is one thing to enter them into the force but how will you retire them when they are half baked? We are creating a huge national problem.

Mr Speaker, on human trafficking, this Parliament has been on record in advocating that human trafficking and slavery are stopped. I have looked through the budget of the JLOS and police sectors and there has been no allocation towards combating this kind of phenomenon. We think we ought to do better. 

On human rights and police, the Inspector General of Police and the Police Force have been combating terrorism in the name of Al-Shabaab but I am so scared that to date, they have not presented any comprehensive report on the so many murders in this country.

Today, all the sheikhs have policemen as their guards. What about Members of Parliament? They are potential targets because they are very influential. They travel at night, face hazards and they are not protected. I cannot be struggling for other people when Members of Parliament are not fully protected; neither at homes nor during travel across the country.

Imagine a Member of Parliament from Karamoja who has to travel all the way and can easily be traced by terrorists and kidnapped. There is need to see how high profile Government officials are protected in the event of terrorism in this country. It cannot be on good will. I know some Members have been given security on the good will and personal relationship with the Inspector General of Police. We would like to see it harmonised.

Regarding the issue of payment on time, I am aware that the Police and Prison Forces in Uganda go up to the 10th or 15th of another month before they are paid. I have interacted across the board - 

Mr Speaker, as I finally make a remark on this matter, when I look at the ministerial policy statement we have before this Parliament, it is one that is pegged on ideological underpinning of a state that is still retrogressive and oppressive. We would like a police force that ensures that Ugandans enjoy their freedoms. Look at what they have been doing, they are abusing the provision of preventive arrest to go out and at their own will, hold me at my home. We would like a police force that will ensure that Ugandans enjoy their peace and freedoms as enshrined in the law. I thank you and beg to move.

2.40
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I salute all the honourable members of Parliament. I am Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, Shadow Minister of Defence and Security. 

Mr Speaker, in our alternative ministerial policy statement, we looked at Defence and Security in two perspectives: human security and state security. Human security involves the security of the people of Uganda and their property, while state security is about the safety of the institutions of the State and their ability to function very well. 

For now, relatively, the state of Uganda is secure for there is no organised group of people known to be targeting to overthrow or to damage the Government of Uganda. Therefore relatively, the State is peaceful and secure but the people of Uganda are not. This has been partly explained by my colleague: the rampant death cases, killings and robberies. The people of Uganda are not secure.

The budgetary allocations in the ministerial policy statement presented by the substantive minister for Vote 004 have indicated more concentration of funds in the area of classified expenditure, which stands at Shs 600 billion. That is 42 per cent of the total budget. 

There are some crucial areas, which we feel should be looked into, for example, the issue of the welfare of the soldiers. If you visit any barracks in this country, you will find dilapidated buildings and soldiers suffering due to poor health care. The welfare of those who are injured from battlefields within the country and outside is so miserable.

We proposed that the classified expenditure should be reduced by two thirds so that part of the money will be used to construct regional military referral hospitals throughout the country. One hospital per region would bring services closer to the people of Uganda, particularly UPDF in the barracks, which are dispersed all over the country.

Right now, we do not have a standing good quality international standard military referral hospital. You see money budgeted year in, year out but you do not see the impact on the ground.

Secondly, there is a problem of suffering for the veterans of the UPDF. If you move around the country, you find emaciated veterans who live amongst the poor of the poor. They do not have facilities for their children. After leaving the army, they cannot get jobs as they have lost their employability in the civilian job market. 

The honourable Minister of Defence does not have a phased systematic way of preparing soldiers for a life after the army. In the alternative policy statement, we propose that as soon as a soldier is recruited and qualified from the army training school, preparations must be made for him to get out of the army into a decent civilian life. There must be trainings, which prepare a soldier for a life after the army so that he can compete with other people in terms of employment in the job market. 

In the alternative statement, we have proposed that let there be equivalent courses for civilian life. When a soldier graduates as a Captain, what is the equivalent of a Captain training outside the army so that maybe he can work as a manager? When Generals leave the Army, you find that they cannot be employed as supervisors at construction firms because they are not prepared for that kind of life. This is a sign of insecurity. They go out when they cannot manage even NAADS because they were not prepared to do that.

Mr Speaker, in the spirit of Pan-Africanism, we agree that Uganda has obligations of an international security nature outside this country for peace keeping, for example but this Parliament made a strategic error by making a recommendation that soldiers sent, for example for the AMISOM mission, should go on zero allocation from this House. This means that if we second our soldiers to go abroad without giving money for their operations outside, we make them to be on hire. Whoever can pay them can take them to Somalia, South Sudan or Central African Republic.

Mr Speaker, we have got to know that soldiers of the UPDF in South Sudan are paid by the government of South Sudan while we also budget money for them here. How can we ensure the independence of our army that is supposed to serve the people and the interests of Uganda if we allow our army to be paid by any outsider? 

We propose that whenever the UPDF goes out, we must make a budget for their going out. Secondly, if someone wants to contribute, this Parliament must know how much money and from who and for what purpose. Thirdly, if we allow the Minister of Defence plus his army officers to continue negotiating and cutting deals outside, we are making an army for hire. The Minister of Defence can hire out the soldiers, receive money for himself and take it to either Obongi or Bundibugyo or wherever he comes from and you are here thinking you have a national army when the army is a private institution of the minister or the army officers.

Lastly, the UPDF is very important to all of us. It is very dear to the heart of the Opposition and we cannot allow our soldiers to suffer outside without our knowledge. Parliament must make arrangements for the Opposition to visit the members of the armed forces outside, independent of the Government. This is because we see that there is a problem even in the committee. When the minister comes and speaks to the committee, you think the leadership of the committee is fused with the ministry. Oversight is lost. 

Members of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda do not have oversight control so we would like to take over and make the whole thing work very well so that we oversee and ensure that the management of the army is proper. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, who is going first? Internal Affairs then Defence, briefly. 

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the issue of welfare of the police and their housing has been a concern to the ministries, to Parliament and even to the policemen themselves. We articulated before the committee and in our policy statement that we are going to handle this particular aspect under the Public-Private Partnership law, when it comes into force. In the meantime, that is what we are preparing for. In the face of inadequate resources, that is the only resort we have in dealing with the issues, especially housing.

Similarly, the money for electoral policing was also contained in our policy statement only that it remained an unfunded priority. However, this is an issue that must be included. We must address the needs of the safety of our population during the electoral process because of challenges of security in the face of terrorism today. We cannot be oblivious to this fact and therefore, this money must be found to allow us to get prepared and ready to ensure the safety of Ugandans during the electoral process. I beg, honourable members, that you consider this request very well.

Is Uganda’s entire policy anchored on an oppressive State? I do not think the majority Ugandans share this view. This is the freest country anybody can talk of in the world today. So long as you behave according to the laws of this country, nobody will - if you are a trouble causer, of course the law will catch up with you. Therefore to say that our entire policy statement or the entire Government is anchored on an oppressive state is totally unacceptable and unbelievable –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I have listened to what the honourable minister has said and I wanted to inquire and therefore put him on order in this regard. If a political leader of a registered political organisation, in this case Dr Besigye, leaves his house or wants to leave his house to come and present a petition to the Parliament of Uganda, the Legislature and the Police force in this country decides to retain him forcefully in his own home, would that be justified as something that is free? Is the honourable minister, who happens to be my uncle, therefore in order to suggest that this is the freest country in the world when they are repressing political leadership and therefore undermining democracy in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that was an issue of clarification for you. 

MR JAMES BABA: I will know how to deal with my daughter later on regarding that order - (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 29 of the report, table 9, arrears balance as at 30 June 2015, the total arrears for FY 2013/2014 were Shs 14,290,123,227. Arrears for FY 2013/2014 were Shs 46,411,913,784. I would like the chairperson to tell this House what is the difference because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure. That is for the Speaker not the chairperson. Raise your procedural point to the chairperson.

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I would like the chairperson to inform this House regarding what happened. Before that, I have been observing this report. When you see some Members who have signed, some of them are out of the country. I do not know whether it was signed today. If it was, some Members are not here and their signatures are here. Is it procedurally right for the chairperson to present a report where some of the Members who have signed are not here and it was signed today? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the procedure is that Members must sign and Members have signed. The report that has been brought for us has been signed by the number of people required to sign the report. We cannot go to interrogate whether they signed from outside the country or wherever. There are mechanisms for handling these things these days. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, on human trafficking, it is incumbent on all of us to make sure that our children are not trafficked or taken into slavery by deceptive companies and selfish individuals. It should not only be the work of Government. However, the ministry is trying its best and it has put a mechanism in place; a multi-sectoral task force, to deal with this challenge and we want to make sure that no Ugandans are trafficked for selfish ends.

On private security organisations, we have set up a new department at the police headquarters to ensure that the operations of private security firms are streamlined, that their training is supervised and that the scope of their training is clearly articulated and approved by the police. This is a work in progress and we will make sure that the next operations of private security organisations will be in line with what Government policy is about.

Lastly, on the security of persons who are threatened, I will take the example of religious leaders during the spate of murders in Busoga. We went round reaching out to religious leaders to request them if they wanted personal security in view of what was happening. Many actually declined. Only a few accepted to be given protection. However, it is our determination to ensure that all those who are threatened are given protection to the extent that we are able to provide.

Mr Speaker, I think these are the issues that were raised to my sector. I request the House to support our policy statement and the budget provisions we have proposed, including the new request for electoral policing, which the chairperson reported on. I thank you.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the recommendations that they have made in regard to the Defence sector. I also thank my brother, hon. Fungaroo, for the very positive comments that he has made.

Mr Speaker, I will start with the comment hon. Fungaroo made specific to the deployment in the Republic of South Sudan. If I got him right, he seemed to imply that our mission in South Sudan was being financed, almost in total, by the Republic of South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I have made this clarification before on the Floor of this House and I have indicated that in terms of financing, the arrangement we have with the Republic of South Sudan is that they will meet fuel bills for operations within the Republic of South Sudan. When it comes to the salaries of the soldiers or any allowances they may be entitled to and feeding, these costs are met by the taxpayers of the Republic of Uganda.

Let me also add, Mr Speaker, that we are still constrained in so far as bringing our troops back home is concerned. This is because the IGAD force that was supposed to be deployed and take the place of the UPDF contingent has not yet become a reality. To that extent, therefore, we remain put in the Republic of South Sudan. However, for clarity, I should also add that the UPDF are not involved in the fighting that is going on in some parts of the Republic of South Sudan.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, again hon. Fungaroo made a principled point that when we deploy our forces, they should go on our terms and under agreement. In regard to our mission in AMISOM in Somalia, we have a clear agreement. This is a multi-lateral mission and we are there alongside other African defence forces. I laid that agreement at the Table here and it is on record in our archives.

It is true, as hon. Fungaroo said, that we stated here, during the debate for approving the deployment to Somalia, that our deployment should be budget-neutral. That, I would like to say, did not, in any way, compromise our independence or our force because this is an AU Force and the funding is mobilised by the African Union. We are equal members with other states in the African Union and the fact that African Union is financing this force does not mean that we lose our independence – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Can I clarify from you the provisions from the African Union for the funding of AMISOM? Why is it that the African Union seems to be like a conduit for receiving money from outside Africa ostensibly for financing African things? Even the independence of the African Union is questionable. Can you provide for us here how much money the African Union has provided for the activities of the UPDF? Which African countries contributed this money? Has Uganda paid her contributions to the African Union? Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the point which the honourable Minister of Defence is trying to clarify is very important and I am seeking clarification. Uganda is in two countries; South Sudan as well as Somalia. In Somalia, it is contributing towards AMISOM’s work of peacekeeping, which is a collective effort. In South Sudan, it is helping one side of the coin. Why don’t you do one uniform role of peacekeeping and stop to support only one political side in South Sudan? Be serious. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I thank the two honourable members for the clarifications they have sought. I think the principled point that hon. Fungaroo is raising is that Africa needs to become independent and I agree with him 100 per cent. We need to reach a level where we meet our costs wherever we are. Unfortunately, as we all know, our continent is not yet there. 

In the whole world, the highest incidence of poverty is here and the highest level of exploitation is here. Therefore, I think the cue we should take from hon. Fungaroo’s stand is that wherever we are, let us work very hard. Let us push the principle of pan-Africanism in earnest and work to be independent. In that way, missions like we are having in Somalia would be fully financed by the African Union.

It is true that although it is an African Union mission, the funding is indeed coming from outside; it is coming from the UN, the United States of America and the European Union. Therefore, let us work for independence and for the transformation of our continent.

Hon. Lukyamuzi, it is misleading for you to say that we are one-sided in South Sudan and I will try to show you why I say so. First, we went there on the request of an elected and legitimate government in Juba. They had a problem and invited us to go and help. 

Secondly, we are equal members of IGAD and IGAD has taken on the role to ensure that there is dialogue between the warring factions. We fully go with what IGAD says. If we were one-sided, we would not go with the IGAD side but we would be having our own side. 

Thirdly, there is an effort to cause reconciliation within the SPLM, the ruling party of the Republic of South Sudan because both H.E. Salva Kiir and his former Vice President, Riek Machar belong to SPLM. Now we have three parties on the continent, which are trying to cause reconciliation within the party: ANC of South Africa, CCM of the United Republic of Tanzania and NRM, which is the ruling party in the Republic of Uganda. 

Therefore, I would like my brother, hon. Lukyamuzi to abandon the thinking that we are one-sided in respect to the conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we would like the minister to come out clearly. If you are there by the mandate of IGAD and you are invited by the legitimate Government of South Sudan - up to now, IGAD has not put in place an independent force so that the presence of our UPDF is not seen as a lonely force in troubled waters. Besides, the minister should let this House know why the citizens of South Sudan are very hostile to our forces when they know that you are operating under the umbrella of IGAD.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to repeat that as far as the conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is concerned, Uganda is for the unity of the Republic of South Sudan and for solving that problem through dialogue and political means. Anybody who reads otherwise does not understand the situation very well.

It is possible, Mr Speaker, because the republic – (Hon. Amuriat rose_) – just hold on, engineer. Let me first take this on. The Republic of South Sudan is a democratic setup and people have views. They do not have a common thinking. Therefore, I would not be surprised to find that there are some brothers and sisters in the Republic of South Sudan who do not approve of our presence there. However, I believe the vast majority of the citizens there are with us and they know that we mean well for them.

Mr Speaker, if you give me a little more time, I can take clarification from Engineer Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want the minister to clear my mind. Whereas the UPDF is in the Republic of South Sudan standing on one side against the other, the minister is telling us here that they are engaged in dialogue with a view to bringing the conflict to a peaceful end. How do you expect the forces of Riek Machar and his group to trust you as a mediator yet we all know the naked truth that it is the UPDF that is sustaining Salva Kiir in power as President? How can you be trusted as a government and as UPDF? Even if you had good will, I think you do not look good standing on one side while making everybody believe that you are in for dialogue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have 30 seconds to conclude.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I should conclude. I do not think that I need to repeat myself. The point is that we are playing a positive role alongside other brothers in IGAD and I believe that we are trusted by both sides.

Finally, so that I get off the floor, is the issue of classified expenditure and the welfare of the troops. As hon. Fungaroo has said, the welfare of the troops is still very wanting but equally, we need to also consolidate and strengthen the capacity of the army to defend the country. The solution therefore lies in us finding more money so that we are equipped properly but also improve the welfare of the troops. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I was raising - I do not know but you remember when we passed the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, we had said that classified expenditure budgets will be examined by our three Chairpersons of the Committees on Defence, Budget and Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to know if the chairpersons met and reviewed the budget of classified expenditure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just received the communication this morning from the Clerk about this issue of classified expenditure and I should be able to communicate to the House tomorrow when we resume.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, you have ten minutes.

4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Mr Speaker, allow me present to the House the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the policy statement for the financial year 2015/2016.

Before I do this, allow me lay on the Table the signed report of the committee’s findings and recommendations. Allow me to also submit the committee minutes, a summary of the recommendations of the report, issues raised by the sector on the National Budget Framework Paper, the policy issues raised by the Agricultural sector, presentation and responses and presentation by agencies by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. You can proceed, Mr Chairperson.

MR KASAMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, under Article 155 of the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, examined and made comments on the various agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries:

    a) Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation 
    b) Vote 152 - National Agricultural Advisory Services  
    c) Vote 155 - Cotton Development Organisation 
    d) Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority 
    e) Vote 121 - Diary Development Authority 
    f) Vote 125 - National Agricultural Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank 
    g) Votes 500-850 - Local Government votes for the district extension services

Regarding the background for the entire sector, I will leave the Members to peruse this using their iPads. Allow me go to the issues, observations and recommendations as per the various interactions we had.

Under Vote 101: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the committee observed that FMD outbreak has become so rampant in the entire country. The committee recommends that an additional allocation of Shs 7 billion for vaccines be availed in order to avert FMD reoccurrences in FY 2015/2016.

The committee strongly recommends that in the long run, Government should undertake efforts to establish a vaccine processing facility. 

The committee observed that KCCA grant increased by 367.6 per cent from Shs 1,360,000,000 to Shs 6,300,000,000 reflecting an increase of Shs 5 billion. As a way of rationalising the sector’s meagre funds, the committee recommends that the Shs 5 billion for KCCA grant be allocated to Vote 125 of NAGRC for restocking and revamping NAGRIC and data bank farms.

The committee further recommends that KCCA grant should be maintained at Shs 1,220,000,000 that was appropriated in FY 2014/2015.

The committee noted that there are no scanners at the different border points to scan agricultural exports and as such, EU is threatening to ban some of our agricultural produce like fruits that are said to contain pests. 

The committee recommends that additional funds to the tune of Shs 5.5 billion be availed to boost the regulatory function of inspection and certification of agricultural exports and imports. This will improve the value of exports and reduce the number of interceptions and address the issues of adulterated planting materials. 

The agricultural sector in Uganda remains significantly rain fed. The committee recommends that the focus should be put on investing in promotion and availability of appropriate irrigation technologies that can widely be adopted by smallholder farmers. Serious efforts should be put into harvesting of run-off water specifically during the rainy season. 

Government should also avail the balance of Shs 5.2 billion to procure the two additional sets, which will facilitate provision of water for production under the farm department of Ministry of Agriculture. 

There are quite a number of land tenure wrangles and Government should sensitise people on land ownership rights for communal land to enable the Ministry of Agriculture establish irrigation demonstration sites.

Currently, the sector is operating without a holistic agricultural policy. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture fast-tracks the National Agricultural Policy to clearly guide the sector and encompass all the other polices. 

The Ministry of Agriculture should present to Parliament all pending bills in both crop and animal resources sub-sectors to improve the regulation of the sector during the financial year 2015/2016. 

The regulation of the agricultural seed industry; The Ministry of Agriculture should expedite efforts to increase the number of seed inspectors required for the efficient regulation of the seed industry. 

The committee notes with concern that the availability of agricultural financing in commercial banks under the credit facility subsidised by Government targets wealthy farmers and still has stringent terms. 

Government should revive the cooperatives arrangements, and revise the terms and conditions under the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) to avail affordable financing to all categories of farmers. 

As a long-term goal, Government should explore ways of establishing a full-fledged agricultural bank to provide a wide range of agricultural credit products that are affordable by the rural communities.

The committee noted that the Ministry of Agriculture plans to spend Shs 4.16 billion on transport equipment. The committee strongly recommends that of this, Shs 2 billion allocated should be reallocated to FMD vaccines that have a funding gap of Shs 9 billion. 

Under Aquaculture; the committee recommends that Government avails additional funding of Shs 15.6 billion to promote aquaculture as this will largely reduce overfishing of the water bodies but also increase production which will in turn boost the country’s exports.

There are a number of activities implemented by NAADS. The committee recommends that activities for specialized agencies (CDO, DDA, UCDA, NARO, NAGRC & and MAAIF) should be financed under their respective budgets in the implementation of the commodity approach to improve accountability of the sector and build synergies with NARO, where agricultural technologies are required.  

The committee notes that there is a need to realign the Agricultural Sector governance institutions to remove duplication, ensure mandate clarity and mission focus.

The Single-Spine Extension System under the NAADS Program

The committee recommends provision of more funds to the tune of Shs 39 billion to achieve at least 60 per cent of the staff structure at the local government level during the financial year 2015/2016. This will ensure that the agricultural inputs given to the farmers are well utilised and hence increase in agricultural output.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture fast-tracks the regularisation of the contract terms of the staff at the NAADS Secretariat for effective output delivery.

The committee further recommends that a minimum contractual term of one year should be considered. This is in view of the observation that all the NAADS Secretariat staff are operating on a monthly term contract as the restructuring is on-going. 

The committee recommends that NAADS works closely with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives through UDC to ensure that funds under UDC facilitate and support value addition of the agricultural products.

National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank

The committee recommends that Government prioritises funding of restocking and revamping all the stock farms in this country by availing Shs 43 billion for this project so as to ensure that there is increased restocking to fulfil the presidential directive of having 20 million quality dairy heifers provided for all households in this country. 

NARO: The committee recommends that Government should come up with a new funding modality for research in agriculture during 2015/2016 and the process of negotiating for phase II of East African Agricultural Productivity Project (EAAPP Project) should be fast-tracked. 

Review and amendment of the National Agricultural Research Act, 2005 - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR KASAMBA: - should be expedited to ensure that the mandate of NARO is widened so that they also participate in the commercialisation and the multiplication of the much required seedlings. 
DDA should expedite the process of securing land assets through titling of land properties that are at risk of being encroached upon.

UCDA; plans for the recruitment of additional extension staff for effective expansion of the coffee sector in the country should be expedited.

CDO: Government should expedite and increase public investment to ensure that farmers are able to participate in the value addition and acquire the requisite inputs to enable them benefit from the new opportunities of the investors in the textile industry. 

As I wind up, the intra-allocations under the agricultural sector are as follows:

Vote 010 – MAAIF

Item: Transport equipment

Reallocation of Shs 2,000,000,000 being referred to Vector and Disease Control in Priority and Animal Commodities. 

Justification; Procurement of additional vaccines for FMD which has a funding gap of Shs 9,000,000,000

Vote 122 - KCCA under NAADS grant to Vote 125 - NAGRIC for funds needed for restocking and revamping the NAGRC and data bank farms and ranches.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that funds be sought to address the critical and yet underfunded areas within the agricultural sector and that issues like standardisation, certification, value addition and market access be given special attention during the 2015/2016 financial year budget.  

It is for the agricultural sector to compete favourably at both regional and international levels which in turn will boost the export values and the balance of payments position for this country.

Below is a table showing the various figures;
Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    a) Recurrent expenditure	- 	Shs 45,948,611,000
    b) Development expenditure	- 	Shs 106,578,081,000
Total	- 	Shs 152,526,692,000

Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	- 	Shs 4,044,202,000
    b) Development expenditure	- 	Shs 1,000,000,000
Total	- 	Shs 5,044,202,000

Vote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank in Agriculture
    a) Recurrent budget 	- 	Shs 4,950,000,000 
    b) Development budget	-	0

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed Chairperson

MR KASAMBA: There was a re-allocation proposed of Shs 5,000,000,000 which makes it 5 but otherwise the Development Budget is 0. The re-allocation is Shs 5,000,000,000, making a total budget of Shs 9,950,000,000.

Vote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) 
    a) Recurrent budget	-	Shs 35,489,167,000 
    b) Development Budget	-	Shs 63,494,244,000 
Total 	- 	Shs 98,983,441,000

Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services
    a) Recurrent budget	-	Shs 6,270,292,000 
    b) Development budget 	-	Shs 177,704,389,000 
	Total 	- 	Shs 183,974,681,000

Vote 155: Cotton Development Organisation
    a) Recurrent budget	-	Shs 3,875,481,000 
    b) Development budget	-	Shs 3,911,000,000 
	Total 	- 	Shs 7,789,481,000 

Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority 
    a) Recurrent budget	-	Shs 43,792,300,000 
    b) Development Budget	-	0 
Total 	- 	Shs 43,792,300,000

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Honourable members, the matter that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. I am going to allow the shadow minster to make a brief comment and then the minister.

3.29
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak on a sector that is the backbone to our economy. It is common knowledge the agriculture sector contributes 26 per cent of our GDP and employs over 66 per cent of the population. The sector therefore is key to transforming the livelihood of our people.

However, what do we get? How does Government respond in support of this key sector? I have been around for some 15 years in this House. We decided to cross-check with all the allocations to the sector since 2001 and we discovered that it was in 2001 when the sector had a 5.1 per cent allocation of the National Budget.

It had a share of 5.1 percent and that is the highest we have ever reached. This financial year, the allocation stands at a miserable 2.7 percent of the National Budget. 

I would like to thank my colleagues from the NRM who had a retreat in Kyankwanzi in 2011 and upon realising that this was a key sector to get government support and priority, they made a wonderful resolution that it should get at least seven percent. 

I thank you for that resolution, it was wonderful. (Applause)  However, I am disappointed that Government decided to pay a deaf ear and a blind eye to your resolutions. I do not know when Government will awaken to the plight of Ugandans. 

We on the Opposition are therefore saying that let Government recognise and appreciate our very policies; the National Development Plan II and even the Vision 2040, at least talk about five percent allocation to agriculture. Can’t we do that for once?

The NRM Kyankwanzi retreat was seven percent and we on the Opposition are saying that if they cannot get to that level, at least let them adhere to Vision 2040 and NDP II. We demand for extra allocation.

We have a lot of funding gaps; in fact the sector is literary limping. Take the example of NARO, it has over the years been getting almost 75 percent of its financing from donor support. However, a number of them have been closing up and as such, it has very many funding gaps and we demand that the government should immediately come up with alternative funding modalities to drive the agricultural research agenda for this country, now that the development partners are pulling out.

We have been allocating Shs 14,000,000,000 for production and marketing grants to districts. Alas, whereas the districts keep multiplying, the figure has remained stagnant. What are we talking about? The agricultural extension systems are now talking of the single spine. It is also not going to reach the people. 

As we speak, that single spine extension system has a funding gap of about Shs 39,000,000,000 and when you go down to the districts, the extension staff are not in place. How do we implement the Single Spine Extension System when there are no people to deliver?

We have now involved our dear veterans. It is good to engage as many stakeholders as possible, making sure that we fill our food basket. However, a lot of expectations have been raised to the farmers out there and little support is going to those who are supposed to deliver. 

Can you imagine without agricultural extension staff, how wasteful this approach of trying to use the veterans to provide input can be? To the best of my knowledge, they are not technically equipped to do all the extension work. Their responsibility is to do the distribution.

If they distribute and there is no extension staff to follow it up, all that effort will go to waste. We demand that the production and marketing grants to districts be doubled. We cannot have this input properly monitored once there is no proper extension.
The re-allocation of KCCA – let me break the nut – what we discovered as a committee was that KCCA which is not even one of the votes under the Ministry of Agriculture has been getting some grants for urban agriculture amounting to about Shs 1.3 billion.

However, last year, we passed a supplementary for KCCA agriculture which ended up in a market. This time round, we are saying no, the Shs 5,000,000,000 that we have re-allocated from KCCA for agriculture was meant for the purchase of Usafi Market. Agriculture is limping financially and yet we have become donors to an already fairly well financed entity. That is why we entirely support the re-allocation.

We agreed in the committee to let the Shs 5,000,000,000 which was going for the purchase of Usafi Market, be re-allocated to agriculture so that we revamp our farms countrywide. (Applause)

I would like to again break the nuts that last financial year, we did allocate about Shs 2.4 billion to vote 010; Ministry of Agriculture for purchase of vehicles. This time they have more than doubled the amount for vehicles. They could not justify to the committee why they needed Shs 4 billion again for purchase of vehicles yet they had already purchased them. We cannot keep buying vehicles every year and doubling the figure. That is why we thought it prudent to re-allocate Shs 2 billion meant for vehicle purchase to increase on the budget for purchase of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) vaccine in order to reduce on the funding gap.

We are demanding that Government puts in place a national bank for agricultural transformation. The commercial banks that we have today have hiked agricultural credit facilities and they have such stringent conditions that the ordinary farmers who form the bulk of our agricultural human resource cannot access such agricultural credit facilities. The terms are also stringent yet a lot of billions are still lying un-utilized because the very people who can access it - Shs 45 billion is lying idle in the banks. Therefore, we are saying that such money should be used for establishment of a National Agricultural Credit Bank whose terms are for agricultural purposes. We cannot go for agricultural financing at commercial terms of credit.

We are dismayed that up to now, no attention has been given to the cry of the people in terms of price of inputs because Government slapped VAT on agricultural inputs. Even last year, we kept demanding; we shall not get tired of reminding Government that the best way we can help our farmers is to make these inputs easily accessible and affordable. 

Now, you slapped VAT on agricultural inputs and all of a sudden, the prices shoot up. At the end of the day, finding market for our crops or yields is not easy; there is very little value addition being done. We have put all these in our statement and response to the Ministry of Agriculture and we pray that our views get captured and are given the due attention that they deserve for the good of our economy.  I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister - there is no Minister? I will put the question to this motion. Please, we had agreed on some frameworks. So, we are going to proceed.

I will put the question that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and greed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chair.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we received this report and we had a debate specifically on the issue of the presidential initiative on bananas. Last week, we sent a team of Members of Parliament to visit and come back and tell us what we need to do with this. Hon. Ekanya went with this team to make this visit. Any other member who went to visit this particular institute? Hon. Ekanya, we are on this report and I remember we sent you to look at this facility and advise us on how to proceed. 

3.40
MR GEOFERY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, your Office and the Office of the Leader of the Opposition constituted a delegation which I headed. The delegation included me, hon. Angelline Osegge, hon. Jack Sabiiti, hon. Kiyingi and two technical staff.  

In summary, what we discovered on the ground - since we are compiling a comprehensive report is that for any country to develop, research development and innovation is important. In terms of value for money, the structure in that place in average is about Shs 40 billion. The machinery installed in that place especially for biscuits, milling, mini silos and others which are still in containers could be about Shs 30 billion.

Therefore, in summary, we were told that other machines are in URA because according to the information from the government, the institution has received about Shs 90 billion.

We also discovered that workers have not been paid for over five months yet some of these workers have children who are supposed to go to school and it is a crisis.

We further discovered that the organisation has serious management issues that need to be sorted out; the board is very weak. There is no human resources manual. Workers do not have contracts, they are dismissed at will. 

However, in a nutshell, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is a good project that will move the country forward. So, I beg that we give them the money on condition that the Minister of Finance sorts out governance issues and issues of ownership. I beg to rest my case. (Applause)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from hon. Ekanya, especially if he looked at the report of the Auditor-General because the Auditor-General raises a number of issues concerning that project. There are a number of queries, value for money is not there and the report was brought to the Public Accounts Committee. The members of the committee looked at the report and found it wanting that there was no value for that project. Hon. Ekanya is now telling us that the project is a good one. Now, do we believe the Auditor-General of Uganda or we believe in the findings of hon. Ekanya and his team? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we want to thank you very much for sending a team to check on the banana project. I am happy the team has come back with a report. Unfortunately, we have two conflicting reports. We had that one of the eye witnesses who simply saw with their eyes and came back saying that there is value for money. There is also another which is technical, the Auditor- General who did value for money –(Interjections)– and he is saying there is no value for money.

This is the person under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda who works under nobody’s directive. Hon. Ekanya works under the directive of the people of Tororo County and Parliament because he has to satisfy Tororo County and satisfy Parliament.

Given the circumstances we are in; we know we are about to give them money. However, as for me from Budadiri West, I am having second thoughts. Is it the Auditor-General causing a problem or hon. Ekanya? And if hon. Ekanya is the problem –(Interjections)– should we believe in his report? If the Auditor-General is the problem, should we ever believe his reports?

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with Parliament. Because I believe the Auditor-General has technical staff who go for audit and take their time; they have working papers; the file is reviewed after which a report is issued. 

Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya went alone with his team over the weekend. He has come with a report which has not been subjected to review and yet he represents Tororo County. How do we proceed?

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving me the opportunity to give you more information. As you are aware, I sit on the finance committee. Last year, as a finance committee, we comprehensively looked at that project of PIBID, and our report was brought here on the Floor of the House.

This House adopted that report. In that report, basing on the information submitted by the Auditor-General, we did agree as a committee and said unless the issues of the patent rights have been sorted out - the project is in the names of an individual. How can we continue appropriating funds to the tune of Shs 90 billion to an entity when that issue has not been sorted out?

Secondly, we did agree that there were governance issues. There is a total mess in the running of that project. What hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is very true. That project still has the same problems and that is why last year, this Parliament never appropriated money to it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have now got enough information –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, very much. The additional information I would like to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that as if what he said was not enough, hon. Ekanya did not have any report; he was speaking off cuff. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have been looking at the members of the committee of finance of the last session. And hon. Geoffrey Ekanya happens to be a member of the finance committee - he said the report - eight months down the road, he becomes a team leader of another team –(Interjections)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to rubbish the work of hon. Ekanya who was sent by this House, to go and check on this project?

The Members who went to PIBID are not saying that there are no problems; they are not saying that the Auditor-Generals’ report should not be followed. They are bringing in a temporary report to help us fund the project; to make sure that the individuals who are working for it are paid their salaries, and their children go to school.

In the meantime, the report of the Auditor-General will be followed-up. Is the Member in order to rubbish the work of this committee which was sent by you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report of the Auditor-General came out last year. The informal team that was sent by Parliament went over this weekend.

I am sure there are variations of things that have changed over the one year. We cannot look at the Auditor-General’s report in view of what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya’s team has seen, as if they happened on the same day. That would not be fair to the process. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have made your point. There were members who went there, can’t we hear from them?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you recall that it was my initiative to send a team to Bushenyi to have a look at what is on the ground vis-à-vis the report of the Auditor-General in order to guide Parliament to take a decision on the matter, which I thought was the best thing to do. Unfortunately, the team that went on the ground has not come up with a report. That is my problem. I am the one who sent them. (Laughter)

I am expecting a report, I only saw the leader standing up; I am asking them - Mr Speaker, I would not like to excite Members, but you know we have spent taxpayer’s money to send a team on the ground. And I have a responsibility as a Member of the Opposition to convince myself, and you people that what you are doing is correct.

This initiative of the Opposition was correct to guide Parliament. I am not trying to ridicule my leader of the delegation. However, it is prudent for the leader of that delegation to have written a report discussed and signed by the team. That is what the rule requires.

Mr Speaker, we are discussing a matter which does not exist, we do not have a report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as a House, we do not require a report from the team that went to Bushenyi. What happens as you have heard, hon. Ekanya acting on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition constituted a team and sought the authority of the Speaker for leave for these people to go. They went and came back. This Parliament is not owed a report.

The Leader of the Opposition is owed a report, not this House. If it is in-house, there is a problem with the report from the Opposition, let us be clear. (Laughter)  

It should not bog down the work of the House because the Opposition took the initiative to find a position on how they can guide the House. If that whole process has been rendered a nullity by reason of a report not being available that cannot stop this House from proceeding.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, so much, Mr Speaker. I am one of the team members that went to Bushenyi. But I would like to believe that the team that went there was authorised by your Office for a purpose. We did not go there for our own satisfaction. We went there so as to bring a report back to this House to enrich the debate and make us come to a reasonable conclusion.

I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us now to say that the confusion is in-house and we have used taxpayer’s money yet we are not going to attach any importance to it. I would request that you give us up to tomorrow, we produce a report; because as far as we are concerned, the information is incomplete –(Interruption)– can I be protected from shouters?

Mr Speaker, we requested to visit the office that runs PIBID, which is established in Kampala and on a telephone call they said that they have been closed, we cannot access any information. We thought that was being dodgy. We needed to bring to this House a comprehensive report to justify the monies that we have used and to help this institution to make a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Reports as they are owed to this House are known. They are committees of Parliament either select committees or reports that have been requested here that please go and consult on this and come back and report to the House. 

This particular one, honourable members - and let me say it and hope to say it for the last time - was requested by the Leader of the Opposition that, “Please grant my members permission to go and do this” and it was granted. It was not as if the Speaker directed these Members to go and do that on behalf of the House. It was done on the request of the Leader of the Opposition.

Therefore, was it necessary for this House? It was necessary for the Opposition to convince themselves and come in a form that they can now advise the House. In other words, this House is not owed a report from that team. It is not. 

It was supposed to guide the debate when they come back and advise; coming from this side of the House because even the matter was raised from this side of the House. Therefore the House can then be guided that now we have found out whatever it is and we can proceed this way. That is how it was; it was an initiative of the Office of the Leader of the Opposition. So please let us not confuse these matters. If there is disagreement within the team that went there, that is an issue that should be resolved that way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in our rules, we passed that any team which goes out for any field work, within 14 days, they must lay the report on Table – (Interjections) - it does not matter; that is the reason you do not know the rules. 

We have a problem here; there are some people, who sent them? Any team which uses public resources –(Interjections)– you see, that is why you lost the Ministry of Works, because you do not listen. (Laughter) 

Therefore any team which goes out, Mr Speaker, the Leader of Opposition – (Interruption)
	
MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Nandala. The information I would like to give this House - because I have listened to this matter since the other day. I sat here quietly and they are back and forth about PIBID. 

Mr Speaker, we have a report that is ready from the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) as assigned to us by this House –(Interjections)– not the other year; the previous report; this is a new report. It is what I am holding in my hands and it is ready. It has very serious issues. Therefore, if the House would like to give us time, we can present this report, may be tomorrow or the other day so that it will inform the House and get some points that kind of arbitrates between the proposals of the Auditor-General, the impasse in the House - because really that project has issues and we listened to them.

In fact when the adhoc committee was leaving, I asked them why they did not come to PAC, we have recordings, we have listened to those people and we have submissions; so they were going over the weekend to meet who? They should have come over the fourth floor and got half of the information they were looking for. That is the information I would like to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are happy that there are reports of the Auditor-General. It would be very good if hon. Byandala could listen because that is the reason that we lost money in Katosi –(Laughter)– it is also the reason why –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I have been listening attentively hearing what the sacked Leader of the Opposition was saying. (Laughter) Is he in order to say that I was not listening when I was attentively listening?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am unable to establish whether the honourable member was listening or not. It is a difficult decision for me to make so I prefer not to make it as to whether the member was listening or not because I do not know. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. Unfortunately for you, hon. Byandala, when you retire, they will say a former minister, but for me, they say a former leader. I am in another group. I am a former leader. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, given the conflicting reports which are coming up, I would plead - we have done it in this House. We have passed votes or budgets with some votes or positions on halt until conditions are resolved or certified. Therefore, in the case of the banana project, we have now three reports; the first report we have is the report of the Auditor-General, we have the report of the committee on finance and now we have a report from hon. Geoffrey Ekanya – (Interjections) - in fact the fourth is from hon. Kamateeka who is a member from the area; she has an interest. She wants the area to develop. However, even us, we would be happy to have a banana plant in Bugisu.

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with the House that we put aside that element and deal – (Interjections)– it is for your good. We deal with other elements, we reconcile this then we can give the money. 

I am saying this because you heard hon. Geoffrey Ekanya saying “This one has Shs 40 billion, the other has 30 billion” I do not know who was measuring it on a weekend and to measure money, you need to have documentation. You need to see the processes, there are many –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nandala. I was categorically clear that the building is – I have been a member of the finance committee and hon. Nandala you know it. Dot Services was contracted by the Government of Uganda. The initial cost was Shs 25 billion; the design was adjusted, it went to about Shs 40 billion. 

If you went to the ground colleagues - I love this country, it is very wrong for me, Ekanya Geoffrey - I have seen very good buildings, even here in Kampala; there are buildings to which people put Shs 100 billion and they are not that poor. If you see the work on the ground, the machineries are there. For heaven’s sake, even if you hate the people of Bushenyi –(Interjections)– I am giving hon. Nandala information. 

For you technical people, if you see the building, in fact even hon. Jack Sabiiti - I wish he was here – (Interjections)– yes Jack is here. Jack told me this building is worth more than Shs 50 billion. Jack is here, he is a senior citizen of this country –(Applause)– you get me? 

And the machineries which are there - our concern is that the workers have not been paid. They have children like we do. I have said that there are serious management issues but we have sunk there Shs 90 billion. If we do not release money, everything there will go to the drain. 

Parliament will be responsible for contingent liability and loss. I cannot be part of the people who stand here – I know the Auditor-General –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that hon. Geoffrey Ekanya does not know what we call a contingent liability because a contingent liability arises if the action you are doing is against somebody maybe his vice or action he is doing. However, in this case as Ugandans are investing money in a project and if we do not –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, we are happy that our team went and my brother Geoffrey Ekanya is trying to justify the figures. However, the problem we have is that the report he is giving is verbal as the Leader of the Opposition said. There should be methodology because he went with two technical staff and I do not know what the staff were doing. What did they see; they should even attach pictures to really convince us that there is value for this amount. 

As for me who was not there, I cannot make a decision based on the picture of what hon. Jack Sabiiti saw in a building of Shs 50 billion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi let us hear from somebody who went there.

4.07
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We were directed by the Chief Whip to go and have a look at this project. We were three people together with the staff of Parliament. We were directed to assess as to whether this is a good project for the country. We were also to compare and see whether the money that has been injected in this project is worth it. The other was to assess whether we should inject more money in this project or not? 

It is unfortunate that hon. Ekanya made a statement before our report is complete. In my opinion and as you know I have served in all these committees, PAC and whatever; I have read the Auditor-General’s report too. This is a very beautiful project –(Applause)– and I wish this project could be introduced in other areas which grow bananas.

Secondly, I am beginning to understand that whereas Shs 60 billion has been injected in this project, we inspected the fields where the farms are, they are first class farms. (Applause)

Thirdly, we inspected the building and compared to the buildings that I have seen built in this country, they are also first class buildings. (Applause)

Fourthly, we interviewed a few of the members who are part of the management and they expressed sentiments that the full management is in Kampala and the money is not being utilised well, therefore there is need to push the management to where the project is.

Fifthly, the buildings which were repaired rather than those which were built are reasonably fair and we could not assess them because so much money was injected in it. We tried to know how much tax was released, but they could not give us the list because the management is in Kampala. Therefore, we could not get all that was needed.

In our opinion, this is a good project and it should be implemented in all the areas that grow bananas. However, the major issue is management because money was channelled through Ministry of Finance and maybe President’s Office. There is a tendency for these people who are managing the project to personalise the project. Therefore, there is need to have a good management team to make sure that this project becomes better. This is what I can present, but when we present our report, the details will be given. I thank you very much. (Applause)

4.13
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE: (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One thing we also discovered was that there is a proposal or already an effected decision to change the name and our question was if today I am Cecilia Ogwal and tomorrow I am Angeline Osegge and you have been funding me as Cecilia, how do you fund me as Angeline Osegge? We thought there were issues to be raised in the change of names; what were the procedures used to change that name? 

Therefore, who is going to be the owner of the new entity, I think this Parliament needs to ask those questions before we advance money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we always say that you do not throw away the baby with the birth water. If your baby is dirty after bathing it, you do not toss the baby out with the birth water; you pour the bad water and keep the baby; that is the principle of life. 

Honourable members, I am not aware of any sector of government that has never received audit queries, I am not aware. If somebody is aware of any institution of government where the Auditor-General has never issued any audit query, I would like that member to speak. But has it stopped this House from giving money to those institutions because an audit query arose from a process after implementation of a particular budget cycle? The audit queries arise and they end up with the Public Accounts Committee and they handle them and report to the House.

If we set up a precedent that for every audit query, unless they are answered we should not appropriate money, we might be setting a very dangerous precedent for the rest of the sectors in this country. That is what I can say on this because if there is any audit query and you say that sector should not receive money because there is an audit query, we might not be setting a very good precedent as a Parliament. How do we proceed with this, Members?

4.15
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am a member of the finance committee. I was a member of PAC and now I am the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to agree with hon. Sabiiti; structure wise when you get to the site, the structures are there. You actually cannot believe it but governance wise, we have a lot of problems and even the location of some of the structures leaves a lot to be desired. For example, if you look at the water systems or the source of water, if it is operational, then in about six months, the source of water will dry up and the whole system will be put to waste. But the system is there.

Then, when you look at how everything has been done, it seems to be in a haphazard manner because you will get to this factory, then they will tell you, “Initially, we put a small structure but it could not accommodate this equipment. So, we had to demolish to put this one.” 

Mr Speaker, structures are there but governance issues, as have been enumerated - that is the only problem and maybe, the ownership because the entire project with lots of money is in the names of an individual –(Interjections) - yes. 

Therefore, those are the issues, which can be sorted out so that the project is in the names of Government –(Interruption)

MR ODO TAYEBWA: Thank you, hon. Kyooma, for giving way. Mr Speaker, yes, there were audit queries for last year but as things now stand, the audit queries on the ownership - I am a member of the Committee on Finance, a title was brought, which is now being transferred from PIBID to Government. We have clarified it in our committee report. 

The issue of water, that project is now going to get water from National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is a big project that is starting in Bushenyi. So, the way I see now, the report of hon. Ekanya is actually now agreeing with the report of the Committee on Finance and therefore, the information I am giving is that we should not continue debating on this issue on the report of the Committee on Finance, which is recommending that we give Shs 19 billion. Let the management issues be resolved, which is very simple and Government has agreed that they will solve the management issue. (Interjections) So, the information I am giving you is not that I come from Bushenyi but it is because it is a viable project.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, hon. Tayebwa. Mr Speaker, I think we can –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is in our rules that the work of Parliament must not be speculative. You do not come here and speculate. (Interjections) You know, you do not read the Rules of Procedure - that is your problem. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the report of the Committee on Finance has not yet been laid at the Table. The report of hon. Ekanya is not yet here and thirdly, Mr Speaker, the one, which hon. Alaso is taking about, the one of PAC is not yet here –(Interjections)– even though it is ready. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for hon. Odo, who has a selfish interest in the project because it is from his area, to support what is not there? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I have heard from hon. Ekanya, hon. Ossege, hon. Sabiti is that it is not true that there is nothing on the ground. Therefore, to raise a point of order saying that supporting something that is not in existence would be in futility. Your point of order is not sustainable.

MR KYOOMA: In a nutshell, Mr Speaker, while we have issues of ownership, I also believe that to transfer ownership, we must transfer ownership of an entity that is a going concern. And therefore it can maintain its going concern status by financing it but it will require Government to sort these governance issues. I thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the chairperson of Agriculture then have the minister, please.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The project, much as it is under the President’s initiative project, falls in the agricultural sector and we have been grappling with value addition for this country. When we were going to privatise most of the investments, we had in this country, we had to recapitalise and Government invested money in those ventures so that they are on-going concerns. It is very illogical for us, as leaders of this country, having invested over Shs 90 billion not to help such a project and guide it to improve. Uganda is the second world banana producing country after India. Officially, we do not export any banana. We are seated here, deliberating on an initiative of somebody, which we can adopt as a country and help all the people who are growing bananas to benefit from this initiative. 

I appeal to this House to take a decision today to improve the management system to make sure that we own up and replicate such an investment for the industrialisation of this country by the banana industry.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. We have had an extensive debate on this matter both last week and today. The report of the committee seems to be supported by the team that went to Bushenyi. The last time we had given some conditions to this project and what we heard last week was that three out of the four conditions had been met and the other condition of the patent, there was agreement that maybe, the way we had recommended, we had not benefited from the study of the law. There was not a big problem with the issue of the patent and there seems to be agreement that the project is good and needs to be supported. 

So, I just want to suggest that we pass –(Interjections)– no, just wait, I will give you chance. I just want to suggest that Parliament should take a decision to give funds to this project but we ask Government to address the issues of management and governance as raised and maybe report to this House within three months on what has been done to streamline the governance issues –(Interruption)

MRS CECELIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, my attention has been drawn to Rule 71 (4), which says, “No Member may refer in a debate to any matter in a committee report until such a report has been tabled in the House.” I have pleaded with you that I put in place a team. The team has let me down, it did not table the report and yet, you are continuing to refer to the hon. Ekanya’s statements. These are personal reports. But there is no report which has been tabled - it is by the rules. I go by the rules. Mr Speaker, I plead with you, I go by the rules, I take responsibility because I am the one who put the team in place. The team has failed us by not tabling their report. We should be debating from the position of information based on that report. We do not have it. We are breaching this rule. 

Therefore, you can debate whatever you want but do not refer to hon. Ekanya, to hon. Sabiiti, to hon. Osegge because they have not produced a report according to these rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Geofrey Ekanya is a member of this House, hon. Jack Sabiiti is a member of this House, hon. Angelline Osegge is a member of this House. I would have benefitted at chairing this meeting if the honourable Leader of the Opposition, or acting in that capacity, could have cited the rule under which this team was set and the obligations imposed on that team under the rules to report. I would be very comfortable. 

Kindly, help me with the rules under which you set up this team and the authority, which you used under the rules to set up a team that can report to this House, then we will proceed.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear that the Speaker’s guidance should not be challenged. Therefore, the Leader of the Opposition is attempting to challenge the guidance you have given the House. 

However, I would just like to say that we benefitted from the report of the Members who travelled to Bushenyi. (Mr Nzoghu: “There is no report”) There was a verbal report on the Floor because the three Members have spoken. Therefore, we should not spend much more time on this. A question should be put and we take a decision -(Interjections)- as a House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me propose this for the benefit of the House. I made this statement earlier that we have a much barred timeframe. Actually, Thursday should have been the last day when we are handling these issues of the budget. We have a barred timeframe. I proposed earlier when some of you were not yet in the House that we needed to finish with this phase so that the outstanding and un-reconciled issues are referred to the Budget Committee, which can then sit on Thursday and prepare a report and we come back on Friday and deal with it so that we can supply.

The law says we must do this by the 31st of this month. That falls on a Sunday. That means we have to bring it back up to possibly Friday. We are going to have to possibly meet even on Saturday. You know, it is significant because we have to close this session of Parliament. 

We are closing this session of Parliament in order that on Thursday, next week, we can have the State of the Nation Address. That is the kind of timeframe we have. If we do not prorogue this Parliament, we cannot open another session of Parliament. The calendar of Parliament provided was such that by the 15th of this month, we should have gone on recess. However, we have not been able to.

Therefore, honourable members, we are in a situation that is completely abnormal. I have been asking and trying to persuade you. I must say I have benefitted a lot from the co-operation we have got from the House. However, should we now have this matter bog us down completely?
I am looking for somebody who can suggest how we proceed with this matter so that we can move forward. Remember, we have not debated the report at all. I am going to ask that whatever decision we take on this PIBID project, I will put the question on the report. This is because we do not have time now to go back to start debating the report of the Committee on Finance. It is going to be very difficult.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, as a matter of way forward, of course, I have had the benefit to go through the audit report and the issues raised and what is actually before us. The issues of audit, as you have correctly said, can be addressed in the audit report. However, the issue of ownership cannot be wished away. 

It is easier for us to take a position only on that matter because it is important, Mr Speaker. We are saying this is a science, which we support. However, when we finance, what is going to happen to the taxpayer?

As a matter of way forward, Mr Speaker, that is very important and we can only make a way forward on that. For others, we can always deal with them. I am of the considered opinion that we need a commitment from the Ministry of Finance that we are going to deal with the issue of ownership –(Interjections)- not governance but ownership, which is actually what is in issue-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you propose?

MR MWIRU: I am proposing, Mr Speaker, that the Ministry of Finance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, propose to the House that the name should not be changed.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, you have asked me for the way forward. In as far as I am concerned, the question of name, the question of governance, the question of audit - there are laws, which deal with that. What is in issue is only one thing, Mr Speaker. If I am to give my support to this loan - it is necessary for us to fund this innovation as matter of fact.

The governance issues are being dealt with through the relevant laws. That is what is in the Auditor-General’s report. However, the innovation we are funding is what was in issue. Who is the owner? Who is the beneficiary? 

The minister should pledge to this House - that is what is critical to this House that he is going to the deal with the issue of change of ownership of this property. Once we get that assurance as a Government assurance, there can be a compromise on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister -

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to thank the House for the support of this innovation this afternoon. I would like to commit the Ministry of Finance that, Mr Speaker, if you allow and the House allows, we will come back in three months to update the House on the progress that we will have made in terms of the ownership structure and governance issues. Actually, we will have solved those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, who is going to own this project? Who owns this project? Is there going to be a change of this ownership? That is the issue.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this is a Government project. PIBID is supporting –(Interruption)

MS ACAYO: Thank you, minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you and this House is that I sit on the Budget Committee. Last year, it was actually the Budget Committee that finally decided that they are not giving money to PIBID until they bring a title to prove ownership. Since that time, we were told that they worked on it and by the time we are going to pass the budget this year, they would bring the title to prove ownership.

Therefore, what we need now is for PIBID to show how far they have gone with the issue of ownership. The issue is ownership. As per last year, it was being owned by Dr Muranga. It is in her personal name and that was the contentious issue. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, members of the Committee on Finance can bear witness to this that I came to the committee with a title in the name of Government. However, I think what hon. Mwiru is talking about is the issue of patent rights that when finally this product is produced, who owns the right? That is why I am saying we are sitting with Dr Muranga and in three months, we will have solved this issue and come to report to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we proceed? We cannot go on like this forever. We have to take a decision one way or the other. (Mr Nandala Mafabi rose_) Hon. Mafabi, please. I think we have debated this matter enough if you agree with me. [Honourable Members: “He is a member of the committee.”] It is not because he is a member of the committee. I think we have been open about this debate and we have all made our contributions. 

Honourable members, given the timeframe I have tried to explain, can we take a decision so that we can move to other levels so that the Budget Committee can sit because we still have to debate the report of the Budget Committee. The condition that has been put is that ownership will remain with Government. That is what the House has agreed. There should be no attempt to make any changes in the ownership of this issue. That is what we have agreed and if you can have your statement on that, then we will see how to proceed.

MR BAHATI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Obliged to what? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we are obliging to the directive of the House that ownership of this project is by Government and it will remain Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, can I now put the question to this report? I put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimate for 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we left that day when we had two issues. We had finished PIBID but the one of Bank of Uganda - I do not know how we have resolved this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is going straight to the Budget Committee and even then, when we were concluding, I said that matter should go back to the Budget Committee. They will come back to the House and we will solve that once for all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: However, Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising this is we have a law about Bank of Uganda, which talks about capitalisation and impairment. As Parliament, we are making a fundamental mistake whereby we have already authorised share capital for Bank of Uganda and we are also dealing with impairment as if it is share capital.

Mr Speaker, I could read this for the House to know what I am talking about. Under section 14-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, can we have that when we come to debate that subject?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising it is because I have heard the minister talking about impairment. I would like to correct his words from impairment in the public -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying Bank of Uganda is impaired to a tune of Shs 1.1 trillion. When it is impaired, they do not come here for share capital. What they deal with there is, they are issued what we call the funds for security. The issue of saying -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, I do not want to interrupt you in anyway. This is a matter I intend to refer to the Budget Committee so that it is clear whether the money that was initially cash proposal that is supposed to go to Bank of Uganda can be applied in the general budget through reallocation; if the Budget Committee can come to conclusion that recapitalising Bank of Uganda does not require cash but instruments.

The Budget Committee will come and advise us on that. If they should say that it does not, then we will still keep that figure with Bank of Uganda. However, should they come to a different conclusion, that we use the instrument under the law because if Bank of Uganda is going to issue instrument for purposes of monetary policy, it does not require it to come to this House.

Therefore, we do not need to appropriate for that purpose. The law excludes that. That is what we want the Budget Committee to examine. Together, they will be better composed to handle it than the way we are at the moment. They will have technical people to give guidance in this matter. They will have the people from Bank of Uganda giving their own - we have already had preliminary discussions on this matter and we have had indications what Bank of Uganda is saying.

Therefore, let us give it the benefit; the Budget Committee will come back and we have this matter. This is one of the key issues that we need to decide so that if it is not there and since the money is already budgeted; it can be applied to other sectors that have some shortages. That will be a matter for the Budget Committee.

Therefore, we are still okay, so far. However, my problem is, we may not even have sufficient time for the Budget Committee to go through these details and come to advise the House properly.

That is why we are saying, if it was possible, we could finish with the ministerial policy statement reports so that the Budget Committee can reconvene and take this decision. Then, we take the concrete decisions of supply of the figures that will go into the Appropriation Bill. 

Would that be a proper way to go, Members? Therefore, let us proceed that way. Therefore, nothing is lost as at this stage because it is going back to Budget Committee. Can we now move to the next item, please?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have gone very far with this one. We had now gone up to clause 10 and we are in the amendments that were proposed. Therefore, Chairperson, can you take us from where we had stopped?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, (h) Clause 10 - proposed section 89(h) was read, but the House did not pronounce itself on it and allow me read it again. 

h) Clause 10
Proposed Section 89H - Limitation of Deduction relating to Petroleum Operations 
    1) Renumber as 89GA
Under sub-clause (9), insert between the words “only against the” and “gross income” the words “the value of the cost oil included in - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not think the chairman of the committee is directing us well. 

When we left that day, we were on the issue of why they should not allow costs or losses made in one area to be transferred -if I am doing another business of oil in another area like from Bunyoro to Amuru. That is where we left and the argument, which some of us put up was that if I am trading in Uganda in oil, I should be allowed all my expenses.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I am the one who raised the objection. I have got a book, which was passed to me by hon. Bahati with his technical staff, a one Lawrence Kiiza, “The Taxation of Petroleum and Minerals; the Principle Problems and Practice” by Michael King.

It has been confirmed from this book that world over, those areas like Australia where there is petroleum production, costs of one area are not transferred. Therefore, with that in mind, until further notice from research, and since I am the one who raised the objection, I now withdraw so that we continue with the argument the chairman had placed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I now put the question on that one which was on - was it 89H?

MR OKELLO ANTHONY: Mr Chairman, it was 89H and -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I now put the question to that?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You have been guiding us since we started this session that we should be strict with our rules of procedure. However, when I look through the House and considering rule 23(1), (2) and (3) of our Rules of Procedure (2012), we are about to take a decision and there is no quorum. 

I, therefore, want to ask, Mr Chairman, whether it is procedurally right for us to go on when there is no quorum. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the procedural point you are raising is to ask the Chair to establish if there is quorum. You have no authority to rule that there is no quorum. I was listening carefully. It is now time for the Speaker to establish whether there is quorum and you are not the Speaker. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and taken no decision. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has been suspended for 10 minutes. We have a one clause Bill that we need to handle. It is the East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill. 

Therefore, let the Sergeant-At-Arms ring the bell for 15 minutes and we resume. If there is no further establishment of the decision capacity of this House, then we will see how to proceed. 

(The House was suspended at 4.49 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.04 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have established from the register that the Members of Parliament who reported and signed the book today were 172. Quorum is 125 members. Therefore, over 50 members above the quorum actually signed the book. I am, therefore, going to read the book. I am going to go by that list not those who are not present in Parliament today but just the list of those who have signed the book and they are not here. 

    1. Hon. Michael 
    2. Hon. James Baba
    3. Hon. Abdi Chemaswet 
    4. Hon William Nzoghu - present
    5. Hon Micah Lolem - present
    6. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo - present
    7. Hon. David Bahati - present
    8. Hon. Moses Ali 
    9. Hon. David Muhumuza 
    10. Hon. Simon Lokodo 
    11. Hon Birahwa Mukitale  - present
    12. Hon. Olivia Kabaale 
    13. Hon. Christine Acayo - present
    14. Hon Rwakajara Arinaitwe 
    15. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo 
    16. Hon. Simon Peter Aleper - present
    17. Hon. Rose Akol Okullu 
    18. Hon. Baker Ssali 
    19. Hon. Simon Mulongo
    20. Hon. Jessica Ababiku 
    21. Hon. Nyombi Tembo
    22. Hon. Sarah Kayagi  - present
    23. Hon. Iddi  Isabirye - present
    24. Hon Kezekia Mbugo
    25. Hon. Jane Mbahimba
    26. Hon. Odo Tayebwa  - present
    27. Hon. Peter Ogwang 
    28. Hon. Sarah Lanyero
    29. Hon. James Kyewalabye 
    30. Hon. James Kabajo
    31. Hon. Margaret Baba Diri  - present
    32. Hon. Geofrey Ekanya  - present
    33. Hon. Nandala Mafabi
    34. Hon. Abraham Byandala - present
    35. Hon. Francis Epetait 
    36. Hon. Jim Muhwezi
    37. Hon. Janefer Egunyu Nantume  - present
    38. Hon.  Chrispus Kiyonga - present
    39. Hon. Henry Kajura
    40. Hon. Robert Kasule   - present
    41. Hon. John Bosco Mubito 
    42. Hon. Bukenya Balibaseka Gilbert
    43. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro 
    44. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi  - present
    45. Hon. Timothy Lwanga
    46. Hon Christine Amongin Aporu  - present
    47. Hon. Miggade Ndugwa  - present
    48. Hon. Chrysestom Muyingo 
    49. Hon Stephen Kasaija Kagwera – present
    50. Hon. Lydia Chekwel - present
    51. Hon. Alice Alaso -  present
    52. Hon.	Judith Mary Amoit
    53. Hon. Boaz	Kafuda
    54. Hon. Terence Achia 
    55. Hon. Stella Namoe -  present
    56. Hon. Xavier Kyooma -  present
    57. Hon. Hellen Asamo – present
    58. Hon. Edward Khiddu Makubuya
    59. Hon. Grace Byarugaba
    60. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi – present
    61. Hon.	Yorokamu Katwiremu – present
    62. Hon. John Kamara Nizeyimana 
    63. Hon. Rosemary Najjemba -  present
    64. Hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko
    65. Hon.  Freedom Kwiyucwiny – present
    66. Hon. Rose Mutonyi Masaba – present
    67. Hon. Theopista Nabulya – present
    68. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi – present
    69. Hon. Mbaguta Sezi – present
    70. Hon. Kitatta Aboud – present
    71. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba 
    72. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo
    73. Hon. Dorothy Nshaija – present
    74. Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba -  present
    75. Hon.	Waira Kyewalabye – present
    76. Hon. Edward Sempala Mbuga  - present
    77. Hon. Hood Katuramu – present
    78. Hon.	Balyejjusa Sulaiman 
    79. Hon. Betty Mbabazi 
    80. Hon.	Ongalo Obote – present
    81. Hon.	George Ekuma 
    82. Hon. Peter Nyombi
    83. Hon. Eddie Kwizera
    84. Hon. Margret Iriama -  present
    85. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga – present
    86. Hon.  Syda Bbumba – present
    87. Hon. Jacob Oboth 
    88. Hon. Bright Rwamirama 
    89. Hon.  Hatwib Katoto – 
    90. Hon. Lyndah Timbigamba – present
    91. Hon. Remigio Achia – 
    92. Hon. Benson Obua Ogwal
    93. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya – present
    94. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa – present
    95. Hon. Godfrey Lubega -  present
    96. Hon. Florence Namayanga - present 
    97. Hon. Connie Nakayenze -  present
    98. Hon. Peter Mukasa Bakaluba – present
    99. Hon. Elly Tumwine – present
    100. Hon. Sylvia Nabulya – present
    101. Hon. Grace Namara – present
    102. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga – present
    103. Hon. John Bagoole – present
    104. Hon. James Kakooza 
    105. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga Aja - present
    106. Hon. Beatrice Atim
    107. Hon. Paul Mwiru – present
    108. Hon. Michael Ayepa – present
    109. Hon. Rose Lilly Akello 
    110. Hon. Benard Atiku – present
    111. Hon. Stephen Ochola 
    112. Hon. Ronah Ninsiima – present
    113. Hon. Anifa Kawooya
    114. Hon. Roland Mugume – present
    115. Hon.  Jack Wamai Wamanga – present
    116. Hon. Kivumbi Muwanga – present
    117. Hon. Yokasi Bihande Bwambale – present
    118. Hon. Florence Mutyabule
    119. Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa – present
    120. Hon. Innocent Oula - present
    121. Hon. John Baptist Lokii – present
    122. Hon. Agnes Nabirye – present
    123. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza –Present
    124. Hon. Anthony Okello –Present
    125. Hon. Caroline Okao
    126. Hon. Joy Ruth Achieng
    127. Hon. Margaret Kiboijana
    128. Hon. Abdu Katuntu   - Present
    129. Hon. Vincent Bagiire
    130. Hon. Dr Jeremiah Twatwa
    131. Hon. Christine Bako
    132. Hon. Jack Sabiiti – Present
    133. Hon. Karooro Okurut
    134. Hon. Angelline Osegge – 	Present
    135. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi – 	Present
    136. Hon. Hassan Fungaroo
    137. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai  – 	Present
    138. Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi
    139. Hon. Alum Santa  - Present
    140. Hon. Opolot Jacob - 	Present
    141. Hon. Florence Ekwau Ibi
    142. Hon. Henry Musasizi - Present
    143. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka - Present
    144. Hon. Rose Iriama - Present
    145. Hon. Moses Kasibante - Present
    146. Hon. Jalia Bintu - Present
    147. Hon Jacinto Ogwal
    148. Hon. Prof. ZM Nyiira - Present
    149. Hon. Martin Bahinduka - Present
    150. Hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba
    151. Hon. Margaret Mhakoha - Present
    152. Hon. Cecelia Atim Ogwal - Present
    153. Hon. David Wakikoona
    154. Hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat  - Present
    155. Hon. Kawuma Mohammed - Present
    156. Hon. Reagan Okumu 
    157. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo – Present 
    158. Hon. James Mbahimba - Present
    159. Hon. Balyejusa - Present
    160. Hon. Sarah Lanyero - Present
    161. Hon. Namugwanya Benny Bugembe – Present
    162. Hon. Rosemary Nansubuga Seninde - Present
    163. Hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko - Present
    164. Hon. Manoah Achile Mila - Present
    165. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo - Present
    166. Hon. Ernest Kiiza - Present
    167. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu - Present
    168. Hon. Rukia Nakadama  - Present
    169. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo - Present
    170. Hon. Mathias Kasamba - Present
    171. Hon. Tonny Ayo 	- Present
    172. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro - Present
    173. Hon. James Kabajo - Present
    174. Hon. Martin Drito - Present
    175. Hon. David Ochwa - Present
    176. Hon. Stephen Tashobya - Present
    177. Hon. Sarah Mateke - Present
    178. Hon. Stephen Baka Mugabi - Present
    179. Hon. Winnie Kiiza - Present
    180. Hon. Raphael Magyezi - Present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it now turns out that from the first list that was read, those who had signed and were in the House at the time of the roll call were 144. The additions were 40. So, 144 plus 40 gives us 184 Members in the House.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, roll call has been done and you have established members who are present. Looking at our rules, it does not require members to register –(Interjections)– yes, if you say no, then quote a section for me.

We have members who might have come here and have gone to, for example, the hospital. But there are those who are not here. Those are the people whose names should be read so that the voters can know they are not here –(Interjections)– yes. I am seeking your indulgence, Mr Speaker. 

The rules do not require registration, but at least some of those members might have been here and maybe went to pick children from school. When we roll call to establish those who are here is okay. However, how about those ones who do not register and are not here? How do we discipline them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the last time we did a roll call from the whole list of Members of Parliament. And the complaint was that some members had been given permission to travel and that some had been sent out by the Speaker’s Office and others by committees. Therefore, they could not be here and yet they were marked absent. Today, I have said any member who has signed, ought to be here. 

Therefore, we have only decided to look at the register of members who have signed present. Those who signed and are not present, really there should be issues with some of these things. I am going to extract the list of those who signed and are not in the House and seek explanation from them why they signed the book and are not in the House.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have received a message from hon. Dr Francis Epetait, who actually was part of the presentation for the agriculture committee - he has gone back to hospital because he is not well. I thought it should be noted that while he actually signed he is back to hospital. Thank you.

MR MBOGO: I am also present, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, mine is not about being present or absent. We have been here since 2.00 O’clock. Some of our colleagues came and signed the books and went away and waited for the bell to come back. The bell was rung. We have taken almost two hours doing roll call. I want to take a simple mathematics. Assuming 60 of us were here, 60x2 hours, that is 120 hours wasted! Mr Speaker, this syndrome; this bad habit especially by the front bench who are the owners - (Interjection)– okay front bench from both sides - I do not mind - and our colleagues who come to Parliament and go sit in corridors, the canteen and in their offices to leave others to do work and wait for the bell and we waste 120 man-hours, is very dangerous! 

Mr Speaker, there must be another sanction to that effect. You should have –(Interjection)– sorry to have directed but what I want to say is that the first thing would have been for you to have recorded us who were in the Chamber. And those who came in afterwards should be reprimanded because it is a bad habit. Apart from Members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which had business and members of any other committee that had business - Mr Speaker, we talk about good governance; you have been talking about PIBID here. What about this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have spent enough time on this issue. Let us leave it here. For sure steps will be taken this time and I can assure you that we will be receiving communication from the Speaker’s Office to this effect. We do not take this - if you have signed to attend, do attend! If you sign to go away, it does not show very well. If you are not there at all, your crime is less than the one for the Member(s) who show up and disappear.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was putting the question to the other clause. Can I put a question to that clause? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 89H do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to clause 89HA on petroleum exploration expenditure as follows: 
“
    1. Renumber clause as 89G
    2. Substitute for 89HA with the following: 
89GB Petroleum Exploration Expenditure:
(1)If the cost of acquiring a depreciable asset is treated as petroleum exploration expenditure, Section 27 applies to the asset on the following basis: 
(a)The asset is treated as belonging to a separate pool of depreciable asset; and 
(b)the depreciable rate applicable to the pool is 100 per cent.
(2)If the cost of acquiring an intangible asset is treated as petroleum exploration expenditure, Section 31 applies to the asset on the basis that the useful life of the asset is one year.
(3)A licensee shall be allowed a deduction for petroleum exploration expenditure to which subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in the year of income in which the expenditure is incurred.”

The justification is that the cost of acquiring depreciable asset first used in a petroleum exploration operation is treated as petroleum exploration expenditure. Similarly, the cost of acquiring certain intangible assets, particularly petroleum exploration rights acquired from the government or under a farm-out agreement, is treated as petroleum exploration expenditure.
However, the application of the section needs to be better linked with sections 27 and 31 as in the case under the Section 89GC for petroleum development expenditure and intangible assets.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, an intangible asset is like goods. If you say an intangible asset is written off immediately in the first year, you are making this company experience huge losses or it may make some profits but declare them as losses immediately. Intangible assets should be spread over time in most cases four years. If you say in first year, you are writing it off, you are making a mistake.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like the chairperson to help me understand what type of intangible assets he wants to write off in one year yet there are those which can take some time before they are written off?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairperson, the purpose of having this provision, the way it is, is surely not to mix - we want to deal physically with the issue of petroleum and mining. So, we thought we should not mix it with other definitions in other places. These provisions are specific to the aspects of mining and petroleum. That is why we brought it this way. However, if the House feels there is a better way of presenting it, we are willing to receive that opinion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to make a proposal that intangible assets be depreciated at the same rates as the assets of the petroleum exploration whatever the case will be. What I am saying is: if the life of the petroleum exploration expenditure is five years, the intangible assets should be treated for the same period as the other assets.  The justification is basically not to load the costs in the first year which may lead this company into not paying taxes if we allowed it to be written in bulk at once.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true that not all intangible assets can be amortised in the first year of acquisition. But what I would like to correct is that intangible assets are not depreciated. The correct word is amortisation. So, I would like to support the proposal by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, but we amend it to replace the word “depreciation” with the word “amortisation.”

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment proposed by the honourable Member for Budadiri West and the Member for Rubanda. I so put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I now put the question to the rest of the amendments proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (j) we propose Clause 89HB on petroleum development expenditure as follows:
“
    1) Renumber as Clause 89GC
    2) Replace sub clause (1) with the following:
    i) Subject to subsection (4), if the cost of acquiring an intangible asset is petroleum development expenditure, the useful life of the asset is the lesser of –
 (a) the expected life of the petroleum development operations to which the asset relates; or 
(b) six years.
3)Delete sub clause (6) - a definition of ‘commercial production’ has been inserted into Clause 89A.”
The justification is that a definition of “commercial production” has been inserted into Clause 89A.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in (k), we propose Clause 89HC on decommissioning expenditure as follows:
“ 
    1) Renumber as Clause 89GD
    2) In sub clause (4) (b), insert at the end of the paragraph, the words, “that is returned to the licensee.”
The justification is, this is necessary because Section 113 (7) of the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act provides that any surplus accrues to the government.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chairperson of the committee. We had asked that the decommissioning income be declared in line with the Mining Act so that we do not only focus on the income tax deductions at the end of it because under the current provision of the law, what is called the environment bond or decommissioning expenditure is determined by the commission.

What happens is that some of these companies, if they find out that they have been engaged in exploration and have not discovered the mineral or oil, they leave the site empty and very dangerous environmentally. So, we had agreed that the decommissioning expenditure be deposited with the Ministry of Finance for it to go to the Consolidated Fund. What have you done on that?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, this is specific to petroleum and we are referring to the Exploration Development and Production Act passed by Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Chairman, I think what is being done is that at the end of anything, after removing the costs, the surplus will be taken to Government. You are not looking at only corporation tax. It also means we are not taking it at the rate of applying the tax; we are taking 100 per cent. So, on this the proposal by the committee is perfect.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 MR ANTHONY OKELLO: In (l) on the proposed Clause 89HD on farm-out, do the following:
“
    1) Renumber as Clause 89GE and change the heading to  ‘Farm-outs’
    2) In sub section (2) (a), insert the word ‘not’ after the word ‘shall’.” The justification is that the transferor is not taxed on the value of work commitments as an incentive to encourage exploration.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee will have to help me on this. If I transfer, it means either I get something out of it. Any excess I get must be taxed. So, why do you want to exempt a person who transfers from paying taxes, unless you are trying to do this for a specific person? I think this cannot apply and I object to it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The member is proposing that this particular amendment be deleted?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, so it is not there. It is an amendment; it is withdrawn. So, we do not take a vote on it.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, this was an amendment that was intended to correct an error that previously existed. We thought by bringing it we would correct it. But if the honourable minister thinks we should concede, I have no objection to that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is no error because if you are transferring, you make a profit. If you say we do not tax it, the one who transfers losses will claim. So, if we have decided that in this area if one transfers and they make a profit, they are taxed and that if one transfers and they make a loss, that is the end of it, then you cannot say there is a mistake you are correcting.

My proposal is that if the section was about to exempt anybody, it should be dropped. If the amendment was to exempt, it should be dropped.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I concede. We can adopt his position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, this is an amendment, which has been proposed. So there is no question to put because it has been withdrawn. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in (m) we propose Clause 89HF - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, farm-outs is rights. When you said “farm-out”, what is “farm-out”? It should be “farm the outs”, whatever the type is. We are trying to catch anything to avoid people trying to dodge at any time. So, I think the correction of adding “s” on this one is also fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: To the heading of the section?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, there were two parts to the amendment of the clause. I would propose that we pass the clause on farm-out and then two, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi deferred, where we put the word “not” instead of the words “we shall,” can also be passed he has recommended. But it is important for us to first decide on the first part, which talks about farm-outs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a heading to that new section. It is now supposed to be “Farm-out.” That is the proposal being made by the committee. I put the question to that amendment accordingly.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman of the committee, can you read the next one without justifications?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: In (m) we propose Clause 89HF on taxation of contractors as follows:
“
1)Replace sub clause (1) as follows: 
(1) Subject to sub section (3), a non-resident contractor who derives a fee for the  provision of services referred to as ‘service fee’ to a licensee or licensee in respect of mining or petroleum operations, is liable to pay non-resident contractor tax at the rate prescribed in part IX of the third schedule. 
(2) The tax payable under sub section (1) shall be computed by applying the rate prescribed in part IX of the third schedule to the gross amount of the service fee.”
The justification is so that the rate specified in the third schedule is consistent with the specification of other tax rates.
“
2) In sub clause (4),
 (i) change the cross-reference to ‘sub clauses 4’; and 
(ii) delete the word ‘either’.”

The justification is that the word, “either” is redundant as the expression “the earlier of” covers the two circumstances specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).


3)Replace sub clause (6) with the following: “(6) Sections 123 - 128 of the Act and the Tax Procedures Code Act apply to a non-resident contractor on the basis that:
 (a) the tax is a tax withheld under part XIII; 
(b) the contractor is the payee; 
(c) the licensee is the withholding agent.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought we are handling 89HE but I see the chairman of the committee reading 89HF. So, is it procedurally right for us to jump 89HE and we go to 89HF?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is proposing an amendment. I do not know how I would know that what has not yet been proposed is going to be proposed. What is being proposed, which is (m) is Section 89 HF on taxation of contractors. That is what he is dealing with at the moment and it runs into those parts up to the beginning of Clause 11.  Can he read it all so that we see how to deal with it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not objecting to 89HF but 89 HE, which talks about indirect transfer of interests, we have not dealt with it because we have just come from farm-out -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to move an amendment, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then propose it; he has no amendment. If you have one, please propose it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, 89HE has not been read. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The whole of that is Clause 10. We are still amending Clause 10 of the Bill. So, you can make your own proposals.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, 89HE says that if there is a-10 per cent change or more is when the licensee will inform the Commissioner General. 

My thinking is that what some people will do here will be to do piecemeal changes. My proposal is to remove that 10 per cent. Any change even if it is a quarter per cent, the Commissioner General must be informed. That is the argument I am putting up. Why? One could have seen a good market now and they attain only one per cent and make big profits but tomorrow when they see it going down and they declare losses - I propose that we delete the 10 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well that is on page 23 of the Bill, proposed 89HE, the member is proposing, in (1), to delete 10 per cent.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the basis for this was not to make the work tedious but any change is not harmful. I agree with his amendment because it is not harmful to the clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question that in 89HE, on indirect transfers of interest in the proposed sub clause (1), the 10 per cent, appearing be deleted as per the amendment proposed by the Member of Budadiri West. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, before the interjection of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I was moving to give justification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I had asked you to move on amendments only.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Okay, Mr Chairman. I now move that we replace sub clause (8) with the following: “(8) if a non-resident contractor provides services for the benefit of a licensee and the fee for the services is paid to the non-resident contractor by a non-resident associate of the licensee, this section applies to any recharge of the fee by the associate to the licensee as if the associate provided the services to the licensee.”

In sub clause (9),
 3) In the definition of a “non-resident contactor” replace the words “not a resident” with the words, “a non-resident.”

4) We also propose that we move definition of a “contractor” to Section 89A (1) and 
5) We propose for the insertion of the following definition in correct alphabetical order: (a) “non-resident associate”, in relation to a licensee means an associate of the licensee that is a non-resident person and b) “service fee” includes an amount treated as a royalty in Section 2 (mmm) (i) (E).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the proposals made for amendment by the committee. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in Clause 11, we propose a replacement with the following new clause as follows:

Amendments of section 89H of the principal Act: 
Section 89H of the principal Act is amended as follows: 
    (a) By substituting the word, “contractor” with the word, “licensee,” whenever mentioned in the section.
    (b) By substituting for the word, “sub-contractor,” with the word, “contractor,” when ever mentioned in the section.
    (c) By repealing sub sections (2) and (3).
    (d) In sub section (5), by substituting for the term “section 2 (nnn)(i) (E)”, the term “section 2 (mmm) (i) (E)”. 
    (e) Insert the following sub section after sub section (5)- “(6) For the purposes of this section, ‘resident contractor’ means a contractor that is a resident person.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: 12, amendment of Section 89I of the principal Act. 
Section 89I of the principal Act is amended as follows: 
a) In subsections (1) and (2), by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee,” whenever mentioned; and b) In sub sections (3) and (4), by substituting the word “ contractor” with the word “prescribed licensee.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: 13 Amendment of Section 89J of the principal Act. Section 89J of the principal Act is amended as follows: 
    a) By repealing sub-section (1) and
    b) In sub-section (2), by substituting the words “exploration, development or production expenditure” with the words “petroleum exploration expenditure or petroleum development expenditure.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: 14, Mr Chairman, we have agreed that we retain 14. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 14 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: 15, Mr Chairman, in Clause 15 on the amendment of Section 89MA – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before Clause 15, which talks about exemption of others - but I am still talking about petroleum. There are these petroleum sharing agreements, which are being drawn left and right. I would like to propose Clause 15. This Clause 15 will be in respect of the petroleum sharing agreements –(Interjection)– whatever the case – the PSAs because you know them. Okay, I am talking about the Production Sharing Agreements, some of them with technocrats who can exempt some people from taxes or whatever. So, I would like to move that we add Clause 15 to say that any PSA, which is in disagreement with the income tax law, then the Income Tax Act supersedes that PSA. This is to avoid people saying they are exempted by the agreement – outside this law we have the parent law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So that you do not amend? Can an agreement between the parties amend an Act of Parliament? Would the Attorney-General clear that agreement that it is in conformity with the law? 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas the legal position is that generally an agreement cannot amend an Act of Parliament, technically some individuals at times take advantage of the technical language in an Act and coin certain clauses to the disadvantage of the citizens in reference to a statute. I think if the law is more specific, it is to the advantage of generally the county vis-à-vis a very sharp and keen draftsmen of different agreements. Therefore, I would like to agree with the previous member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister? I think you were clear. Let us get a response from the minister.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think we need to seek guidance from you because there is no agreement that will really overturn an Act of Parliament. I think it is an unnecessary amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the avoidance of doubt.

MR BAHATI: Maybe for the avoidance of doubt, but -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does it do any harm?

MR BAHATI: It does not do any harm and it does not bother the red volumes.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I think the proposal raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi does us no harm. However, I would like to be clear on where he wants us to place this because currently we are dealing with Clause 11 and we were on section -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are dealing with Clause 14; we have just dealt with Clause 14 and the chair shall not mislead the House. (Laughter) He is proposing a new clause after Clause 14. A new 15 is what he has proposed.

MR OKELLO: Mr Chairman, if I may draw your attention. We are going to have 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 20, 21 and 22. We shall then move to Clause 17. What we are dealing with are actually amendments on sections which are available in Clause 11. That is why I wanted hon. Nandala-Mafabi to guide the House on where he wants his proposed amendment to be. This is because we are essentially dealing with Clause 11, but with amendments on sections, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I heard our Clerk reading Clause 14.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, wait. I think then we have not been proceeding properly. We called Clause 11 and we did the amendment. We called clauses 12 and 13 and now we are on clause 14. Those clauses are in the Bill not in the Act and you are proposing amendments to clauses in the Bill.

The mistake we made was not to put the question that Clause 11, as amended, stands part of the Bill, which I am going to do now. In clauses 11, 12 and 13; we have passed the amendments in them. So, we are now going to put the questions on Clause 11, as amended, Clause 12 as amended and Clause 13, as amended; we have already adopted Clause 14. Okay? Let us deal with it.

Clause 11, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 11, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 14? We passed it already.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I would like to beg your indulgence that we probably get back and proceed correctly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is exactly what I have done.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, what we have dealt with are actually sections in Clause 11. We do not have any amendments on Clause 12. We do not have any amendment on Clause 13 and neither do we have any on Clause 14. 

After Clause 11, Mr Chairman, we shall move straight to Clause 17. Therefore, we do not have any amendments in those clauses. However, we have amendments in the sections of Clause 11. In that regard, what we were reading were actually amendments of sections.

MR KATOTO: Mr Chair, these ones are sub-sections.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, now you will appreciate the problems with amendments that are bigger than Bills. I have said this before, if it was not because of this spirit of transition, this Bill should have been returned to the people who drafted it. It is completely confusing; I do not know how the people who are going to extract the final Bill will deal with it. It is completely confusing.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I think the way you are moving is correct because the Bill amends the principal Act and you have to put the question and we pass it. Therefore, I do not find any problem with the proposal being moved by hon. Anthony Okello. If the committee has not brought amendments, it does not stop the House from passing what Government has proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what they are saying is that all that they have been reading is still under clause 11? Have you finished reading it?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In 15, on the amendment of section 89MA of the principal Act -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is 15?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, 15 is a sub-clause under clause 11.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is where the problem is because when you just say 15, we would go straight to clause 15 of the Bill. When you say 15 and it is not an operating provision of any law, we go to the Bill. What you are substantially amending are sections of the law, which is 89O and others. That is what you should be proposing amendments for.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I am going to avoid reading the numbers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those numbers are actually fake.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes. I will proceed to the subheading -amendment of section 89MA of the principal Act. Section 89MA of the principal Act is amended-
(a) 	by changing the heading to “Application of sections 111 to 113 of the Act and the Tax Procedures Code Act.”

(b) 	by substituting the phrase “Parts XI, XIV, XV and XVI of this Act” with the phrase “Sections 111 to 113 of this Act and the Tax Procedures Code Act.”
(c) 	by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee.”

(d) 	by substituting paragraph (a) with the following paragraph: “(a) mining and petroleum revenues and for that purpose- 
(i) 	such revenues are a tax; and 
(ii) 	a consolidated mining revenue return and a consolidated petroleum revenue return required under section 89O are a tax return; and” 

(e) 	in paragraph (b), by substituting the word “Government” where second mentioned with the words “mining or”.

Amendment of Section 89O of the Principal Act
Section 89O of the principal Act is amended- 
(a) 	by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee” wherever mentioned in the section; 

(b) 	in subsection (1)-  
(i) 	by substituting the phrase “sections 92, 93 and 94” with the phrase “Section 93 of the Act and sections 15 and 19 of the Tax Procedures Code Act”; 
(ii) 	by substituting the words “Government petroleum” with the words “mining or petroleum” wherever mentioned in the subsection;

(c) 	in subsection (2), by inserting the words “mining or” after the word “consolidated”; 

(d) 	by repealing subsection (3).

Amendment of Section 89OA of the Principal Act

Section 89OA of the principal Act is amended -  
(a) by changing the heading to “Assessments and objections and appeal”; 

(b) in subsection (1)- 
(i) 	by substituting the phrase “sections 95, 96 and 97” with the phrase “Part VI of the Tax Procedures Code Act”; 
(ii) 	by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee” wherever mentioned in the subsection; 
(iii) 	in paragraph (a), by inserting the words “mining or” before the words “petroleum revenues”; 
(iv) 	by deleting paragraphs (b) and (c).

(c) 	in subsection (2)- 
(i) 	by inserting the words “mining or” before the words “petroleum revenues”; 
(ii) 	by substituting the phrase “Part VII of the Tax Procedures Code Act” with the words “this Act”.

Amendment of Section 89P of the Principal Act

Section 89P of the principal Act is amended- 
(a) 	by substituting the phrase “sections 103 to 113 and section 136” with the phrase “sections 111 to 113 of this Act and Part VIII of the Tax Procedures Code Act”; 

(b) 	subject to paragraph (e), by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee” wherever mentioned in the section; 

(c) 	in paragraphs (a),(b)(ii),(c),(d),(e) and (h), by inserting the words “mining or” before the words “petroleum revenues” wherever mentioned in the section; 

(d) 	in paragraph (b) (ii) by inserting the words “Mining Act or mining right or” before the words “petroleum agreement”; 

(e) 	in paragraph (c) by substituting the word “contractor” with the words “prescribed licensee”; and 

(f) 	in paragraphs (f) and (g) by substituting the words “Government petroleum revenues” with the words “mining or petroleum revenues”.

Amendment of Section 89QA of the Principal Act
Section 89QA of the principal Act is amended- 
(a) 	by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee” wherever mentioned in the section; 
(b) 	by repealing subsection (2); and 
(c)	in subsection (3) by substituting “subsection (1)” with “subsection (2)”.

Amendment of Section of 89QB of the Principal Act:

The principal Act is amended by substituting Section 89QB with the following: 
“89QB Making false or misleading statements 
A prescribed licensee or person in relation to a prescribed licensee who is convicted of an offence under section 58 of the Tax Procedures Code Act shall be liable- 
(a) when the statement or omission was made knowingly or recklessly, to a fine not less than $500,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or both; or 
(b) in any other case, to a fine not less than $50,000 and not exceeding $500,000.”

Amendment of Section 89QC of the Principal Act

Section 89QC of the principal Act is amended-
(a) 	by changing the heading to “Penal tax and tax offences”;

(b) 	by substituting the phrase “sections 143 to 155 of this Act” with the phrase “Part XIV and sections 59, 60, 63, 64, 65, 67 of the Tax Procedures Code Act”;

(c) 	by substituting the word “contractor” with the word “licensee” wherever mentioned in the section; 

(d) 	by inserting the words “mining or” before the words “petroleum revenue”; 

(e) 	in paragraph (a) by substituting the number “154” with the phrase “51 of the Tax Procedures Code Act”; and 

(f) 	by inserting the words “Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Act” after the words “Mining Act, Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act.”

Amendment of Section 89QD of the Principal Act	

Section 89QD of the principal Act is amended by inserting the words “mining right” before the words “petroleum agreement”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the series of amendments proposed by the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, they are many, but my issue is on when somebody makes a statement -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On which one is it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On making false or misleading statements. Mr Chairman, if you make a false or misleading statement that is a crime. So, I do not think we should only go for a fine. These people should be punished because they will have made a false statement, which at the same time will be misleading.  

I would like to propose that we make it so punitive in order to deter them from doing it. The proposed US$ 500,000 is equivalent to Shs 1.5 billion. These petroleum people are big boys and girls; they can say “let us make these statements and if we are got, we shall only pay Shs 1.5 billion”. So, we must make it so punitive that they would worried that if they make a mistake - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Propose.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to propose that this should be US$ 5 million – (Interjection) - Do you want them to make false and misleading statements? The clause says “anybody knowingly or recklessly”. Read the clause. We want to catch those who will do it knowingly. If you do it knowingly or recklessly, you will pay US$ 5 million. That is the justification. The purpose is to make them do things in the right way. I would like to propose US$ 5 million. 

Secondly, (b) does not exist. It says, “in any other case…” What is the other case? You have made it clear - making false or misleading statements- so there is no other case. You have either committed a crime or not. That is why I am saying (a) should be US$ 5 million and we delete (b) so that these big boys and girls do the right thing at the right time. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Chair, I think what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed is too high. It may be more than the capital inserted in the business. So, how can someone be fined this amount? I think US$ 500,000 and imprisonment of one year or both is enough; US$ 5 million is too high.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have passed laws in this place and where we have put the equivalent of currency points to make them correspond to imprisonment terms, we have certain criteria. Somebody is about to advise me how $500,000 can be equivalent to one year imprisonment. You need to think about that while we review this.

MR EKANYA: Whereas hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a point, in mining we have value; there are those who do artisan mining and then there are the big boys and girls - big companies. I think to have fairness and justice, we could propose in terms of percentage of annual income of the company; for example, you can say 30 or 20 per cent of the annual income of the company. 

If someone is doing artisan mining even of rocks, sand, gold on small scale - we passed a law here on artisan mining by our local people – and you put a fine of $5 million, some of these people do not even file tax returns; they instead apply under presumptive tax. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister and the technical team to see whether we can propose a percentage of the annual net gross income so that there is fairness. Let those who get billions of dollars pay, but for those doing artisan mining in places like Busia, Budadiri and Kasese, they should be charged on ratio basis.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On the issue I raised, I have been informed that there are already provisions that are similar to that in the Income Tax Act itself. So, that does not hold now. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chair, I did not get your clarification very well. I thought the way you had guided was good; if we decided on the number of years in imprisonment, then they should - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. I am saying they already have a similar provision in the subsisting Act, unless we are going to amend all of them. Have we concluded on this? 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am of the opinion that the recommendations of the committee are okay. I know hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking about deliberately giving wrong information, but there is also an element of mistake. Somebody can make a mistake, which will not be deliberate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but this one is clear. Are you talking about the other option? If you are talking about the second leg, yes. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is it in order for a whole minister, who has been in works and is now somewhere, to have not read very well the statement that says, “a person knowingly or recklessly makes a deliberate move” and come and mislead the House by saying that somebody could make a mistake? We know a mistake is not made knowingly and recklessly. So, is he in order? Does he know English? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you proposed the deletion of (b) and what the honourable minister is talking about could easily fall under (b) where it is a mistake but not deliberate design of the person making the statement. I think that is where the minister is coming from – because you have proposed the deletion of (b). In that case, he would be making a statement that is reasonable in the circumstances.  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has made a point, which needs to be brought home. It has two elements of reality. One, if the act is made knowingly and it can cause economic losses it is both tortious and criminal. A combination of the two would certainly amount to the punishment he is proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, remember that some of the persons seated here are aware of the meanings of some of those words. So you need to reflect on that.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I want to draw the Members’ attention to the reading and formulation of this clause. This clause reads - and hon. Nandala-Mafabi should listen to this - “when the statement or omission was made knowingly or recklessly, to a fine not less than $500,000…” I think the formulation was to give a judge the discretion to analyse the circumstances and make a decision. I think even the $5 million is catered for because it is more than $500,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He proposed the deletion of (b). What do you say to that? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, as you can see, in the second leg it says, “in any other case…” – meaning, in my opinion, not recklessly, not knowingly, not intentionally – “…to a fine not less than US$ 50,000 and not exceeding US$ 500,000.” It is important that we cater for circumstances which are not done knowingly or recklessly; it could be by mistake. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is clear. 

MR ODO TAYEBWA: Mr Chairman, the point here, and that is why I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is not about knowingly or recklessly; it is because we are dealing with mining and petroleum. Here we should actually take $5 million for petroleum because mining is according to the magnitude of the business. Of course, when dealing with petroleum, we should have a higher value for penalties so that these people do not even dodge or submit some irrelevant figures. We should therefore take US$ 5 million for petroleum and US$ 500,000 for other mining activities and then we delete (d). 

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya suggested something on the percentage of the income. Instead of struggling with figures, why can’t we have a standard formula using percentage of the income of that institution, other than panicking around with figures?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us look at the drafting again. When the statement or mission is made knowingly or recklessly, the minimum is US$ 500,000 and the maximum is infinite. It will depend on each case and the discretion of the person handling the case to look at the damage that has been made by this particular reckless statement or statement knowingly made to mislead. Therefore, it will be for the judge to assess on a case by case basis. This is what the provision is suggesting. Even $5 million is still less than $6 million and yet the judge could award $10 million depending on the gravity of a particular case.

We are not trying to take away the discretion of the judges or courts that are handling this matter. That is what the proposition is about.  In (b), we are taking care of circumstances that are neither made knowingly or recklessly – maybe mistakes like hon. Byandala suggested. Therefore, in such circumstances, do we still need to make changes to what has been proposed?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not have any problem with part (a) but I still have a problem with the small scale miners or artisanal miners, unless we say that what we are dealing with here is only handling the big guys in petroleum and so on. However, if it is handling different types of miners, we may still need to put in something to address the small scale miners that are not quite catered for. Even if those small scale miners could be handled under part (b), the US$ 50,000 for them would still be too high. 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we legislating to be fair to criminals or to stop them from doing it? Do you want to stop the criminal or you want to be fair to them?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, we are talking about formal activities and also informal activities. Most of the artisans fall under the informal activities. Last time -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, address the subject directly.

MR NZOGHU: I just wanted to build a background so that I give my proposal. I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the US$ 500,000 is too little considering the fact that this is not a business for anybody who just wakes up one morning and begins that activity. I suggest that we get a middle position - We raise it from US$ 500,000 to at least US$ 1,000,000.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, I would like us to reflect on this situation. You are a Ugandan earning Shs 5,000,000 and are employed by Tullow Oil or any other company. You make a false statement knowingly or recklessly and you are fined US$ 5,000,000. Think about it, is it practical?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, we are looking at this resource which should benefit the entire country. Why are we also not looking at what the possible magnitude of the loss could be; for example, what this false information could cause to the country in terms of taxes? If the false information is given, how much will have Government lost? I think we should look at it from that perspective. Instead of saving the individual, our interest should be on how we save the citizens and the country. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think a company is an artificial person who has powers to sue and can be sued in its own name. If we are dealing with companies, I do not think it is proper to talk about individuals and employees. We are dealing with companies and if a company makes a mistake, either knowingly or unknowingly - To assess the taxes of a company or if you are fining a company, I think you base on the final audited accounts. If they are “manufactured” to default, I think if we are fining them we do not need to consider how much less or more, as long as the company under-declares. I think we should not look into what may favour them.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think in (a), the proposal by the committee is a deterrent that even if you want to do it, you will not. I do not agree with those saying that it must be open because it can stand to be abused by the person judging that case. 

Also with tax laws, you must be precise and not leave room for somebody to doubt your judgment. So I agree with those saying we should put a maximum figure that even if you want to do it, if they have called you to make a statement, you will not try to do it. I do propose that maybe the maximum can go to US$ 2,500,000.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Here they are legislating for the minimum and you now want to cap it? Honourable members, let us take a decision and move on.

The proposal from the committee is not less than US$ 500,000. The amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that the figure should be not less than US$ 5,000,000. Is it not less than US$ 5,000,000 or it is US$ 5,000,000? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It should be not less than US$ 5,000,000. Mr Chairman, I would like to put a rider on this. Under the tax laws, they have provisions where they can say double the loss you have caused or they suggest a certain figure, whichever is greater. I am trying to put up this matter because I have seen the income tax law and I know that where they penalise a person who has committed a crime, if it is a tax crime, they will identify it and they will double the tax.

In this case, somebody might be falsifying statements that he is making losses and the losses will become bigger and bigger over a period of time. In that process, you will never tax him. Even if you got him on the wrong footing, if you applied the tax on what was lost, you will not make it. That is why in the wisdom of the committee, they wanted to put a figure, which is good.

Mr Chairman, the heading says, “making false or misleading statements”. You make a statement knowing very well that it is false and misleading; that is criminal. We want to avoid situations where people or companies make mistakes well aware that they can make them and if they win, they will not pay $500,000 or they can even say $500,000 is little money. However, if we make it high, a person will think twice before he files returns. They will say, if they make a mistake of losing US$ 1,000,000, they will fine them US$ 5,000,000. 

My justification is that the moment you make it less, you are actually promoting crime and saying you can do it and get away with it. My argument is that nobody should make a false or intentional statement; that is all. Suppose you make a mistake and put this as an allowable expense when it should not be under it, that is okay. By the way, avoidance is allowed. This is invasion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, in other words, you are withdrawing your proposal to delete (b).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we shall provide for (b); it should not be under “making false or misleading statements.” We shall include it where mistakes are made. When the heading says, “making false or misleading statements”, those are criminals and they should pay. You do not have to exempt some. That is why I suggested US$ 5,000,000. A mistake will always be corrected.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let me put the question.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we should punish criminals in the highest way possible but when you read the provision, it says “A prescribed licensee or person in relation to a prescribed licensee who is convicted of on offence…” but it also talks about “when the statement or omission was made knowingly or recklessly”. When somebody makes a reckless omission, he or she may not necessarily be criminal in intent but in error.  This provision is combining “knowingly” and “recklessly” and that is why there is the lower amount of U$ 500,000 to leave the discretion to a judge to look at the circumstances. Somebody could just out of his own weakness, recklessly omit some figures not necessarily with a criminal intent.

I thought the combination of “knowingly” and “recklessly” was what informed the provision to have a minimum of US$ 500,000. However, the presiding judge who will look at the circumstances will be able to determine the amount which is commensurate with the intention of the person who has made that error. Therefore, I thought the provision is okay the way it. However, if we are to go with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s suggestion, then we will have to remove the word “recklessly” and remain with “knowingly”. That is how I look at it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in criminal law there is ranking of intent; the highest level is called intent, the second level is recklessness, the third one is negligence and the fourth one is what we call blameless inadvertent like the case we covered in (b), where you cannot blame anybody for it but the mistake has been made. That is what is covered in (b).

They are trying to put all the categories of intent - recklessness and they have only left out negligence. They want to group intent, where somebody just intends it. It is not even recklessness. Recklessness means you should have checked but you did not check or you omitted to do something and then it comes out wrong. So, they are grouping all those together to say that they all constitute that level of intention that should be severely punished. That is all they are saying. It will be punished from that level that there should be a minimum of US$ 500,000. That is what the committee is proposing. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying the minimum should be US$ 5,000,000. Can I put the question on the amendments and then we move from there?

MR KARUHANGA: On imprisonment, Mr Chairman, I think US$ 5,000,000 and one year are not in correlation at all. In most cases, when they say 10 currency points, we all know how this goes. I suggest that if we agree to $5 million or $500,000, the imprisonment should not be less than 10 years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, there is already a provision in the same Act that is similar. So, for consistency, unless it is going to $5,000,000 then the issue of the sentence might have to be reconsidered.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in the Act there is no $5 million, $100,000 or $50,000; there are just a few currency points.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, this is the principal Act, section 89QB: 
“Making false or misleading statements
(1) A contractor or a person who- 
(a) 	makes a statement to an officer of the Uganda Revenue Authority that is false or misleading in a material particular; or 
(b) 	omits from a statement made to an officer of the Uganda Revenue Authority any matter or thing without which the statement is misleading in a material particular, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to- 
(c)	where the statement or omission was made knowingly or recklessly, a fine not less than US$ 500,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both; and 

(c) in any other case, a fine not less than US$ 50,000 and not exceeding US$ 500,000.”

Mr Chairman, the provisions and the figures are actually captured here in the principle Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Therefore, what you are proposing to amend is actually not the figure; what you are trying to amend is the name - (Interjection) - What is in the principle Act is what is in being proposed by the committee. The only difference is that they are saying “a prescribed licensee or a person in relation to prescribed licensee”. That is the only amendment they are proposing. Why don’t you propose it properly so that we know what we are dealing with?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, as you have guided, this principle Act already states so. What the committee is doing or what the House is doing now is to make reference to the Tax Procedures Act, which was passed by this Parliament. We are only making reference to clause 58 of the Tax Procedures Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Here you are saying the justification was to provide for punishments and fines for a person who makes false or misleading statements. It is already in the law! Why are you misleading the House?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, having read the principle Act, I think it still does not balance in enhancing the punishment. Some people may find it very easy to go to prison and serve one year as opposed to paying about Shs 1.5 billion. I still propose that we enhance the imprisonment period from one year to 10 years considering the amount of involvement and the likely mischief. I hope the chairman will concede on this.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am appealing to the honourable minister to concede because the example he gave cannot stand in law. He gave us an example of an employee of Tullow Oil and it was quashed when one of the members said that the company called Tullow Oil is a legal person; you cannot talk about an individual. Whoever is serving in a company is supposedly serving a company. Therefore, I would like to request the minister to concede so that we support hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal because the example he gave cannot stand. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to be guided here. The original provisions of the Act relate to a contractor. They are changing from a contractor to a licensee in the oil industry. The difference has got to be recognised, that the contractor by any definition may not be the same as a licensee in oil exploration. Let us help each other and move forward. The original law is talking about a contractor, the amendment is now talking about a licensee for those purposes of oil and so forth; are they the same?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, you have guided correctly. We wanted to streamline as per the laws already passed by this Parliament, to refer to a licensee and not a contractor. We have changed the terminology right from the other sections we have proposed to amend. We are referring to a contractor as a licensee and that is in line with what we are doing in this clause. However, the content has remained the same.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, the question is whether that contractor was not in relation to oil; was he? If not, are you saying a contractor for a building is going to be treated the same way as a licensee for oil operations? 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, in this case we need to cover both the contractor and the licensee. Why don’t we just say “a contractor or licensee” so that both are covered? The original law was covering the contractor, unless the original law is left as it was and this is just an addition to it. Otherwise, the honourable chairman is asking the House what we shall do with the contractor because we still need to cover the contractor who is not a licensee.

MR SIMON ALEPER: Mr Chairman, we have confused ourselves so much. When you look at the principal Act, what is provided for here as you have guided is about a contractor, unless the committee was thinking about a licensee at another level. I can proceed to propose. 

Now that what is in the committee report and the amendment they are proposing is already captured in the principal Act, I propose that for that particular amendment, we now include (c) so that the aspect of a licensee, probably in relation to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was proposing, is captured under (c), so that it is separate. In that case, we shall treat a licensee separately other than combining a licensee and a contractor. 

The original aspect here is about a contractor not in relation to oil. Now that we are bringing in the element of oil, we can add sub clause (c) to take care of a licensee and that it will be in relation to the oil industry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we stand over this clause so that we do proper consultation and come back together. The concern is that this particular amendment being proposed is now regulating petroleum operations and yet the principal Act was not specifically dealing with petroleum operations; it was dealing with contactors. I think those are people who do roads. Is it necessary to remove “contractor” completely? Which law will regulate the contractors if you removed them from here? Are they off the hook completely?

You are saying that this only relates to petroleum operations and you now want to delete the existing thing that relates to contractors. What is the implication of that?  Please consult on that and let us get back together.

Clause 12

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, I have a point of procedure – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have stood over the other clause. If your procedure is going to take me back here, it will not be in order. Let me deal with clause 12. We thought it had an amendment but it did not have. I now put the question that clause 12 stands as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before clause 15, I had proposed a new sub clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we will deal with that and they will just do the editorial to fit it in. Let me finish with what is here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am raising it because clause 15 is far different from what we are talking about and from here, you are going to the schedule. After clause 14, we are dealing with petroleum and that is why I want to bring it up immediately after clause 14. The justification is that so that it flows as you will be making the amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, nothing will stop you from bringing an amendment to the Bill or passing any new clause anywhere. Let us finish with what is here and then you bring that amendment and we see where it can fit and we propose it properly. Is that okay? 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I propose an amendment immediately after Global Fund for AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis. I propose to add National Medical Stores among other agencies. The justification is that the National Medical Stores deals with procurement, storage and distribution of essential medical supplies and is operating as a credit line.

A few days ago, URA had slapped a bill to the National Medical Stores to the effect that payment of taxes had to be effected before 30th April. The consequence would be closure of the distribution chain of essential medicines and health supplies. I propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with this first, honourable minister - adding the National Medical Stores among the exempted ones?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, this is a decision that we had made in the previous sitting when we were discussing the VAT. We said that when it comes to the income tax law, we will consider this and I have no problem with that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are talking of National Medical Stores and that means you are looking at all government facilities which deal with medical matters, health supplies and whatever. To avoid a problem, we should make - because another one will come up tomorrow. We should say, “all Government entities which deal in medical supplies” – (Interjection) – Yes! Now you have brought in the National Medical Stores, tomorrow Government might put up a hospital and it will make a profit, like Mulago Referral Hospital, which has a private wing. One time they will assess it. To avoid problems, we should include all government entities which deal in medical facilities.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the amendment by hon. Nandala-Mafabi because the policy for all government facilities is that they pick medicine from National Medical Stores. When we changed the law to say that National Medical Stores should be given the total amount of money to supply all the medicines, it was in totality that within Government it is only National Medical Stores to supply without any profit. There are some which import for profit but National Medical Stores does not do that. That is why I support that the National Medical Stores is included in this schedule as one of the listed companies to do that.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. To me, this proposal seems to be something we have already dealt with.  This proposal is about supplies and we dealt with these supplies when we considered the VAT. I would like the minister to clarify to the House which exemption he is looking for since we have already given this exemption when we were considering VAT. 

Mr Chairman, yes there are popular proposals which come here but we must understand. If NMS is not involved in activities that generate profit, how do they accrue tax liability? These are the clarifications we want before we make this decision. I would like the minister to clarify to this House which activities make it generate profit.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The National Medical Stores is a public entity created by the NMS Statute of 1993. The money it receives is appropriated by this House; it is not engaged in any business. The only source of income that NMS gets is money from Government through regular subventions, which we approve here. It is a body mandated to procure, store and distribute drugs and other medical supplies and pharmaceuticals to all the public health facilities including Mulago Hospital and the others. Therefore, the concern has been why anybody would ask NMS to pay taxes when we actually do not provide for taxes when we are passing the money. Therefore, I agree –(Interruption)

MR SASSAGA: Thank you, honourable minister. I am seeking clarification. We interfaced with the National Medical Stores and of course their argument was that they do not want to pay taxes even on the appropriations or the funding Government gives them. However, you realise also that it is Government policy on every funding or appropriations made, even if to institutions of Government including schools, that there is a percentage of tax they are supposed to pay, which National Medical Stores was not happy about.

Apart from government funding which they receive, they also get donations which help them to supplement the administrative costs. Therefore, I do not know if they are the ones you mean, that even on the donations they get, they should not pay tax. That is the clarification I seek.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. The information I am giving you is that the only money that NMS receives is from Government. Yes, sometimes donations by partners in form of physical drugs and supplies are given to the country but they are not sold by NMS to make any profit. They are distributed to public health facilities. That is the information I want to give you. They do not receive any other monies apart from what Government gives through this Parliament. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, those who were in the House when we were debating this issue of National Medical Stores recall that National Medical Stores receives donations from people who support and supplement our supplies. Most of these donations are in kind and in addition to those supplies, they send money for distribution and operations to manage those supplies.

Because of the global practice, they have been calling that money that they send for distribution, “handling fees”. So, because it was called “handling fees”, URA thought it was an earning, which it is not, and they went ahead and gave a bill to National Medical Stores. This raised a lot of issues in the House. Actually, it was Shs 14 billion and they said, “If you do not pay it by 20th we will close you down”.

We intervened as a ministry and harmonised this but Members have insisted that they do not want that situation to appear again. That is why the proposal is coming up. I do not have any problem if the House makes a decision on that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question on National Medical Stores?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like you to have the schedule. The schedule talks about listed institutions which are exempt from corporation tax. We do not want to confuse the two things. These are banks like the African Development Bank, IMF, mention it. Now, National Medical Stores gets money from the Consolidated Fund. Any balance at the end of the financial year is supposed to be taken to the Consolidated Fund 100 per cent. Therefore, there is no way URA will come and taxed the balance as if it is a profit. It will be taken back to the Consolidated Fund.

Secondly, donations in the hands of the ones who receive are not taxable and even URA and Ministry of Finance know this. However, the question I would like the minister to help me with is: are there some activities apart from donations that National Medical Stores is involved in that are generating income like rentals? If there is nothing like that, it would be wrong for us to put National Medical Stores on this schedule. 

Why would it be wrong? Tomorrow, the National Medical Stores will build buildings and collect rent and because you have already put them here, they will not pay any tax on rentals. If URA has problems with taxes, I am available to teach. All monies received from Government by ministries to do work and they do not finish returns to the Consolidated Fund. All donations in the hands of the one who receives are not taxable; they are also not allowed in the hands of the ones who gives. There is no reason why you should put the National Medical Stores onto this. 

The only thing we have to deal with is the VAT, which has been allowed, unless National Medical Stores is engaged in another activity. People, do not argue for the sake; we are teaching you what it is supposed to be. There no reason for this. If you are saying that the National Medical Stores should come here, all governmental parastatals then should come here because it says - for purposes of the record - United Nations agencies, IMF - those international bodies - the World Bank and those other banks. If you bring here the National Medical Stores, it is a terrible error.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I would like to reiterate that NMS was created by Parliament and its objectives are clearly written down. The objectives of NMS are basically to procure, store and distribute drugs and other pharmaceutical and supplies for the public sector; so they have no business in rentals and investments. 

The reason it has come up, like hon. Bahati said, is because URA has been anomalously attacking NMS and presenting tax bills. However, we have had discussions between the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Finance and URA and agreed that that was an error and NMS should be exempted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us see where we are. In clause 11 we dealt with all matters except the proposal that has to do with those figures; is that correct? We stood over the amendment to section 89QB; is that correct? Did we handle section 89QC?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, we handled section 89QC and section 89QD, which was the last proposed amendment from the committee’s side on clause 11. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We approved all those amendments except on section 89QB; that is the one we stood over?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can the records show that? So, it is section 89QB; that is the amendment that was stood over but all the other amendments we have approved. Is that correct? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: That is correct, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We then went to the other clauses and we have stopped at clause 15. On clause 15, there are now these issues of National Medical Stores. We have not pronounced ourselves on National Medical Stores. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi had proposed an amendment. Honourable member, would you like to state that amendment again – the new clause. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose a new clause after clause 14 stating that the Income Tax Act will supersede all production sharing agreements, which are incomplete as far as taxes are concerned. This is to avoid situations where some people can put something that you are exempt from taxes yet the law says you must be taxed. This is for avoidance of doubt.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am now asking hon. Nanadala-Mafabi to do the drafting properly. We are standing over clause 15 and we will come back and resume from clause 15. We have stood over that amendment and the amendment on 89QB which is in clause 11. I need you to consult on that and harmonise so that when we come, we are able to move quickly. 
We have stopped at clause 15; we have not stood over it. We have just stopped there because that is where we will come and continue from. I think it would be a proper time to adjourn for today.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE RESUME

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)  (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole of the House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 10, 11, 12 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We stood over clause 11

MR BAHATI: We stood over clauses 11, 89QB; passed clauses 12, 13, 14 and stood over clause 15.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, we need to free Thursday for purposes of having the Budget Committee deal with the issues that are still pending on the ministerial policy statements. Therefore, tomorrow I propose that we start the House at 1O O’clock so that we can move with whatever is ready and we finish. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.24 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 May 2015 at 10.00 a.m.) 
