Wednesday, 27 May 2015

Parliament met at 10.33 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have business; so let us start on it.

10.35
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (GEN. JIM MUHWEZI): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, I heard my name being read on radio that I come here, sign and go away. It is not characteristic of my conduct.

Yesterday, I was here, and I was asked to represent the government to negotiate with the teachers to call off the industrial action they had taken. I have been on radio and television; everybody saw that I was there. I would like to inform the nation that the radios are reporting lies. I was here but was asked to go and do a national duty. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records reflect that.

10.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker and Members, on the same note, I too was announced on Capital Radio that I am one of those who came, signed and walked away.

Mr Speaker, you saw me and I stayed here from the beginning to the end of the session. Let the nation know that I am not that type. Moreover, I am the minister of Ethics and Integrity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to have a brief whether we have been able to make those consultations and conclude, honourable minister.

10.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have been able to harmonise on a number of issues that were raised yesterday and we are ready to go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 15

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was an issue of National Medical Stores on clause 15.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, one of the things we have agreed with the minister is on clause 15. National Medical Stores is a Government entity which receives money from the Consolidated Fund by appropriation.

There is no way they can be taxed on the money they have received from the Consolidated Fund which has been appropriated by Parliament. We have asked the minister to investigate as to why URA wants to tax National Medical Stores, and why it wants to be taxed. For now, it should not come under clause 15. He agreed to drop it because it was one of the contentious issues we were going to raise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no amendment to clause 15?

MR MULIMBA: I recall very well, Mr Chairman, I am the one who moved that amendment. I move that we provide for National Medical Stores under schedule 1.

Upon looking at section 2 closely, I came to understand that we could provide for National Medical Stores under clause 2. I will be moving when we go to the third reading for a re-committal.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree that we have agreed in principle that National Medical Stores should not be paying taxes. However, I think the amendment which had been moved was a wrong clause. It should not be clause 15. Maybe the clause which needs to be amended is clause 2. We shall be moving to recommit that clause so that we can make an appropriate amendment at that time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 2 was stood over, it is okay. I put the question that clause 15 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: [Mr Nandla-Mafabi rose_] Can we take the amendment from the chairperson then I come to you?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. We had agreed on the tax rate in part 2 and 3. Those are the first things I had wanted us to deal with before we can move on. If you take it as the amendment of the second schedule to the Principal Act, there is part 1, 2 and 3 where we discussed and agreed on the amendments. For example -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it the document that you agreed upon with the minister?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we have agreed with the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, can you call back clause 16; we are still in committee.

Clause 16

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we would like to propose an amendment to part 2 of clause 16; Kampala City and Divisions of Kampala.

    1.  We would like to change, instead of grade I, II, III with turnover between Shs 35 million to Shs 50 million. Grade II with turnover of Shs 20 million to 35 million and Grade III with turn over between Shs 10 million to Shs 20 million.

The rate for garages is being increased from Shs 500,000 to Shs 550,000 under Grade I, now amended to the turnover of Shs 35 million to Shs 50 million. Then between Shs 20 million to Shs 35 million, the garages are Shs 450,000 and then the other grade to Shs 300,000. Hair and beauty salons - from Shs 500,000 to Shs 550,000 then from Shs 350,000 to Shs 400,000 and from Shs 200,000 to Shs 300,000 respectively. We are introducing, restaurants and bars; Shs 550,000 under Grade I, Shs 450,000 and Shs 300,000 respectively.

Then instead of the use of maternity homes, we are using clinics and we are increasing it from Shs 500,000 to Shs 550,000; Shs 450,000 for Grade II and Shs 300,000 for grade III. Then we are introducing after drug shops, “Others” and under a turnover or 35 to Shs 50 million, we are proposing Shs 450,000, Shs 300,000 and Shs 200,000 respectively.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the column of “others” is now deleted 

MR BAHATI: Yes sir; the column is deleted; it is now a new row. 

Then under municipalities and towns, we are reducing under Grade I from Shs 500,000 to Shs 400,000 - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you also changing the heading - the turnover?

MR BAHATI: We are also changing the heading respectively. From grade I, II, III between Shs 35 to Shs 50 million to Shs 20 million, Shs 35 million, Shs 10 million, and Shs 20 million.

General trade under municipalities; we are reducing from Shs 400,000 under Grade I from Shs 500,000 to Shs 400,000, from Shs 350,000 to Shs 300,000, from Shs 200,000 to Shs 150,000. Under carpentry metalworkshops, from Shs 500,000 to Shs 400,000, from Shs 350,000 to Shs 300,000, from Shs 200,000 to Shs 150,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you also proposing to amend on workshops not to be carpentry and metal workshops –

MR BAHATI: Then garages; we are reducing from Shs 500,000 to Shs 450,000. That is the only one we are adjusting on that row. 

Hair and beauty salons; we are reducing from Shs 500,000 to Shs 450,000. Restaurants and all bars; we are reducing from Shs 500,000 to Shs 450,000. Clinics’ we are reducing from Shs 500,000 to Shs 450,000. And then others under the turnover between Shs 35 million and Shs 50 million, we are reducing from Shs 500,000 to Shs 400,000.

Mr Chairman, we are also introducing another category of towns and trading centres; and under between Shs 35 million to Shs 50 million, general trade - Shs 300,000, carpentry and metal workshops - Shs 300,000; garages - Shs 350,000; hair and beauty salons - Shs 350,000; restaurants or bars Shs 350,000’ clinics - Shs 350,000, drug shops - Shs 300,000 and others - Shs 300,000.

Between Shs 20 million and Shs 35 million: general trade - Shs 200,000; carpentry/metal workshops - Shs 200,000; garages - Shs 250,000; hair and beauty salons - Shs 250,000; restaurants - Shs 250,000; clinics - Shs 250,000; drug shops - Shs 200,000 and others - Shs 250,000.

Between Shs 10 million and Shs 20 million: general trade - Shs 100,000; carpentry and metal workshop - Shs 100,000; garages - Shs 100,000; hair and beauty salons - Shs 100,000; restaurants – Shs 100,000; clinics - Shs 100,000; drug shops - Shs 100,000 and others Shs 100,000.

Mr Chairman, we are also amending part (3) of clause 16 to read as follows: 
    a) The rate of advance tax under section 134(e) shall be for goods’ vehicles, Shs 50,000 per ton per year,
    b) For passenger service vehicles, Shs 20,000 per passenger per year.
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you deleting the existing part (3) in the Bill?

MR BAHATI: I beg your pardon.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are proposing to delete the existing part three in the Bill and replace it with this one now? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, that is what I said, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is what we agreed, we delete (c) and (d) for drivers and conductors. But we also agreed in part (XI), a withdrawing tax on payments of reinsurance premiums to be moved from - it was initially 15 per cent 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which part?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Withdrawing tax, part XI - sorry, this is another menu.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, we shall deal with that in clause 17.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: okay, can I put the question to those amendments then? I put the question to the amendments proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 17, be redrafted as follows: (17) Amendment of the third schedule of the principle Act. The third schedule of the principle Act is amended,
    a) By substituting for part IX the following: Part IX, section 89B, 89G, and 89GG;  Tax rates for licensees and contractors
    1) The income tax rate applicable to a licensee under section 89B is 30 per cent.
    2) The income tax rate applicable to a licensee under section 89G is 30 per cent.
    3) The rate of non-resident contractor tax under section 89GG is 10 per cent; and
    b) By substituting for part XI the following: part XI, section 118D; withholding tax on payment of reinsurance premiums: The withholding tax rate for the purposes of section 118D is five per cent. 
Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think – well maybe the chairperson was not present in the meeting; the withdrawing tax initially on reinsurance was 15 per cent. It started by the VAT at 18 per cent, we changed it to withdrawing tax to 15 per cent and we are proposing you cannot drop from 15 to 5 per cent and reinsurance is basically money which they take out to other countries for reinsurance because the reinsurance is not within this country.

We are saying; why should we externalise - these are jobs being externalised, a lot of money, forex and whatever. Therefore, we agreed that instead of 5 per cent, from 15, let it be 10 per cent.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we had an engagement with the Insurers Association of Uganda and they said we have few companies which do reinsurance and that in order to invite them because we are going to a phase of infrastructure development which needs a lot of money - that in order to encourage them, we should lower the rates. They have appealed for three years; this is the third year they have been coming to the committee. So we think the 5 per cent is enough.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have heard what the Chairman of the Committee is saying, “…in order to attract…” - what we need is to have our own. When you have your own, it means our resources will remain here, there will be no pressure on our forex and it means more jobs will be created. 

For those foreign companies, the best they can do is to open up a branch here so that the reinsurance is done here and if the reinsurance is done here, it means money will stay here.

Mr Chairman, I know the Chairman might have got those guys because reinsurance is when you get money from a premium and because you cannot handle that risk, you give money to an insurance company which can handle the risk. Most of these companies are outside and we have only one in Uganda. Why don’t we promote more to be here by making it attractive for people to invest in the country? This is common knowledge.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I concede to the 10 per cent. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendments proposed by the chair of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On clause 11, there was the issue of those rates -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on the rates, we have agreed with the minister that we move it from Shs 500,000 to $1 million and the years should move from one to five years.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I do confirm that we had that consensus.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that under clause 2 - and that should be about National Medical Stores. Whereas -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the justification was already done. Can I put the question to that amendment on National Medical Stores in Clause 2? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2, we had agreed to delete “Immovable property”. The justification was given the other time. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion of “Immovable property” in the definition of goods -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I suggest we delete the whole (eef).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Did we agree to delete the whole of (eef)? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think the Chair of Finance has to use a microphone so that the House can benefit, however, for avoidance of ambiguity over this issue we agreed that (eef) be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that paragraph (eef) as in clause 2, be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

10.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015


11.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister, Chairman and the House. The only people who are going out without being congratulated are the people of the Ministry of Finance because they have really caused us problems in this Bill. Next time they should do better.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, when this report was read, an issue was raised and the chair who read it could not lay on the Table the document. May I now take the opportunity to lay on the Table the committee report and minutes of the meetings on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, yesterday we passed a clause where I was talking about primacy of the Income Tax Act and you had asked me for a wording. Could we take the one I proposed here or we refine it? Yesterday, we passed a new clause about the - if the PSAs as far as taxes  are in conflict, what would supersede the other between the Income Tax Act and other taxes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think we have passed that stage but ordinarily those kinds of agreements should never be sanctioned by the Attorney-General because they are in conflict with the law. But if there is any omission to that effect, that office should be held responsible for sanctioning an agreement that is in conflict with an Act of Parliament. That will be the position.

MR GERALD KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I also would like to seek your guidance on that very issue. However since you have already guided, I had indeed liked your earlier guidance yesterday where you were very clear for avoidance of doubt but since the spirit of the law has also been debated and we also know that the position of the law is that the Act will always take supremacy, then we can go with your guidance. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EAST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

11.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013”, be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Chief Whip, Minister of Energy, Minister of Information, Minister of State for Health and member for Kioga. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the object of the Bill is to amend the East African Development Bank to provide for giving effect to the Charter approved at the summit of the East African Heads of State meeting in Nairobi in 2012. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this Bill was read for the first time and referred to our Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development. The committee has now looked at that and is ready to report. Chairman, you have 10 minutes.

11.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Finance committee on the East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to present this report. Let me utilise the 10 minutes I have been given in advance to lay the minutes of the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA: At the 23rd meeting of the governing council of the East African Community held on 15 March 2012, the council approved the amendments to Articles 3, 4, 24, 45 and 46 of the Charter of the East African Development Bank. The amendments to Article 3 and 4 of the Charter sought to allow class B shareholders to subscribe to callable capital and callable is defined in the footnotes. 

Article 24 of the Charter was equally amended at the meeting to establish the status of the bank.

Committee observations

The East African Development Bank is an international organisation established by an international agreement to which Uganda is a party. It is therefore created by state parties. Its legal capacities and status are clearly defined in the agreement establishing it. The agreement is, as the case in respect of other agreements, creating an organisation, containing provisions granting it immunity from judicial, executive, legislative, administrative, and other such processes. 

This emanates from the recognition by sovereign states of the fact that the attribution of these privileges and immunities is an essential means of ensuring proper functioning of such organisations free from unilateral interference by individual governments.

Pursuant to the 1980 Treaty, the East African Development Bank Act, Cap. 52, was enacted for the purpose of carrying out the obligations of the Government of Uganda under the treaty we are amending and re-enacting the Charter for East African Development Bank and to provide for related matters.
The committee notes that Section 3 of the East African Development Act, Cap 52, provides that the provisions of the Charter annex to the treaty of 1980 and set out in the schedule in this Act have the force of law in Uganda.

It is important to note that the only provisions that had the force of law then were the following: Articles 24, 25, 43, 44, 46 - immunity of assets; Article 47 - immunity of archives; Article 48 - freedom of assets from restrictions; Article 49 - personal immunities and privileges; Article 50 - exemption from taxation; Article 52 - waiver of immunities.

Clause 1 now seeks to amend section 3 of the Act by replacing Section 3 to incorporate the entire text of the Charter. The effect of which is to domesticate all the Articles of the Charter in Uganda. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to replace the existing schedule with a new one. The committee observes that this is desirable since Uganda is a state party to the entire treaty. 

Furthermore, Clause 1 grants the Minister power with approval of Cabinet by statutory instruments to amend the schedule which contains the Charter to reflect future amendments if any. 

However, the committee notes that whereas the proposal may ensure timely domestication of any future amendments, the status quo should be maintained. Parliament should approve any amendment to the Charter if the provisions are to have the force of law in Uganda.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed Sub section 2, 3 and 4 of clause 1 be deleted. The committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report from the committee. The question that I now propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013”, be read for the second time. That is the question for your debate on the general principles of this Bill and debate starts now. 

If there is no debate, I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EAST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill -

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 1, the committee proposes amendment of Section 3 of Cap 52. Delete proposed amendments 2, 3 and 4.

Justification: Parliament should approve any amendments to the Charter if the provisions are to have the force of law in Uganda.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the proposed amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I also have no problem with the proposal of the chairman of the committee. However, the question I want to raise is about one of the things we are leaving in that Section 3 of the parent law. We are introducing immunity to the bank. We have no problem with this immunity and that should have been done some time back. 

But I will give a simple scenario, Mr Chairman. Banks nowadays can raise very wrong charges on customer’s accounts and the customer goes to the bank and it refuses to refund. They end up going to court and the customers are winning cases worth billions of money.
Now, we are saying the bank is immune; we cannot attach anything of theirs. Therefore, who will compensate the customer who has got a problem? Assets of the bank include even their money. Who will compensate a customer who has a genuine case against the bank? We must have a provision. Who pays in case the bank loses the case?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is this immunity for the banks or immunity for persons?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they are saying immunity to the banks; you cannot touch anything of the bank. You cannot touch their property, which includes cash. However, we are saying, if the bank makes a mistake and is under the force of the law of Uganda - where do we go for payment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chair?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we are told that immunity is for the bank assets. However, as far as monetary redress is concerned, I think you are free to get compensated for any damages.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know why this is rising; you recall the case in Tanzania where the customer went and won $100 million. That is the reason why the East African presidents decided to create immunity. The issue was that a customer went to the bank, they did everything they could do, but the bank made mistakes and the company lost. 

It is going to happen again; we want to create a bank with immunity. Assets of the bank include cash, buildings and whatever. Where will the customer now go to? If it is in Uganda, is it the Government of Uganda to pay? Is it the East African Secretariat to pay? Who should pay this customer?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister? Let me have honourable member for Katikamu.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. What is emerging as far as I can see is that we need to be assured that the immunity of the bank can be distinguished from impunity. I think if we get this assurance then the issue will have been sorted out. Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman and colleagues, let us take this example. You cannot attach the assets of Government. However, you can sue Government. Therefore, this is a similar arrangement that if there is any problem the bank will be sued and if the case is against the bank, they will – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have read papers that a certain local government has had its bank account attached. The graders have been attached and sold off. That is Government. Is it in order for the minister to come and say assets of Government cannot be attached for anything? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, I think there have been some changes in the law where it is now permissible for some of those assets to be attached.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the immunities are here specified and they are specific. They have not said that the bank cannot be sued. These articles outlined here from 46 (immunity of assets); 47 (immunity of archives); 48 (freedom of assets from restrictions) - they are specific. They are outlined and they are in the Charter itself. If you can read them; they are not saying you cannot sue the bank for damages.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, do we have the authority to amend the schedule? It is a charter that we are domesticating. Can we go to the schedule and amend what was signed by the President or whoever signed them and we are now ratifying? It comes here for reification and domestication. Yes, Attorney-General?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will begin with your latter question. We do not have the authority to amend a charter that has been promulgated by the Community. 

On immunity, the articles are very clear. Article 45 (1) refers to property and other assets of the bank whosesoever located and by whomsoever held shall be immune from interference such as acquisition, attachment and confiscation. It goes through to Article 46 and I think 47. This immunity is in respect only of assets and you cannot attach against the bank assets. 

However, that does not mean that anybody is precluded from suing the bank. You can sue the bank and apply other execution measures like mandamus against the officials who refused to pay you once you get an order against the bank. This is because normally, the courts would order the officials of the bank to pay you. The only immunity we talked about is on assets. However, all other forms of executions are available to whoever succeeds against the bank – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, minister. Maybe the clarification you need to give to the House is that in the current law, if there was a court order for the East African Development Bank to compensate a client and the bank was reluctant, you could explore other avenues. However the final remedy was that should the bank fail at the end, the only remedy left for the client was to attach the property of the bank. 

In the amendment which is now coming, it will definitely mean that even if there has been a court order and the bank has been reluctant to compensate, we are now giving immunity and insulating the bank. Nowhere can a client attach the property of the bank. I think that is where there is a problem. In case the bank finally fails, what will be the last remedy more so that we are now insulating the bank from its property being attached?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I just wanted some clarification. Hon. Ssasaga is a member of the Finance Committee. He has recommended that we adopt this report – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been very clear. I am a member of the Committee. Whether I have signed or not is not an important issue now. However, I was seeking the indulgence of the Chairperson and the minister to expound and clarify to the House for the benefit of the House, not for my personal benefit. I said for the benefit of the House; what would be the final remedy? Is the minister in order to say that because I am a member of the Committee I cannot seek clarification from the Attorney-General?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it is true that you are a member of the Committee. It is also true that the Rules of this House prohibit you from participating in debate of your own report. It is also true that you agreed with the recommendation of the committee and your signature appears on the report. Everybody has a right to change their mind; but, where the law does not allow you to change your mind, you stay with the mistake. (Laughter) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I want to make a case for the immunity of the assets of the bank. That bank is going to be recapitalised by the Government of Uganda - (Interjections) - for sure, I will start with my own country. Those assets are public assets. Therefore, it is important that you protect them from any liability. 

The Attorney-General has however clarified that, as a customer, having sued the bank, I have all the avenues to claim for my rights. You used the word “mandamus”; we do not know it. It means that you can cause the responsible officer of the bank to honour the court order. However, how do you fail to honour a court order? The immunity is specific to the assets. What would be the interest of any member of the East Africa Community to expose our assets? I think that amendment is rightfully thought.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I do not think that debate is tenable. We do not have authority to amend the charter as Parliament. Therefore, we cannot be debating in vain. Let us deal with the proposal the committee has made. In the extent to which we can apply this, the minister had proposed that they should be given the authority to amend as they wish. The committee is saying they do not agree with that and they have agreed it should be dropped.

Can I put the question to that amendment that (2), (3), (4) in Clause 1 be deleted? That is the proposal from the committee which has been agreed to by the minister. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed

Clause 2, agreed to.

The schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

11.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.


(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE


11.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE EAST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

11.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE EAST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Congratulations, honourable minister, Chairperson as well as members of the committee and honourable members for handling this in one of those record times that we have set.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

        I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

        II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural issue which the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has brought to the House. 

When the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the first time on 1 April 2015, presented this document about the budget of 2015/2016, it had a budget of Shs 14,300,000,000,000. Now, the documents which were given to the committee which we have been analysing, it is Shs 18,130,000,000,000. They have a corrigendum which has come and because the committee has finished work, they are going to say it is now Shs 24,117,000,000,000. These are three different figures at three different times. The committee has finished its work and we are about to finish too, yet the amendment to the first document of April has not been done.

My procedural issue is, which figures are we going to go with? Which documents are we going to use? The committees have already sat and even presented the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last document you are referring to; is it in this House already? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it came in recently when the committees had finished their work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had it been laid before Parliament, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, a few weeks ago, we resolved as the House that we should maintain the spirit of the transition and I think whatever document that comes to this House should be handled in that spirit. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you do not have any other document coming up - (Laughter) - honourable minister, you better come out clean if there are other documents you would like to lay before the House.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have the last document to submit to this House and it is an addendum to the corrigenda schedule to the Draft Budget Estimate 2015/2016. Can I lay it, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to allow the minister to lay that document. It goes to the Budget Committee so that you can have ways of discussing it properly. Let us receive this document and then we proceed.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay an addendum to the corrigenda schedule to the Draft Budget Estimate for financial year 2015/2016 in respect to vote 001 and vote 130.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are those votes?

MR BAHATI: Vote 001 is the Office of the President and Vote 130 is the Treasury Operations. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We cannot refer it to the committee. We will refer it directly to the Budget Committee when it sits so that they can handle it.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It would have been prudent for the minister to lay the two corrigenda as well as the revised income framework, the revised expenditure and the revised macro-economic policy, which we are going to use in scrutinising this budget. He is now causing more trouble for the Budget Committee. 

The Budget Committee will need all those three for critical analysis. What he first laid was the first money he wanted us to appropriate. He started with the Shs 14 trillion then later on the Shs 18.13 trillion. He must also lay at the Table the document for this new one because all of them have an impact on the entire budget process.

Therefore, could it be right, Mr Speaker, that the honourable minister could as well lay the revised expenditure and the revised macro-economic frame work papers here for us to proceed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure those corrigenda have details of where those things are contained. They also contain a summary of the implication it has to the general one. What I prefer to do at this time is to allow a committee look at it and come and advise us either to disregard it or take it in. We are not properly constituted to begin discussing it now. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right. We have a competent Budget Committee, which will handle it. However, the issue we are raising is that we have moved from Shs 14 trillion to Shs 24 trillion. The difference is Shs 10 trillion. Macro-economic stability or instability of Shs 10 trillion must be explained. 

Was it that the government had excess money kept somewhere that it was not declaring? Has the government just now seen the money or are we going to borrow? Are we going to borrow the money locally or from foreign sources? 

Therefore, these issues we are raising are very important. The minister should now be able to produce an amended income, expenditures and the macroeconomic stability. He should be able to tell us what effect it has on the economy. 

If I took a book to my village – [Hon. Members: “Order.”] – but you cannot raise order on a procedural issue. Where did you study debating? (Laughter) Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that - I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the Budget Committee finds that those things are necessary, they will demand for them. This House is not properly constituted to begin looking at the details until we have a report. Let the Budget Committee consider this, report, and then we pick it from there. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister proceeded very well in mentioning the vote and also the name of the corrigenda. It has been a practice in this House that such a presentation by the minister should have also given us a picture of the total amount so that for record purposes, this House is able to listen and know how much is actually reflected in the corrigenda. 

Therefore, I want to seek your indulgence that for purposes of the record, it would be fair for the minister to give us that additional information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have allowed the minister to lay documents under the rule for laying of papers. In this instance, you just lay the paper. The Budget Committee will advise us on what we can do with this particular document. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious issue. Moving from Shs 14 trillion to Shs 24 trillion, with a difference of Shs 10 trillion. You have told us that you are sending this to the Budget Committee.

Mr Speaker, you know we do not have time to analyse the budget and the Budget Committee also does not have the time. Shall we have time to analyse these issues? Can the minister be explicit and tell us exactly where the government is going to get Shs 10 trillion? We do not have time to analyse the budget? This puts the country in a very serious issue of borrowing Shs 10 trillion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me say this and I hope I say it for the last time. The Budget Committee will sit tomorrow. They will go through all these things that have been proposed including the shifts that have been proposed by the committees, the new situations that have arisen from the ministries and come back here to enable us make those same statements you are making. 

We do not have a vehicle carrying those arguments - that is why we are only raising procedural issues because we cannot go into the details of what is there. Procedural issues can never lead us to a motion that we can take a decision on.

Therefore, let the Budget Committee look at this, come back to the House and we dispose of it at that stage. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

    II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will restate my prayers of yesterday that we allow the chair to present, followed by the shadow ministers and then the ministers to respond so that we can have all these details forwarded to the Budget Committee for finalisation. 

Where is the chairperson for the Committee on Physical Infrastructure? Is there any member of the committee? 

Honourable members, we do not have time for these kinds of problems. I will, therefore, allow the Shadow Minister to speak and the minister will speak thereafter. 


11.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nzoghu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have three sectors in this process. In this circumstance, you did not mention which specific sector and that is why we were sorting out ourselves.

Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, you have only five minutes.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We feel as the alternative Government that the statement for 2015/2016 should have addressed a number of issues. Specifically, when you look at what we have presented, we identify a number of gaps. 

One of them is the conflicting roles in the project implementation between UNRA and Ministry of Works and also between Ministry of Works and local governments. They are implementing the same projects and yet, they are different agencies. 

We thought it would have been better, for example, when you look at the ferries, which are owned both by UNRA and Ministry of Works - when it comes to the aspect of maintenance, we failed to understand who should maintain the ferries. 
Therefore, we feel that there should be only one agency, which should own the ferries. The implementation of District, Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) should be clarified because they are getting funds from Uganda Road Fund and also UNRA. There is that conflict.

The second aspect, which we feel should be addressed is the issue of axle load control. They are now charging overall vehicle overloading penalty and yet, the individual actual axle loading has not been addressed. Yet, when you look at the design of our roads, you realise that they are dependent on a standard axle load.

When they do not consider the overall, that means the quality of our roads is being compromised and yet, even when they are taken to court, the amount they are charged for overloading does not reflect the damage that the overloaded trucks will have caused on our roads.

Therefore, we feel it should be taken as overall and then, we know that when they cause damage on the roads, they pay heavily so that the taxpayers are not losers since they have paid heavily to fix these roads.

The third aspect is the issue of inappropriate budgeting. You realise that this ministry has been given over Shs 3 trillion and yet, there is not much visible impact to reflect this.

Compare it with ministries like that of Lands, which is simply given less than Shs 30 billion. We know that in the event of planning, to have a good road system, the land issues and policies must also be harmonised. When there is overfunding of the Ministry of Works and underfunding of related ministries like the Lands, it does not give a clear understanding of what the ministry should actually do. Land and Infrastructure are almost complementary.

There is also lack of transparency and motivation in increasing some of the votes. For example, when you look at how much UNRA is given vis-a-vis how much money is given to local governments to maintain their district roads, you realise that the percentage is far over-stretched.

Uganda National Roads Authority is overfunded and yet, districts own most of the roads in this country. So, if local governments could be given some more funding, this would possibly help address some of the gaps.

The Members of Parliament here could possibly have an opportunity to have roads in their districts worked on, if they are funded with reasonable percentages compared to UNRA. Most people have suggested that many of these roads should be returned to the districts because the districts feel that they are performing better than UNRA right now. We were in Oyam last week and they confirmed that their roads are better than those of UNRA. Therefore more funding should also be identified for district local governments.

Finally, there is the aspect of low allocations for water transport and lack of land that has been illegally occupied.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you, please, wind up?

MR NZOGHU: - land that has been illegally occupied. If we have water transport improved, then it should be in respect of increasing the number of vessels especially for those communities that live on the islands.

For those of us who live on the main land, we feel we are cheating them. We can access our roads at any time yet for the communities on the islands, once there is an emergency, accessing a facility which is outside the island, they find it challenging and yet they too are taxpayers. Therefore, there should be a balance with how the roads are planned on areas that are outside the islands and also how vessels can be allocated to island areas so that they can also access facilities at any given time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Five minutes for you.

11.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This alternative policy for Housing and Urban - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are dealing with what the committee has reported now.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The right to housing is recognised in a number of international human rights instruments. Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, recognises the right to housing as part of the rights to an adequate standard of living.

Article 11 (1) of the International Covenant of Economic Social and Cultural Rights also guarantees the right to housing as part of the right to adequate standards of living.

We in the Opposition recognise that Uganda’s Housing and Urban Development sector has registered commendable growth rate and transformation, during the last decade. However, the sector has numerous challenges that outweigh the achievements.

As mentioned earlier, the slum problem is getting out of hand as most city dwellers reside in slums. Figures from recent UBOS statistics show that Uganda lacks over 100,000 house units. This leaves Ugandans struggling for decent housing.

Secondly, land lords have taken advantage of this scarcity to charge exorbitant rent, which makes rentals a seller’s market with little influence from the consumers. There is rampant loss of homes and buildings to financial institutions.
Middle and high income earners dominate of the real estate in adequate accessibility to mortgage, finance and city municipality and increased number of dangerous mechanical conditioned vehicles in the urban areas.

The key market-players notably real estate developers and banks have attempted to address the challenges of housing strategy. Unfortunately, there are clear flaws in some of these efforts. Mortgage interest remains high and real estate developers focus on the medium clients with low cost consumers being largely ignored.

Our ideal housing and urban development sector situation - Government should prioritise the national shelter strategy like the success story of South Africa, where housing has been prioritised in the country’s national shelter strategy, with focus on low income households.

This led to the construction of 1.5 million units between 1994 and 2003. Countries like Chile and Costa Rica have also made significant strides in averting slum growth through low cost housing support.

Paving the way forward, it is imperative for Government to make low cost housing a priority and demonstrate such commitment with the necessary policy instruments and budget allocation to boost the housing sector with focus being on low cost basic housing. While such allocation may be used for actual brick and mortar construction, the more viable option would be to complement housing funds in financial institutions.

Such funds channelled through credible financial institutions would go a long way to subsidise mortgage finances. This translates into reduced interest rates. Mortgage financing in Uganda still attracts high rates and as such, many are not only unable to afford but are also sceptical about mortgages in general.

Mr Speaker, however, it is worth noting that one of the biggest influences on interest rate is the high cost of funds. Therefore, while Government will urge financial institutions to offer lower rates, they can also offer these funds within a margin that makes business sense. This in effect determines the interest rates offered to the public in an increasing competitive global business environment. Strategic partnerships have increasingly become important in sourcing cheap financing, which can be channelled through financial institutions at minimum margins so that mortgage consumers can enjoy interest rates. 

The ideal urban development situation is one in which there is land regulation and integration, participatory urban management in which there is appropriate implementation and monitoring of master plans for major towns where they exist, and the preparation and implementation of new ones where they are non-existent or outdated. Develop a sustainable city and municipality development programme whose aim is to adopt a visionary approach to urban planning and management and build a necessary institutions and human resource capacity to effectively utilise this approach and support for the urban informal sector through improving the informal economy through the development of cottage and agro-allied industries to create job opportunities.

Mr Speaker, looking at this, you will realise that the slum development in our country is still very high. If you look at the setup of the urban centres within the country, you find there is no proper planning for urbanisation. You find the middle class and the first class mixed up together with people in the slum areas. Therefore, one may fail to identify who is sleeping in the slum and who is staying within the gazetted area meant for economic progress. Therefore, this calls for proper planning and proper re-direction of resources for urban development. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that the Shadow Minister for Lands? Housing has just been done. I will go to the minister. If there is no response from the minister, can I ask the chair to conclude on their report and make recommendations.

11.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go to the conclusions of the report and the requests. I called the ministers but they were not here so let us proceed.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I go to the conclusion, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure meetings that were recorded while considering the following ministerial policy statements:
1. 	The ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which has votes 112 and 156 for the financial year 2015/2016. 

2. 	The ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport, which has the following votes:  
    a) Vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport. 
    b) Vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority
    c) Vote 118, Uganda Road Fund
    d) Vote 500, local governments
I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministerial policy statements were laid before the House. Go to the conclusions and the figures.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, that is what I am going to. I beg to present the figures.  The approved budget for the Ministry of Works and Transport for financial year 2014/2015 was Shs 122.29 billion and the proposed budget for the financial year 2015/2016 is Shs 998.025 billion, with a budget variance of 716 per cent.

The proposed budget for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is Shs 82.978 billion, which shows a negative variance of one per cent down. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will now put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee and those recommendations and the figures distributed.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the presented report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial 2015/2016 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will have the shadow minister and then the minister. You have five minutes.

12.01
THE SHADOW MINSTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the most important ministries in any government is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the role of the ministry is spelt out in the Constitution of Uganda. It stands on five pillars and these are promotion of the national interest of Uganda, respect for international law and treaty obligations, peaceful coexistence and non-alignment, settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation.

How does the Ministry of Foreign Affairs carry out these obligations that are put in the Constitution in Uganda? The Ministry of Foreign Affairs recruits the best cadres to be able to carry out these obligations with Ministry of Public Service. However, of late we have seen that the ministry has moved away from the norms that are in the Constitution and that are laid down in the Ministry of Public Service in recruiting professionals to carry out this mandate.

You will recall on this Floor I told the Prime Minister that the performance of our missions abroad is below average. This is because many people have been recruited outside the Ministry of Public Service and posted to missions without undergoing professional training in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, before they acquire the levels in which they have been placed. 

I supervise the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as a shadow minister. When you move from mission to mission, you find many people who have been recruited in the service that do not measure up. This is everywhere; when you go to London, Brussels, Washington, Moscow, you will find them, and they have ashamed this country. We demand that the people to be recruited in the foreign service must go through the Public Service Commission and be trained in the ministry before they are posted abroad. 

What is happening in our missions abroad is very absurd. People posted to missions should be well remunerated to be able to carry out the responsibilities of representing this country. However, in most cases, whatever they are given is not enough. These officers serving in missions do not go with their families because Government cannot even pay fees for their children abroad. This came up in the 1980’s when hon. Kiyonga was the Minister of Finance; he said the children of foreign service officers must study at home. So, the women and children remain behind while the officers are abroad. This makes it very difficult. 

Recently, we worked very hard and made sure that at least foreign service officers are given some money to stay with their children abroad. They were given only US$ 2,500, which is not enough. We demand that Government increases the fees for the serving officers who are in different countries.


The prerogative of appointing ambassadors lies with the President; that is very clear. However, the President should at least give 30 per cent to career diplomats because these people have gone through stages to reach the level of an ambassador but they remain at the ministry headquarters and are not posted. We have only one career ambassador based in Addis Ababa; the rest are political appointees. What happens is that Government still picks people, sends them and gives them the rank of “career diplomats”. This is not proper.

On accommodation, when you go to missions and see how our officers are operating it is very absurd. Even the properties we have aboard are not maintained at all. We are asking Government to look after these properties because missions are a reflection of what is happening in this country. It is also very difficult for our officers in missions to carry out what is laid down in the Constitution - the foreign policy of Uganda - when the situation at home is not conducive.

Recently, I returned from the Gambia where human rights issues were raised and Uganda was definitely condemned. The same issues come up in Geneva at the Human Rights Commission of the UN. We ask Government not to embarrass us at international fora. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, in summary, the recommendations we are giving Government are: Uganda’s foreign policy is, to a large extent, at variance with the principles that are set in the Constitution. We ask Government to follow the Constitution so that we get proper representation abroad. 

The Northern Corridor arrangement is based on misunderstanding of the law of treaties. That should be abandoned; instead, emphasis should be placed on reform of the legal framework of the East African Community. Both commercial and economic diplomacy - We need money if we have got to carry out commercial diplomacy. We talk of commercial diplomacy but how can these officers do that when there is no money in the missions. 

We talk of tourism; how can we promote tourism, investment and trade when these officers in missions are not given money? We demand that missions should be given money to be able to carry out trade, investment and do tourism. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is important. They should be given money to be able to represent this country properly. I beg to move.

12.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Philemon Mateke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs for raising the concerns of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At an appropriate time when we come, we feel we have got the support of the House. 

Assiduous attempts are being made to improve the conditions of living of staff of our foreign service. I hope when time comes, you will give the ministry more money. If we had all the money we wanted, all these complaints would not arise.

I would like to assure this honourable House that we have heard what is itching the Opposition as far as foreign affairs is concerned and appropriate measures are going to be taken Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman, can you give us the figures. 

12.10
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. After listening to the Shadow Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, I request that the House approves the figures, which are necessary for operating the ministry. A number of issues that the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs enumerated are included in our recommendations and Members should be able to read that by themselves.

I request that under vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including arrears and taxes, the House approves Shs 26.393 billion.

Under votes 201 to 233, that is, missions abroad, including arrears we are requesting the House to approve Shs 108.297 billion. 

As a grand total for the ministry, we are requesting that the House approves Shs 134.069 billion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 10 minutes. 

12.14
MR STEPHEN BAKKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I present apologies from the chairperson who is away, outside Kampala on official duty.

I beg to lay on the Table the report of the committee, which is 105 pages, and the minutes of the committee in respect of the ministerial policy statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUGABI BAKKA: I have an abridged version of the main report, which I wish to go through, Mr Speaker. However, I beg your indulgence; since I have already abridged it, I request that you give me 15 minutes. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016.

Introduction

In accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for eleven votes under its mandate and hereby presents its report.

Scope 

The committee considered the policy statements of the following votes: 
    a) Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
    b) Vote 101, the Judiciary	
    c) Vote 102, Electoral Commission 
    d) Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government 
    e) Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission 
    f) Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission 
    g) Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission 
    h) Vote 109, Law Development Centre 
    i) Vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau 
    j) Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions 
    k) Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission  

Methodology

In considering the ministerial policy statements, the committee- 
(i) 	held meetings with the representatives of the aforementioned institutions/votes; 
(ii) 	held a harmonisation meeting between the sector institutions and the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business,  the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
(iii) 	The committee also reviewed and analysed the following documents:
    a) The National Budget Framework Paper;
    b) The policy statements for financial year 2015/2016;
    c) The alternative policy statement for financial year 2015/2016; 
    d) Previous reports of the committee on the Budget Framework Paper and ministerial policy statements of financial year 2014/2015; 
    e) Reponses to issues raised by the committee from the different ministries, agencies and departments.

The committee held one of its meetings in the Chief Justice’s chambers. It was the committee’s maiden meeting with the newly appointed Chief Justice. 

Cross-cutting issues

 The committee, in its meetings, recognised that there are some issues that cut across the sector and need urgent attention from Government short of which will lead to the continued poor performance from sector institutions. This section of the report highlights those issues and makes recommendations on them.

Office Accommodation

The JLOS House project, which is meant to house all institutions under JLOS, is being implemented through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement. That notwithstanding, the actual construction is yet to commence, four years since Government made its commitment to the project. As a requirement under PPP, Government is required to execute guarantees or capital contribution equivalent to 10 per cent of construction costs, which is equivalent to US$ 10 million.

The committee was informed that JLOS institutions spend over US$ 7 million in rent annually and that the funds currently used for rent would sufficiently cover the annual premiums under the said PPP arrangement. The Prime Minister assured the committee that the guarantee would be given as soon as the Ministry of Justice concludes the procurement of the investor. 

The committee recommends that JLOS be supported to implement this project since it will be a net saving on rent. It recommends that Ministry of Finance provides a guarantee for the US$ 10 million as confirmed by the Prime Minister.

The committee further recommends that the timelines indicated by Government be adhered to as this project is anticipated to resolve the accommodation issues that exist in the sector.

Harmonisation of salaries and emoluments

Institutions under JLOS such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Law Reform Commission have received salary enhancements while some others such as the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are still operating under old salary scales. The disparity in salaries has resulted in a number of problems such as a high level of staff turnover, low motivation levels, corruption in the Judiciary and poor staff performance.

The committee reiterates the recommendation made in its report on the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2014/2015 that the establishment of the Salary Review Commission be expedited. This is in view of the fact that the Constitutional amendments required for this body to be established are already under consideration by Parliament. 

The committee further recommends that in the medium term, institutions such as the Electoral Commission, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, which are in dire need of a salary enhancement to enable them pay a living wage to their staff, be given urgent consideration. I will now go to the details of the specific votes.

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 

Observations and Recommendations

Funds for Trying Court Cases 

The committee noted that while only Shs 1.8 billion has been provided in FY2015/2016 for the ministry to defend Government in court, an additional Shs 9 billion is required.  Failure to provide the additional funds will result in an increased court awards’ bill, which currently stands at Shs 256 billion, or possibly the crystallisation of the Shs 4.2 trillion contingent liability arising out of the 6,000 cases currently in court.

The committee recommends, following the meeting with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that Shs 9 billion be availed for the Ministry of Justice to defend civil cases in FY2015/2016.

Compensation and Court Awards

The committee noted that the issue of court awards, currently amounting to Shs 256 billion, has remained outstanding for many years. With every passing year the figures continue to escalate while Government blatantly continues to allocate less than Shs 10 billion to settle these court awards. In FY2014/2015, Government undertook to bring a three-year payment plan to resolve this issue and yet to date, no such plan has materialised. 

The committee re-iterates its recommendation that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs liaises with the Ministry of Finance to establish a payment schedule for this outstanding obligation. Specifically, the committee recommends that the ministries should work out a three-year payment plan starting this financial year and submit it to the committee within a month. 

I will read the tables that follow at the end, in the interest of time. I have other tables I will read at the end which have the figures.

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission

Observations and Recommendations

Funding for the General Elections 

The committee was informed that while a significant provision has been made for the Electoral Commission to start preparing for the February 2016 general elections, there is an outstanding requirement of Shs 70.02 billion to finance critical items at the tail end of the voting process such as paying of polling officials, tallying of results, polling for the regional parliamentary youth elections, printing ballot papers for youth committees among others. 

In the meeting with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Government undertook to meet the Electoral Commission and establish the funding gap in respect of funding for general elections. Government undertook to provide funding after this exercise. The committee recommends that Government avails the additional funds required for the general elections to enable the Electoral Commission deliver free and fair elections as per its mandate.

Compensation for Workers Injured on Duty

The Electoral Commission informed the committee that there was a shortfall of Shs 0.420 billion in its budget meant for paying workman’s compensation in accordance with Section 3 (1) of the Workers Compensation Act, Cap 225. The committee recommends that these funds be availed for the Electoral Commission in FY2015/2016 to enable it pay compensation to workers injured at work, some of whom lost their livelihoods. 

Staff Remuneration

The committee noted that the current wage structure of the Electoral Commission was set in 1999 and has not been reviewed since then. Since then, socio-economic realities have changed, especially with inflation, resulting in a substantial increase in the cost of living. The committee further noted that the salaries of the commissioners have been reviewed twice since 1999 while the emoluments of the staff have remained static in the same period. 

During the meeting with the sector, the Ministry of Finance and the Prime Minister, Government made an undertaking to take this matter up along with the issue of the Salary Review Commission. The committee recommends that Government sets up a salary review commission to harmonise and streamline remuneration of all public servants.

Without prejudice to the above, the committee recommends that in the interim, Government implements the salary increment proposals that have been agreed between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Public Service Commission and the Electoral Commission.

Elections for Lower Administrative Units and Women Councils 

The issue of elections for lower administrative units (LC I and II) and women council elections has been recurring. No budgetary provision has been made for holding the elections in the financial year 2015/16 budget. The committee notes that no elections have been held for these units for the last 10 years and yet these units exercise judicial and administrative functions.

The committee recommends that as soon as possible, Government supports the Electoral Commission to conduct these important elections for lower administrative units and women councils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go to page 31.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Page 31 of the summary - Finally, Mr Speaker, the committee moves that the august House approves the budget estimates for the votes under legal and parliamentary affairs for FY 2015/2016 as follows:  

Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 40.14 billion
    b) Wage  - Shs 4.16 billion 
    c) Non-wage, court awards - Shs 9.35 billion
    d) Non-wage,  compensation -  Shs 0.6 billion 
    e) Non-wage, arrears - Shs 26.03 billion 
    f) Development expenditure - Shs 25.1 billion 
Total - Shs 65.35 billion. 

Vote 102: Electoral Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 235.89 billion
    b) Wage  - Shs 8.30 billion
    c) Non-wage  - Shs 227.59 billion
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 30.11 billion
Total - Shs 266 billion

Vote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 10.19 billion
    b) Wage  - Shs 2.40 billion 
    c) Non-wage - Shs 7.79 billion 
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 0.24 billion
Total - Shs 10.42 billion

Vote 109: Law Development Centre

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 4.52 billion 
    b) Wage  - Shs 3.02 billion 
    c) Non-wage  - Shs 1.50 billion
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 2.66 billion
    e) Appropriation in Aid - Shs 4.714 billion
Total - Shs 11.904 billion

Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 11.00  billion
    b) Wage  - Shs 3.59 billion 
    c) Non-wage -  Shs 7.41 billion 
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 0.74 billion
Total - Shs 11.74

Vote 101: Judiciary

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 88.42 billion 
    b) Wage  - Shs 24.88 billion 
    c) Non-wage - Shs 63.54 billion 
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 6.71 billion
Total - Shs 95.13 billion

Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 370.401 billion 
    b) Wage Shs  - Shs 73.854 billion
    c) Non-wage  - Shs 296.547 billion
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 14.890 billion
Total - Shs 385.291 billion

Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 23.09 billion
    b) Wage  - Shs 5.93 billion 
    c) Non-wage, arrears  - Shs 17.16 billion
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 7.93 billion 
Total - Shs 31.02 billion

Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 34.58 billion 
    b) Wage  - Shs 16.76 billion 
    c) Non-wage - Shs 17.82 billion 
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 3.14 billion
Total - Shs 37.72 billion

Vote 148, Judicial Service Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 3.09 billion
    b) Wage -  Shs 0.78 billion
    c) Non-wage - Shs 2.31 billion
    d) Development expenditure - Shs 0.27 billion
Total - Shs 3.36 billion

Vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau

    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 13.71 billion
    b) Wage Shs 5.97 billion 
    c) Non-wage -  Shs 7.74 billion
Total - Shs 13.72 billion
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, for this report. Honourable members, I will now ask the shadow ministers to make responses in five minutes each.

12.29
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. In Uganda, we have three pillars in terms of governance and that is the Legislature, Judiciary and Executive.

Justice is seriously undermined in terms of planning, budgeting, human resource and execution of activities. Without a strong and transparent justice, law and order sector, a country or economy can never grow and achieve middle or first world income status. Therefore, we need to realign the way we do our planning and budgeting so that the justice, law and order sector gets a fair share. 

What has bedevilled this country is that the Executive, that is, the Presidency, takes more resources and a lot of money is put in defence and security related issues. However, with the absence of laws, you will have the rate of crime increasing. If the DPP is not well funded, if CID is not professional in its work and you bring the Army to run the Police, you are destroying the justice, law and order sector.

That is why, Mr Speaker, the case backlog in this country discourages investors. We have a budget of more than Shs 24 trillion. You need foreign direct investment, but how can foreign investors come to an economy where it will take five to 10 years for them to achieve justice? How are we going to fund the budget? You have to feed the cow in order to get milk, and one of the sectors that are very important is the Judiciary for investigation and the DPP.

Mr Speaker, it is shameful that the DPP and their staff are getting peanuts and magistrates also get peanuts; in some districts, a magistrate sits in a very hot uniport and yet we are all here and we want justice. No wonder we complain that there is corruption in the Police because people have to look for short cuts. 

Going forward, the Opposition demands that for the next financial year, the budget of the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) needs to be revised and increased to the level that is internationally required.

Another key important sector within the Justice, Law and Order Sector - I know the chairman presented the issue of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much because now MPs have sitting facilities. However, colleagues, we need to be able to implement the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I have looked at this law; the Executive will blame Parliament for not implementing this law. 

For Parliament to be able to do serious oversight over the Shs 24 trillion budget, each Member of Parliament needs to be fully facilitated in terms of research and technical facilities in office. Each Member of Parliament needs a minimum of two technical staff in their office and at least two in the constituency to do oversight duties. Otherwise, you are going to have Members of Parliament debating without seriously researched information and that will take a lot of time. In Kenya, Tanzania and South Africa, Members of Parliament have research teams that prepare issues. 

We are now talking of charters of fiscal responsibility but how of us know what it is all about? The minister is supposed to report on the performance of the budget every three months and we are supposed to make analysis - to get what is on the ground. The Secretary to the Treasury is supposed to issue what we call “cash flow expenditure” immediately we conclude this budget. That cash flow expenditure should show us the entire budget and then we monitor. What time do we have and what capacity do we have? 

Colleagues, this is a serious matter. It is not about the money Government gives Members of Parliament for salary, fuel and so forth. We need capacity in terms of technical staff so that when we stand on the Floor, we are Members of Parliament that are respected around the global. I rest my case. (Applause)

12.34
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): I am going to give a very brief supplement and I will concentrate on justice. I am standing in for hon. Medard Lubega Ssegona, the Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

I will straight go to the Electoral Commission because as you are aware, this country in the next few months, if it is not already in place, is preparing for a national election. Free and fair elections are the tail end of a process but the process must begin in its entirety. The Electoral Commission as it stands now is a body that is partisan, incapable of organising a legitimate national election. Therefore, all efforts to reshape this Commission must be undertaken. 

The Government, especially the President, has on several occasions conceded that the Electoral Commission, more often than not, fails to execute its mandate. There have been court rulings to this effect too, including a Supreme Court judgement. Two of the last three elections have been contested in the Supreme Court and have been found wanting. They have only not been overturned, especially the presidential elections, on the simple basis of lack of substantive effect. However, one of the landmark judgements concluded that the Electoral Commission did not conduct an election in accordance with the law.

Therefore, this country urgently needs an Electoral Commission that is worth its mandate. A mere change of name, which has been proposed, does not suffice. It goes farther than that. You have a bureaucracy in the Electoral Commission that is more like a security operative and that needs to be checked severely - the staffing of the Electoral Commission and its mandate.

The Electoral Commission is depending on information generated by the information system to draw a national voters’ register. Mr Speaker, this exercise has left a lot of gaps and a lot of people are still out there not registered as voters. As we head towards the general elections, we need to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy a right to vote and are not disenfranchised. The data collected, which the Electoral Commission is depending on, compromises its independence in totality. We have made these arguments before and they still suffice at present.

The Observance of Human Rights in Uganda
Mr Speaker, Uganda is still a country where state organs, particularly the Police and other security agencies, are at the forefront of abusing human rights. We need to improve -(Interjection) – Well, I do not know -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I was saying that the security organs are at the forefront of abusing human rights. This becomes more apparent as we head towards the national elections. We want to be assured that as the country prepares to go for this election, human rights will be observed.

The Judicial Service 

We have a big issue with the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. The Directorate of Public Prosecutions relies heavily on state machinery for detection and investigation of crimes. It is this machinery that processes and assembles evidence for the directorate. The Criminal Investigation Department in particular is central to the successful prosecution of criminal cases. However, police investigations leave a lot to be desired. 

Clashes between criminal investigations and intelligence directorates should ordinarily be the responsibility of the directorate. However, what we are seeing in this country is that a lot of very critical cases are failing to be successfully prosecuted simply because of interference and in-fighting between criminal investigation arms. As a result, the country is losing billions of money. Take the case, which is very apparent, of the pension scam, which has been mishandled because of poor investigations. The country can no longer afford a DPP that heavily relies on non-coordinated investigation machinery. We need to improve that as a matter of priority.

Mr Speaker, our conclusion, in particular on this policy, is that we also need to know in real terms whether the budget of the Electoral Commission does not include the policing of the elections. The Police is demanding an extra Shs 200 billion on its own on top of what we shall allocate to the Electoral Commission funding. So, can the Ministry of Finance explain whether the budget for the Electoral Commission does not, in essence, entail the policing of the national elections? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister for Justice or the Attorney General; five minutes, please. 

12.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I am going to take one minute to respond on the issue raised by hon. Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi, that the elections will not be free because the Electoral Commission is using data from other sources.  

Mr Speaker, just a few months back we passed the Registration of Persons Act, 2015. I want to inform the Member that Section 65 (2) of that Act empowers the Electoral Commission to use information contained in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ registry. This is a law that was passed by this Parliament. So, the honourable member should not complain. It is in order for the Electoral Commission to use information in the voters register under this law. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chair of the committee, and thank you, members. Honourable members, we go to item No. 7. The report of the Committee on Education is not ready.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 34 MILLION ($50.2 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) FOR FINANCING THE PROGRAMME FOR RESTORATION OF LIVELIHOODS IN NORTHERN UGANDA

12.44
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the request by my ministry relating to the proposal by Government to borrow SDR 34 million, equivalent to $50.2 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the programme for the restoration of livelihoods in Northern Uganda be approved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by the Minister of Works, the Minister of State for Teso, the Minister of Education, the Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs. Would you like to speak on your motion, honourable minister?

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. This loan is intended to help people particularly in the northern part of our country because of two problems that have prevailed in that area: the civil war, which we are all aware of, and also the difficulties of attaining peace and security in parts of Karamoja. These made the livelihood – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the minister has brought a loan request to the House. However, judging from the way he is sharing notes with the chairman, his body language and the level of hesitation in his presentation, I think he does not understand what the loan is all about. 

Is the minister in order to come to the House unprepared, while not knowing what he is presenting in the House and also resorting to the chairman of the Committee on National Economy for his presentation? Is he in order not to know what he is doing as far as this loan is concerned? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member could have assisted me very well to show me the rule that restricts members from sharing documents in the House. However, be that as it may, the honourable minister was making strong progress on this matter. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would just like to inform my colleague that the minister works very closely with the chairman of the committee. Therefore, I think we have got a right to share information when one party may not have that information. Let us go to the matter.

Mr Speaker, the object of this loan, as I said, is to help the people in those districts, particularly in the northern part of our country, - Apac, Oyam, Yumbe, Masindi, Buliisa, Luwero, Nakaseke, Busia, Bugiri, Mayuge, Bundibugyo, Kamwenge and Kyenjojo - to improve on their livelihoods -(Interjection)- I am getting to that. The other districts are Agago, Amuru, Gulu, Lamwo, Kitgum, Nwoya, Pader and Adjumani.

For the details of this loan, Mr Speaker, I would like to refer you to the report. I am sure you must have this report downloaded on your iPads. If you do not, then that is unfortunate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to move that the motion be adopted.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I thought you had asked me to speak to the motion so that when I move that it be adopted, everybody understands it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but now I am asking you to move that it should be adopted.

MR KASAIJA: Okay, very good. Mr Speaker, I now would like to move that this report be adopted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not the report but the motion for the request. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you for the correction, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that a loan request for SDR 34 million, equivalent to $50.2 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to finance a programme for the restoration of livelihoods in the northern region be adopted? I beg to move.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to rise on a point of order now. The minister is telling us about a loan for northern Uganda but some of the districts he named has are not in northern Uganda. This is confusing us a lot. This country is structured by geographical nature. When you talk about northern Uganda, people know the districts that belong to northern Uganda. If you talk about the economic north, people know what the economic north is. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to mislead the country and the House in particular that this loan is for northern Uganda yet the loan is actually for Uganda - the whole country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that will be a matter for debate - whether that is the actual picture. The committee is going to report and we will get a better picture of what this really is. I think the chair could help us answer this question because it is a factual matter that needs to be handled.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I would like to find out from you whether it would not be prudent for us to define the north in as far as this loan is concerned before we even listen to the report. It is because some of us come from that region but our districts have not been mentioned. You know the whole of Teso is not mentioned and yet we belong to the economic north - (Laughter)– and I have suffered the same kind of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us use the time properly. I have said let us hear what the committee will report and then we will have that defined in the debate. It is not a procedural matter. We cannot start defining regions now. 

MR AMURIAT: I needed to get your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is my guidance. 

12.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Maybe before I present the report, I need to make some clarification. This loan is for the second phase. The first phase was the District Support Livelihood Programme, which covered most of those other districts, which are not in Northern Uganda and which the minister has talked about. This second phase is specifically for the districts in northern Uganda; it is not cutting across these other districts. I needed to make that clarification. 

Like the Speaker has guided, I think you should wait for our recommendations because we are even recommending that Government should get funds so that all the other districts left out here should be covered. It is because we have seen the benefits of this programme. I beg to proceed, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have ten minutes.

MR KYOOMA: This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow SDR 34 million, which is equivalent to $50.2 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing the Programme for Restoration of Livelihood in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the original report of the committee on this loan request. Equally, I beg to lay the brief to Parliament by the minister on the design and proposal regarding this same loan and the draft financing agreement. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings on the same loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Rule 166(2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 34 million from IFAD for financing the programme called the Restoration of Livelihoods in Northern Uganda (PRELNOR). The request was presented to this august House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in March 2015 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration.

Mr Speaker, the committee considered and scrutinised the loan request and now we beg to report. Having given me ten minutes, I would like to inform the House that the methodology and background to the report are given and Members can read. The project is actually linked to the country and regional strategies and information to that effect is also given. 

Project Development Objective 

The overall project development objective is: increased sustainable production, productivity and climate resilience of smallholder farmers with increased and profitable access to domestic and export markets. 

The target groups are given, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg that Members read that. The project components are also given at page 6.

Project Costs and Financing Arrangements

Total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 71,000,000. This will be financed by the Government, IFAD loan, Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant, and the beneficiaries. In this case, I need to explain that for the beneficiaries, considering their situation, their contribution is not in form of money but in form of land and other contributions. Their contribution is in kind and not in financial terms. 

Mr Speaker, IFAD will contribute 70.7 per cent of the project costs through the loan. In addition, it will give a grant to finance 14.1 per cent of the total cost, which is equivalent to US$ 10,000,000. Government will finance the taxes and duties to the tune of US$ 9,300,000, representing 13.1 per cent of the total cost. The target beneficiaries will contribute US$ 1,500,000 but as I have already said, this will be in kind.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the breakdown for the various components is given in the table that follows. 

Loan Terms and Conditions

Mr Speaker, the terms of the loan are as follows: 
    a) Loan amount is SDR 34 million, which is equivalent to US$ 50.2 million;
    b) The loan period is 40 years including a grace period of 10 years; and
    c) The service charge is 0.75 per cent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balance, which makes it very concessional.

The above conditions suggest that a service charge of 0.75 per cent will be applied on the amount of money disbursed by IFAD during the grace period and the outstanding balance of the loan.

Conditions

The financing has the following conditions attached to it:
i) 	Provision to IFAD of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General of Uganda on the legal validity of the supplementary loan documentation to the Republic of Uganda;

ii) 	Appointment by Government of Uganda of a project co-ordinator and financial controller for the programme on terms and conditions acceptable to IFAD; 

iii) 	Opening by Government of a project special account to receive the proceeds of the financing; and 

iv) 	Development of guidelines for the post-harvest handling grants, community-based natural resources grants, and food grants acceptable to IFAD. 

Implications of the Financing Conditionality of the Loan

Mr Speaker, briefly, this loan is very concessional to the extent that it is very difficult to get a loan which has such concessional terms.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to move to the observations and recommendations on page 14. 

Observations and Recommendations

Scope of the Project

The committee observed that of the five sub-regions in northern Uganda, the project will cover seven districts in Acholi Sub-region and one district in West Nile sub-region. That scope leaves out many other districts in the region. The committee also observed the need to roll out the programme throughout the entire country because of the associated benefits.  

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should acquire more funding to cover the entire northern region like previous projects under NUSAF and PRDP, and other regions of the country.

Local Leadership Involvement in the Project Implementation

The committee observed, with appreciation, the involvement of the local leadership - district chairpersons, RDCs and DISOs among others - in the implementation of the District Livelihoods Support Programme at the grassroots. That is the one under phase one. However, it was noted that the local leadership is normally left out when it comes to the national consultative meetings relating to the projects where they would share experiences.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the local leadership be involved at all stages in the implementation of the project including national consultative meetings and workshops. 

Equipment Utilisation

The committee observed that some of the equipment and facilities such as mills and silos given to the farmers’ groups are not fully utilised. The committee recommends that the project should ensure that mini silos or granaries are built at homestead and household levels. The Ministry of Local Government should devise mechanisms of utilizing the existing silos at sub-county level that are unutilized. 
 
Interventions in the Northern Region

The committee observed that there have been various Government and Non-Government interventions in the north that are almost creating a dependency syndrome. Many youth and elders are fond of hanging out at the trading centres and at sub-county headquarters waiting for interventions and handouts.

The committee recommends that Government projects should be tailored towards production and self-reliance as opposed to the current wave of dependency syndrome.  

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow SDR 34 million, equivalent to US$ 50.2 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for the financing of the Project for Restoration of Livelihoods in Northern Uganda be approved subject to the recommendations herein. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now propose the motion for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorize Government to borrow SDR 34 million, equivalent to US$ 50.2 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for the financing of the the Project for Restoration of Livelihoods in Northern Uganda.

That is the motion I propose for your debate. The debate begins now. Each member will take three minutes. 

1.05
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I stand to support the motion, I am surprised by some of the committee recommendations that encourage workshops. Part of the problem this country continues to face is that of major chunks of money meant for projects being diverted and abused in workshops.  I am therefore surprised that a committee of Parliament would continue to recommend workshops and seminars for projects. It is a big problem not only in this country but it is a phenomenon, which is sweeping the world and diverting more attention from the actual problems on the ground. 

I would like to add my voice to the cry that a big chunk of this money be entirely used for the purpose it was meant for and that workshops should not become part and parcel of this. We have had a lot of experience with PRDP where lots of money was spent on workshops in very expensive hotels in Kampala. The committee is now recommending that local leaders should be invited at national level to attend workshops and seminars either in Munyoyo or other places, which are extremely very expensive. I think committees of Parliament should discourage themselves from supporting workshops especially when we have projects like these. This is because workshops take away a lot of money and they are a source of corruption in project implementation. 

Lastly, I would also like to appeal; many projects have been conceived based on available data and statistics of either poverty or consequences of other problems. In the long run, when it comes to implementation, they over stretch it beyond the boundary of the original conceived project. My prayer is that when we get loans like these, they should be limited to the framework of what has been conceived other than politicising them. Otherwise, they will not have the intended benefit. I support this motion, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

1.08
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that Parliament approves the loan request of US$ 50.2 million for the funding and restoration of livelihoods in northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, if the Hansard of Parliament was to be brought out and we do an evaluation of funds that have been channelled to northern Uganda, I think the whole nation would agree that if these funds were put to good utilisation, the north would not be what it is now. Statistically, northern Uganda comprising of West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja, and Teso sub-region accounts for 20 per cent of the total population of Uganda. However, it is still a fact, beyond reasonable doubt, that northern Uganda still has the highest poverty levels compared to other regions in this country. It currently stands at 38 per cent. 

We appreciate the fact that to a reasonable degree, the poverty level is slowly but surely reducing. However, in my honest opinion, it is not commensurate to the resources that have been channelled to this region. It is also estimated that 26 per cent of the chronically poor citizens of Uganda are found in northern Uganda and yet each and every time we are channelling resources to that region. 

I support the committee’s recommendation that this programme be rolled out to cover West Nile, Lango, Teso and Karamoja. However, if we could put resources requested for in the name of northern Uganda to good utilisation, the north would rise and shine. It would retain its regional status quo of being the food basket of Uganda. This is my humble appeal. There will come a time when other regions will rise against the north each and every time we are borrowing, we are doing it in the name of northern Uganda and yet on the ground - Look at the tarmac roads in northern Uganda; from Kampala it is okay but before you reach Gulu, the road is so bad. (Member timed out)

1.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to support the motion for the borrowing of this loan. 

However, I would like to say that this time as we get to the implementation after the borrowing, we need to review and understand why the earlier borrowed money failed. If we fail to correct those mistakes, we shall not be able to achieve our objective. This will be to the disadvantage of the people in northern Uganda, which in turn will affect the development of this country.

As members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs Committee, we toured some projects in western Uganda and got to know that the implementation strategies are more comprehensive there compared to other special programmes that we have in northern Uganda.

Therefore, I request the technical officers and our ministers to share information because if I take PRDP, NUSAF - what happens on the ground is that the deliveries of specific items  is only about receiving but with no comprehensive information and knowledge being passed on to the would be beneficiaries. I recommend that our implementing staff should share information so that the gaps are bridged. 

Secondly, I am concerned with the safety of this money if it comes. We vividly still have the memory of how we lost our money at the Office of the Prime Minister. This time can we be assured that this money will be channelled through the rightful channels and will not disappear?

Thirdly, I would like to propose that during implementation, let us have regular reviews for people to be able to account timely. This will help us, where necessary, to at least manage situations before they worsen.

I would like to end by saying that what the committee noted about the poverty levels in Northern Uganda, which is increasing, it is right. When we did the last review for PRDP, the poverty levels had risen from 40 to 42 per cent. (Member timed out)

1.15
MS SYDA BUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. However, I am perturbed because the motion which was presented by the minister is different from what we have covered in the report. For instance, in the minister’s motion, I had my district being mentioned as one of the beneficiaries. But in the report which I have gone through over and over, I do not see Nakaseke anywhere. We need to address this variance. The motion I am supporting is that one which includes Nakaseke –(Applause)– and I will not support the one that excludes Nakaseke District, Mr Speaker. 

Having said that, it is good Government is borrowing funds for the affirmative action. However, I would like to say that some areas remain marginalised. The North and Karamoja seem to be the root for all borrowed funds for affirmative action. They have NUSAF, PRDP and now they have these and others. Under the Luweero-Rwenzori Programme, the only money we get for affirmative action is Shs 20,000,000,000 to cover 19 districts.

Mr Speaker, this is not fair considering that the Luweero-Rwenzori area delivered the peace and stability we are enjoying today. I would like the Minister of Finance to give special attention to the Luweero-Rwenzori area and ensure we get affirmative action as is being done for other areas.

I know Busoga is one of those areas with high poverty indices but are not covered anywhere. Democracy should not only be in politics but also in economic development. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.17
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the borrowing of USD 50.2 million to go towards supporting programmes in the North.

However, I would like to comment on a few issues that have been raised by the committee. I wonder whether these projects are well-thought through before loan requests are brought to the House.

In one of the recommendations the committee laments the lack of utilisation of equipment and facilities put in place by other projects that came before them. But they also say that they would like to use this project to enforce utilisation of this equipment like silos, granaries, food stores, etcetera that were built from the previous projects. 

This brings me to the point where I think that what we need to do in future is to ensure that we recommend funding for items that are demand-driven. It does not seem like granaries and silos were actually demand-driven. The mills that you have all over the northern part of the country, which are now under-utilised, are just a waste of money. If projects are not thought about before their implementation – because you keep duplicating the same thing - you end up just wasting money. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the committee for recommending that this project should be rolled out to other needy regions: Teso, Karamoja, Lango and the West Nile regions need to be considered specifically because of the unique situations that they went through.

I am saddened to see ministers representing regions, probably apart from Karamoja, running ministries without funding. The President promised the people of Teso, a Ministry for Teso Affairs. This ministry, apart from the vehicle and the office space, is a ministry without funding. I think that Government need to be serious. When a ministry is put in place, it should be helped to operate and this goes for Luweero as well. I heard my sister from Nakaseke lamenting. The Luweero-Rwenzori Triangle is there by name. Bunyoro Affairs Ministry is also there only by name. Actually - (Member timed out_)

1.20
PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan request though with some observations. I think this should be the last loan presented by the minister; it is sectarian in nature. I don’t know why you didn’t request for a loan to support the entire agricultural sector? Why did you have to peg it to a region? When you look at – this House passed a resolution about the affirmative action for Busoga.

By you structuring this loan in this sense, it is like you want us to mix issues yet it is apparently out of context. I would like to support this under an impression that you will be coming up with another loan, as far as the restoration of livelihood in Busoga is concerned. So, I would like to support it under that impression because it seems such type of loans seem to be coming up every now and then. 

As the previous speakers have said, when you talk about the agriculture sector, what interventions have been put in place? The interventions are not supposed to be in terms of the expenditure which we have been seeing. I would like to give an example, the intervention input is very important. What we are seeing is simply the duplication of what has been taking place. 

Honourable colleagues will agree with that the programme of hon. Mathias Kasamba, which we have been implementing as Members of Parliament, when you go the ground, you feel the impact. When I went to recently my constituency, women thanked me for the maize seeds supplied simply because those seeds had been delivered to the intended beneficiaries.

When you look at the setting of this loan, of course there is a huge part of it covering administrative cost yet we are saying that a loan of this nature should be targeting to befit the beneficiaries.

The Ministry of Finance made an analysis of the agriculture budget and got to realise that more than 60 per cent of it, does not go for the intervention, which is needed in that direction. So, I would like to advise the minister that the next loan you bring to this House should be geared towards production. I whole-heartedly support this loan because it is moving towards production. As a country we are supposed to be moving in that direction other than the other loans we have been passing. I can give an example. We one time passed a loan in this House to construct the Buseruka Dam but if I ask any of you on the Frontbench, where the dam is, I am sure you will have no answer. There is nothing taking place there. Minister of Finance, tell us. The loan was already passed by this Parliament for the construction of that dam. Where is it?

We keep on passing loans but follow up is a problem. And I think, as far as this is concerned, in my opinion it is intended towards benefiting our people but the next loan should focus on the implementation more. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will reduce the time to two minutes for each Member and I will take the following people: PWD East, Namutumba, Rukiga, Kilak, Igara and Mbarara Municipality.

1.24
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the loan but I have some reservations.
 
The loans come in the name of supporting vulnerable people. However, you find that people with disabilities are never included.  First of all, the mobility to the venues where the capacity building is done is not easy, and if they are supported, you find a technical person buying a small pig and some two chickens for them.

Mr Speaker, the people in Uganda who do technical work are taking us for a ride. I have evidence where people with disabilities could be in a group and may be they want to give them money but the technical person will ask for a kickback of Shs 500,000 – you know these are people who might have never held even one million. I think this has to stop. Institutions like Inspector General of Government (IGG) should open their eyes on this kind of support.

I am happy that the loan is talking about vulnerable groups including the youth but within the youth, we have youth with disabilities and we have those vulnerable households. It is my prayer that when the loan goes to the North - we have our people there - let them benefit from this loan. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.26
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Women Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the loan but on condition that the next loan that comes on livelihood should be for the Busoga Sub region. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, the Basoga experienced war. However, when they talk about regions that experience war it is only about the northern region. The truth is that the late Alice Lakwena’s rebel movement harassed us very much and our people were left with almost nothing. But whenever a loan request is brought to the Floor of Parliament, it is only for the North and never for the Basoga Sub region. 

The report recently released by ActionAid shows that Namutumba District has a jigger epidemic and it is not as a result of lack of good sanitation. It is due to poverty, at least according to that report. How can we cure jiggers when poverty is biting the people of Busoga, left and right? If we have to deal with the jigger epidemic in Busoga, we should ensure that the conditions of the people of Busoga are improved upon.

I would like to request the Minister of Finance to seriously look at funding the affirmative action programme for Busoga Sub region that was approved by this Parliament. (Member timed out)

1.28
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. After the correction that this loan is meant for Northern Uganda, I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee whether they looked at the Auditor-General’s report regarding these loans: PRDP, NUSAF, NURP and many others, whether it is necessary for us to continue injecting this money in Northern Uganda before we correct the mistakes that have been made.

Therefore, I am hesitant to support this loan because I have traversed the whole country. If you compare Northern Uganda and South-Western Uganda: Kabale, Kanungu, Kisoro and Rukungiri, there is no difference. Why can’t the chairperson first understand the problems involved in the implementation of these projects? We cannot continue just passing projects after projects. We are borrowing this money, we shall pay. Our future generation is going to pay for these loans. I would have expected the chairperson of the committee to come up with suggestions on how we can correct some of these mistakes. Therefore, I request that before Parliament passes this loan request, it allows the committee to present to this House an explanation as to why many of these loans have not performed miracles. (Member timed out)

1.31
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan though for it to succeed we need to majorly emphasize implementation. We normally come up with very good programmes and proposals but when it comes to implementation things are messed up.
 
Looking at PRDP, when it came on the scene we were so happy. It raised the hopes of the people of Northern Uganda but the implementation was totally poor. The reports from the Office of the Prime Minister were all false. For example, in my area Amuru, they reported very clearly that they had opened thousands of hectares of land for our dear mothers and parents in those villages. But going to the villages, you can never see any gardens being ploughed. Therefore, we need to emphasize more on implementation.

Secondly, when a new project comes, Government tends to recruit new people to handle it. What I mean is that currently we have structures at the districts. For example, we have the office of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), the production officer up to the sub county level. Why do we keep recruiting new people to implement these new projects? That is how people normally go and swindle finances. Let the project go on through the existing structures; through the district, to the office of the CAO, the production officers up to the sub county level.

Mr Speaker, we need to emphasise the use of the existing structures otherwise - (Member timed out.)

1.33
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion but I have the following observations. 

One, in this project, Government is supposed to provide counterpart funding but Government has sometimes been releasing funds late hence affecting the time scheduled for the implementation of the programme. I request that Government releases its counterpart funding timely for the success of this programme.

Secondly, I agree with the committee that this programme should be rolled out to other areas. I have been here for four years religiously approving loans but I have not seen any loan, not specifically coming to Igara but for Western and Southern Uganda. All the loans have been going to other areas. I am not trying to be sectarian but we also have issues in our areas. Therefore, as members have said, we would also like to be considered when Government comes up to roll out this programme.

Thirdly, the chairperson of the committee has said that people are supposed to contribute to this programme in kind, in terms of land. It would be very important for people to be sensitised to know what they are supposed to contribute as far as this project is concerned. Otherwise people will think that everything will be coming from Government. I support the motion.

1.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I have some serious observations. I am in pain - when you look at the way this project is designed, 58 per cent is going to be “eaten” by technocrats; it is very clear. Only 33 per cent of this money will go to the people to whom the project is intended. If this Parliament does not stop technocrats from causing us to borrow loans and then they end up “eating” all the money, I do not know how God is going to handle us.

Mr Speaker, they want to increase crop production, community seed production, conservation of farming and piloting appropriate mechanisation for the main crops. What we need in Uganda is seeds, land - they have it in Northern Uganda, tractors, the other things will come. For example, all the money for NAADS was eaten by people working for NAADS. The people in my constituency working for NAADS have very many buildings but the people for whom NAADS was intended have nothing.

I would like us to approve this loan but with some conditionalities, which we can alter here; one, that 58 per cent should go to the people for whom the loan is intended and let technocrats only eat 10 per cent –(Laughter)– because they are going to finish the money. If you look at the plan, they are going to finish all the money. Let them tell us how many tractors they want to buy now for the people of Northern Uganda. This time they must be stopped.

The honourable Prime Minister Kajura is here; this is very serious. How do we stop these people in offices from sitting down in Kampala, designing projects for themselves and they start giving people small – as if we are in Hollywood. You say only 33 per cent for the people of northern Uganda and the remaining money is eaten. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question now to this motion. I put the question – 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, there is a very fundamental issue that was raised by members in the minister’s presentation; he laid wide latitude for this loan, including other districts. Therefore, before we move a motion, I need clarification so that it is on record and we know exactly whether there are any differences to be reconciled between the loan and what the minister presented and then we can make a position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is clear from what the minister was saying that the minister was reading from Phase I of this loan. However, he did not read the actual loan that is before Parliament now; that is what has been presented by the committee. Honourable members, let me put the question to this. 

1.38
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Finance and Government need to come out clear. When you hear the level of debate, it is as if we do not have a National Development Plan. Everybody is saying “My village is not there”; this is a very serious issue. We do have the Vision 2040 but people do not know when their areas are going to be covered.

I request Government to tell us when we approve loans or implement budgets, is it based on Vision 2040? Is it based on the National Development Plan, the Sectoral Development Plan or the Sectoral Investment Plan such that this business of asking where Tororo is or where Kasese is will cease.

Secondly, we took a decision sometime back that we leave project support loans and go to budget support. Budget support will use the national structure. However, project support goes to what hon. Bitekyerezo said; you create programme officers and 50 per cent disappears. This is a serious policy issue that we need to resolve.

Thirdly, there is a Uganda Bureau of Statistics report, a World Bank report and an IMF report. These reports show that 84 per cent of the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda are likely to slide back to poverty. Face it, like it or not, the reports are available; go and read. Therefore, when the loan is for the North or this region, they are to comply with the constitutional requirement to bring the country to the same level of development. However, Government needs to come out to address those issues. Otherwise we are going to have these loans of Busoga, Tororo, Kamuli and it creates confusion, divide and rule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the request by Government to borrow SDR 34 million equivalent of US$ 50.2 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the programme for restoration of livelihoods in Northern Uganda. I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is suspended for 45 minutes for lunch. Okay, House suspended to 3 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 1.42 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.59 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sarah Lanyero): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; sections 9, 7, 12(1) and 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 177 (a) (b) (d) (e) and (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports is mandated inter-alia to examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries, departments and agencies under its jurisdiction and examine critically Government recurrent and actual budget estimates, and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

Consequently, the committee examined and considered the budget framework paper and the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports for the financial year 2015/ 2016 and now reports to the House.

The Votes under the mandate of the Education Sector are: 
    1. Vote 013 - Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports headquarters,
    2. Vote 111 - Busitema University
    3. Vote 127 - Muni University
    4. Vote 128 – The Uganda National Examinations Board; that is a new vote.
    5. Vote 132 – The Education Service Commission
    6. Vote 136 - Makerere University 
    7. Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology
    8. Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School
    9. Vote 139 - Kyambogo University
    10. Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute and 
    11. Vote 149 - Gulu University

Mr Speaker, I beg to move to the observations and recommendations on page 25 but before I do so, I would like to say that there are 42 observations and recommendations and I have picked 10 very pressing ones. However, members can look at other recommendations if the 10 pressing ones are not pressing to you.

Observation and recommendation; Vote 013 - Ministry of Education, Science Technology and Sports

(i) Restructuring of the Ministry of Education and Sports

The committee noted that His Excellency the President expanded the mandate of the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. The structure of the new ministry may imply that some departments or agencies that hitherto were under other institutions now fall under the ministry.

However, no guidance has been received from the Ministry of Public Service on the new structure and the financial implications. The committee notes that they had no direct financial resources accompanying the ministry’s restructure to accommodate a new mandate. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service urgently comes up with the new structure and that Government allocates the required financial resources to implement the new expanded mandate.

(ii) Under performance of several projects in the sector

The committee noted that a number of projects within the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports underperformed during Financial Year 2014/2015 below 50 per cent. The committee was informed that delays in the procurement process were the major causes of the underperformance in the first two quarters.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Education, Science Technology and Sports should plan early in advance for procurement as these delays affect service delivery.

Additionally, Government should expedite the implementation of the African Development Bank grant for the construction of facilities in institutions of learning.

(iii) Counterpart funding

The sector is projected to receive Shs 200.68 billion in the financial year 2015/2016 as external financing. This is Shs 3.2 billion reduction from the ending financial year external financing of 232.68 billion. The sector requested from Ministry of Finance counterpart funding of Shs 58.83 billion for the coming financial year but only Shs 16.91 billion has been provided.

The committee noted that without adequate counterpart funding, the projects will stall and the objectives will not be achieved resulting into poor absorption. 

Recommendation 

Counterpart funding of Shs 41.92 billion should be given priority.

(iv) Understaffing

Heavy understaffing of several institutions in the sector, particularly universities, is mainly caused by poor ability to attract and retain staff. Most of the universities operate below 40 per cent of the staff ceiling, particularly Makerere, Busitema, Mbarara, MUBS, Kyambogo and Gulu. This greatly affects the performance and achievement of their mandate, as staffing gaps impact on the university’s ability to effectively execute the budgets and work plans to satisfactory levels.

It also promotes continued use of part-time lecturers who are not committed to the teaching and research activities of the university. In the administrative departments, it undermines the principle of separation of duties and weakens the internal control systems. For Busitema, they are at 29 per cent staffing, which is very serious!

Recommendation

The committee appreciates Government’s efforts to provide the teaching staff in public universities with a salary enhancement through the provision of Shs 50 billion.  Nevertheless, Government should provide funding to enable the universities recruit the required numbers especially for the senior lecturers. 

Government should take over the wage bill to 100 per cent in all public universities, based on the established staff ceilings.    

(v) Vote for Special Needs Education (SNE)

Lack of a separate vote for Special Needs Education hampers effective service provision and coordination by the Special Needs Department.  The committee’s report on the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2014/2015 recommended that the Ministry of Finance expeditiously creates a vote for SNE, to be operationalised in financial year 2015/2016. 

Despite this recommendation, this is still duly backed by law and a touch of government policy. To date, SNE remains under Programme 06 that is accommodated under vote function 0703 together with Guidance and Counselling. 

It should be noted that while the will to create the vote appears to have been there, the way to actualize it has remained rather elusive.  

Ministry of Finance expeditiously creates a vote for SNE, to be operationalized in Financial Year 2015/2016.  Additionally, Government comes up with a clear policy on Special Needs and Inclusive Education. Short of the foregoing, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance should make a statement on this subject in the House.  

(vi) High dropout rates 

High drop-out rates, especially of the girl-child or female learners across all sectors. This is attributed to many factors including inadequate school feeding programmes in primary school and poor levels of sanitation and hygiene including shortfalls in management of menstrual hygiene in schools.  

The committee recommends that Government prioritises hygiene and sanitation as well as increases the provision in the School Facilitation Grant. Government prioritises management of menstrual hygiene in schools particularly, to ensure that all primary and secondary schools provide emergency sanitary towels to be given through the senior women teachers or school counsellors.

Additionally, to ensure that girls are provided infrastructural facilities such as separate toilets and/or changing rooms.

Government to provide funding to improve the capacity of senior men and senior women teachers to offer psycho-social support and counselling to students.  

Massive national advocacy campaigns around the theme “Go-back-to-school and Stay-in-school”.  

Implement a Safe School Initiative intended to create a safe school environment to foster retention and completion rates of pupils and students.  

Consolidating the gains made at primary school level where gender parity has been achieved so that subsequent cohorts of girls reach higher education. 

Continued implementation of the affirmative action of according 1.5 bonus points in public universities and for those seeking enrolling to BTVET institutions.  

Poor quality education

While the strategic objectives of the Ministry of Education puts emphasis on quality education, the quality of education at all levels leaves much to be desired, more so with sciences. Moreover, there is little value for money invested in Government and grant-aided schools.  

Lack of feeding has been identified as a contributory factor for poor quality education. Nonetheless, the committee observed that in several cases, parents are actually willing to make contributions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, go to page 53.

MS LANYERO: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, subject to the observations and recommendations made herein, the committee finally recommends that the House approves a total of Shs 989,683,312,000 to cater for the votes under the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports for the Financial Year 2015/2016, as broken-down hereunder:

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports

    a) Recurrent; non-wage and wage - Shs 281,969,190,000
    b) External financing - Shs 200,476,638,000 
The total is Shs 425,850,020,000.

Vote 132 – Education Service Commission

    a) Wage and non-wage totals to Shs 5,836,464,000
    b) Development - Shs 653,061,000
Total is Shs 6,489,525,000

Vote 136 – Makerere University

    a) Total appropriation of recurrent is Shs 200,931,510,000
    b) External financing - Shs 223,290,148,000

Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology 

    a) Recurrent; non-wage and wage - Shs 29,086,239,000
    b) External funding nothing; Government of Uganda funding - Shs 4,327,769,000 
Total is Shs 33,441,008,000

Makerere University Business School
    a) Wage and non-wage totals to Shs 54,381,995,000
    b) Development - Shs 3, 534,652,000 
Total is Shs 57,916,647,000 

Kyambogo University 
    a) Recurrent wage and non-wage Shs 75,724,916,000
    b) Government of Uganda Development - Shs 5,430,476,000
Total is Shs 81,155,392,000

The Uganda Management Institute 
    a) Recurrent; wage and non-wage - Shs 17,486,635,000
    b) Development - Shs 6,219,919,000
Total is Shs 23,706,554,000

Vote 149 - Gulu University
    a) Recurrent - Shs 25,395,315,000
    b) Development - Shs 5,367,257,000
Total is Shs 30,762,572,000

Busitema University
    a) Recurrent both wage and non-wage - Shs 23,144,258,000
    b) Development - Shs 1,693,063,000
Total is Shs 24,837,316,000

Muni University 
    a) Recurrent wage and non-wage - Shs 6,018,172,000
    b) Development - Shs 5,148,045,000
Total is Shs 11,166,217,000

The Uganda National Examinations Board
    a) Recurrent both wage and non-wage - Shs 66,823,401,000
    b) Development - Shs 4,271,512,000
Total is Shs 71,094,913,000

The grand total is Shs 989,683,312,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move but before I sit down, I beg to lay the minutes of the report, the report as well and the ministerial policy statement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ministerial policy statement was already laid here; you do not have to lay it again. Let the records capture the minutes and the complete copy of the report. Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee.

Honourable members, I propose for your debate, the motion that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial 2015/2016 be adopted. The procedure we have adopted is to allow the shadow minister to speak and then the minister to speak.

3.19
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION (Fr Jacinto Ogwal): Mr Speaker, needless to say, education is a basic right and governments all over must provide basic education as a common good and not as a commodity. 

Private Public Partnerships must not commoditise education. We, as the Opposition, see that in Uganda there seems to be a tendency to commercialise education. However, we emphasise that it must remain a public common good and therefore, we immediately propose that Government should tax profits of private institutions to improve access and quality of public education. 

We would like also to applaud the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports and technical education that it has made progress in expanding access and enrolment in UPE, USE, UPPET and universities. As the Opposition, we applaud Government. 

However, now is the time to shift focus from expansion and enrolment to equity and quality. We are really concerned that there is inequality and then the quality of education leaves a lot to be desired. 

Currently, the quality and standards are low. Enrolments have outstripped available resources, low passing levels at universities which is turning almost between 32 and 35 per cent and the poor conditions of service for teachers and academics, the dropout is still relatively high, teacher and pupil absenteeism seems to be also high, competency in literacy and numeracy is still low to cure these several  malaises.

The sector budget must be tripled. We propose that the government should increase from the current budget 25 to 30 per cent of the total national expenditure or 5 to 10 per cent of the gross national product of the nation.

Mr Speaker, major sectors which we propose should be examined are pre-primary education or early childhood education. We propose to Government to invest massively here. There is neglect in this aspect for pre-primary education.

Government should also make also this universal and compulsory for children who are two to three years and three to five years.

We also propose that Government establishes and rolls out ECD learning centres and programmes throughout primary schools. We also propose that they integrate the training of early childhood education teachers in teacher education and training.

Above all, the ministry and Government should define, clarify and unify national standards for quality and personnel who are going to man this early childhood education infrastructure.

Pre-primary and secondary school education
We have seen that there is still also a failure on the part of Government. The pupil to book ratio is still very low and that is 52:1. Also, the ratio for teacher: pupil is 66:1 and this is very low. We ask the government to try to improve this area. 

One, we propose that for primary education, increase funding and boost capitation grants, which is comparable to private school levels in order to improve quality and competence in teaching and learning outcomes. 

We have done our survey and we know that Government is giving Shs 10,000 per year. That is Shs 3,300 per term. Actually what we need after going to private schools per term to educate one child, we need between Shs 200,000 to Shs 500,000 if we are to effectively teach these primary school pupils well and private schools do this. They employ almost Shs 200,000 to Shs 500, 000 per term per pupil and if we want our public schools to succeed, we have to move in this direction. 

We are also proposing that for primary and schools we should emphasise literacy and numeracy but we should reduce compulsory subjects at the primary and secondary school levels. We have noticed that there are several subjects at this level and students cannot concentrate. We want students to have a limited number of subjects so that they are free up and they nurture independence of thought, intellectual curiosity, develop creativity and they also develop some ingenuity in learning.

We again propose that Government should provide school lunches to needy pupils and this is very important especially in poor areas in our rural schools.

Higher and tertiary education
Here, there is also some disparity which we noticed. We propose that Government should abolish state sponsorship at public universities and make students’ loans which we say should cover everybody who needs them. It should cover not only tuition but also living fees and feeding fees. This is very important for our students at university. However, we still say scholarships and bursaries can still be maintained for very capable students and districts can still award scholarships and bursaries to capable students.

Finally, we also propose to Government that we should provide energy to all the primary schools in our districts especially solar energy so that evening learning can also be possible.

We also propose to Government to roll out ICT to all schools at all levels of education to avoid digital inequalities.

Another proposal that we need Government to be bold about is consider a moratorium on construction of new teachers’ houses especially in urban areas and then give them housing allowance. In rural schools, you can continue constructing the houses. 

We ask you finally to cut out money from Kiswahili and employ this money to other priority areas. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Shadow Minister for those views and recommendations you have made.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of Daniel Comboni Senior Secondary School in Kitgum District, represented by hon. Henry Oryem Okello and hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. I also appreciate my colleagues from the other side for acknowledging that Government has done quite a lot to improve on accessibility and for sure, we are seriously addressing the issues on quality.

I have good news that the strike that had been called by UNATU has been called off and there is learning and teaching taking place throughout the country. Government has agreed to provide a 15 per cent salary enhancement for teachers in the financial year 2016/2017. I think that is good news.

On the Special Needs Education vote, as a ministry, we have agreed and forwarded our application. We have notified the Ministry of Finance and we are yet to hear from the Ministry of Finance. 

The funds for teachers SACCO; Government has agreed to be releasing these funds to the teachers’ SACCO. They will be released to and managed by the UNATU SACCO. 

Finally, we have taken serious note of all the recommendations as provided by the committee. We shall look at them when we get back to the ministry. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the procedure we have adopted. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had issues with this particular matter because it contains those things that I am not comfortable with. Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for your report and for the committee’s work.

I had clearly stated twice on the record of this House that unless the governance issues in KCCA are handled, I would not be prepared to handle this matter. (Applause) I have so far not received any update on what has been done. However, the Prime Minister has told me they have done some work. I would like him to brief me so that I can take a formal decision.

3.32
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand here to read, on behalf of the Prime Minister, the Statement of the Prime Minister to Parliament on the KCCA budget approval vis-à-vis the Prime Minister’s engagement on the removal from office of the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City. It is dated 27 May 2015.

Mr Speaker, the background to this is that under Section 12(1) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 – hereafter called the “Act” – the Lord Mayor may be removed from the office by the authority body of the councillors by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds majority of all members of the authority on any of the following grounds:
    1. Abuse of office
    2. Incompetence
    3. Misconduct or misbehaviour
    4. Physical and mental incapacity rendering him incapable of performing the duties of Lord Mayor
    5. Failure to convene two consecutive meetings of the authority without reasonable cause or 
    6. Corruption.

On 17 May 2013, a written petition signed by more than one-third of the KCCA councillors was presented to the minister responsible for Kampala, seeking the removal of the Lord Mayor on grounds of misconduct, abuse of office and incompetence.

The minister evaluated the petition in consultation with the Attorney-General as required by Section (12)(5) of the Act and satisfied himself that there were sufficient grounds for constituting a tribunal to investigate the allegations.

The minister further consulted with the Chief Justice again pursuant to the legal requirement on the suitability of persons proposed to constitute the tribunal.

On 4 June 2013, the Chief Justice gave his no-objection to the constitution of the tribunal and the proposed members to sit on it: Hon. Lady Justice Catherine Bamugemereire, chairperson; Ms Joska Ocaya Lakidi, member; and Mr Okello Oryem, member. 

The tribunal was then constituted by the minister on 5 June 2013, with the following terms of reference:
    1. To determine its own rules of procedure for management of the proceedings.
    2. To investigate the allegations against the Lord Mayor as contained –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to just find out whether we are proceeding correctly. I thought that you had asked the Prime Minister to give you an update on what has been done concerning the matter which you already knew. This is because this House has been privy to all that background he is going through.

Therefore, is it procedurally okay that the Prime Minister begins to take this House through a genesis of a petition; a story of court when actually we had said the cut-off point was to do something to resolve the impasse? That is what the House wanted that day. Is it procedurally okay that we continue to be entertained to a very lengthy background, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think go straight to the subject matter and advise us out of it.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. In that regard, I go straight to the Prime Minister’s engagement with the Leader of the Opposition, representatives of hon. Erias Lukwago and the councillors of Kampala Capital City Authority.

On 19 December 2014 when Parliament was considering a loan request for Kampala Infrastructure and Institutional Development II, it was raised on the Floor of Parliament by the members of the Opposition that the loan should not be approved until the governance question at Kampala Capital City Authority was redressed, in particular, the reinstatement of hon. Erias Lukwago as Lord Mayor. 

The Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament committed to the House that he would endeavour to engage with the Leader of the Opposition and the representatives of hon. Erias Lukwago to work out the solution to the impasse at the City Hall in accordance with the law.

The Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition indeed met and agreed that further consultations be made by the parties and thereafter hold a further meeting. The Prime Minister went ahead and met the councillors of Kampala Capital City Authority on 2 February 2015, who expressed their dissatisfaction with the reinstatement of hon. Erias Lukwago as Lord Mayor and demanded that their views as initiators of the removal of the Lord Mayor should be respected.

The Prime Minister sought the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on this matter and was duly briefed that the question of the removal of the Lord Mayor was a subject of litigation and was currently before the Court of Appeal. Without prejudice to the current proceedings before the court and the independence of the Judiciary, the government is fully committed to the negotiation initiated by the Prime Minister in a bid to engender harmony among all the stakeholders involved.

The assurance that Government would like to give this House is that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda vested the administration of Kampala Capital City in the hands of the Government of Uganda and indeed the Government is in charge of the capital city.

The KCCA is effectively being administered and I would like to highlight the following achievements:
    a) There is political oversight being exercised by the councillors at the KCCA and the minister responsible for Kampala. That is one fact.
    b) The Auditor-General for the first time in the history of Kampala gave a qualified opinion confirming proper financial management and accountability of public funds by the KCCA for the financial year 2013/2014.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the report which the Prime Minister is giving the House. However, apart from the general overview which he has given, he has now specifically gone on the issue of KCCA: the achievements and challenges. This goes contrary to the statement which has been recorded in this House that anything to do with KCCA will not be chaired by the Speaker called Jacob Oulanyah. 

By the time you are now giving us these achievements and challenges, it is unfortunate that the Speaker who is chairing this meeting is called Jacob Oulanyah. Until I am convinced that he is not the same person - (Laughter) - then we may allow. However, since this was a personal statement confirmed and reconfirmed, three times, according to the biblical confirmation, I believe that the Prime Minister is very right in many ways to let people know that the government is effectively in charge of KCCA.

However, I am sure there are many members in this House who would like to know the legal instrument under which the government has taken over KCCA. Unfortunately, at this very moment, this House will not be very interested in those detailed reports because the chairperson right now is called Jacob Oulanyah. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member for Dokolo, who is also the Chief Opposition Whip. You would have benefitted from coming earlier - (Laughter) - when I made the communication and I reiterated exactly what you stated; that I have twice on the record of this House stated clearly that if the matter that is coming on the Order Paper involves KCCA, I would not be prepared to handle this matter unless the governance issues were resolved.

I was advised that the Prime Minister was going to give me an update on how far this matter has been resolved. That is where we were and that is for me now to assess to give me the confidence whether to say I am not satisfied or I am.  Therefore, let me listen, please.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was giving progress report on KCCA. The World Bank through its Global Credit Rating Agency has certified KCCA credit worthiness and rated it as A1. This makes Kampala the third city in Africa to receive such an international ranking. This shall open up the institution for multi-pronged avenues to source funding. 

The KCCA’s e-city revenue platform last week want -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, how far has the process of resolving governance issues gone? What is the assessment? How far are we in that process?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Let me read one point more. The Prime Minister sought the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on this matter and was duly briefed that the question of the removal of the Lord Mayor was a subject of litigation and was currently before the Court of Appeal. 

Without prejudice to the current proceedings before the court and the independence of the Judiciary, the government is fully committed to the negotiation initiated by the Prime Minister in a bid to engender harmony among all the stakeholders involved.

Mr Speaker, the negotiation is still continuing and when the Prime Minister left, he asked me to brief the House on this progress, which I have just reported. I want to assure this House that it is not an easy negotiation but the Prime minister has met almost everybody involved.  This means that with patience from both sides, this matter will be resolved. I beg to report. 

3.49
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, when the Prime Minister started chairing the meetings between the government side and the Opposition led by the Leader of Opposition, the meetings started off very well. Discussions went on very well and in trust of each other. Midway, the lawyers on both sides were detailed, first of all, to harmonise and synchronise everything that transpired in court. They wanted to see where we could have trade-offs and where we could not and then revert back to the main committee, chaired by the Prime Minister. 
 
The Leader of Opposition gave me hon. Medard Sseggona to initiate these discussions on the legal side. I and hon. Sseggona have had a preliminary meeting. I want to sincerely apologise for what followed. It is because of my other responsibilities that we could not actually link up properly to continue with this dialogue at the legal level. However, we have scheduled tomorrow at 3 o’clock to resume our discussions on the legal side and then we report back to the Prime Minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these were my concerns. The date is clear. It was 19th December when we had a discussion on this loan. You will recall that the governance issues of KCCA have been difficult in this House. Most of the time, I found myself chairing it. (Laughter) I got completely fed up of the whole thing because it is stressful. 

Once these issues that are clear cannot be resolved - what we can recognise from this process is that the consultations are on-going. I had given them a timeframe of February this year. I said that if by February when Parliament was resuming there was no indication of any resolution of the governance issues in KCCA, I would not be prepared to sit in any meeting where these discussions were going to be held. 

The report that has been given by the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General indicates that there is some progress being made towards that resolution. I do not know whether there is any member who has been attending these meetings. 

3.53
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I am fully privy to what is going on. I routinely meet with the Lord Mayor and his team. Let truth be told. I think as Parliament, we are honestly good people and I take heart from the position of the Attorney-General. 

The Leader of Opposition has made a statement to this effect on this Floor of Parliament. To the understanding of the Leader of the Opposition, who heads our side, and he put it before the Speaker then that the negotiations had hit a dead end. There was nothing progressing in that regard. As he is promising, the legal team hit a snag; the political side hence failed to progress.

Therefore, even the minimum agreement we made in your office lobby as we negotiated that let the simple remuneration of the Lord Mayor be reinstated was not adhered to. I remember they said that would be done the next day since we were heading towards Christmas. They said that by the time the Lord Mayor went for Christmas, he would be fully paid as we sort out other issues. That was not held up. It went back to the usual politics.  

Our humble opinion, and if this parliament is to be respected  - when we raised these other issues the other time, we were simply told these commitments were by  the person Oulanyah, not the Speaker of Parliament. That is why Parliament allowed KCCA issues to be entertained. As we are always lucky, today you are the one in the Chair.  

All that we urge Government to do is to be honest and descent people. I think Uganda deserves that calibre of people. I see so many people that side that can hold up to that standard. 

The truth of the matter is nothing is going on. Government is simply buying time. All that the Prime Minister promised on record that he was going to bring a law amending the KCCA Act did not come to pass. That was the commitment he made concerning how far they had taken a decision to amend that Act and solve that impasse. 

What we debated then and agreed upon was that KCCA issues were not legal. They were majorly political and could be addressed through a political process. That was the premise over which you made the understanding; that we can find a way out. We do not want to be part of the people who stall the progress of KCCA but honest people who want a Government that keeps its part of the bargain of being descent, humane and civilised. We want to urge Government this time is to own up to its responsibilities. 

The Attorney-General says that tomorrow there will be a meeting. They were supposed to report here in February, yet he says tomorrow. I think we are not a bunch of fools and we should not be taken to be one of them. 

My humble plea is that we are still at ground zero; nothing has progressed. Therefore, we leave it upon you, the Speaker of this Parliament, with your indulgence to decide accordingly and to respect the position that you took. I urge you and I thank you. 

3.55
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this issue, Government must come out clean. I remember very well that before hon. Ruhakana Rugunda was appointed Prime Minister, we had the same meeting under the then Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi. 

Our Leader of the Opposition then, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I, and other groups of lawyers sat in Amama Mbabazi’s office for two weeks until the Attorney-General then renegaded on what we had said. They then kept quiet and the talks collapsed. This is the second time this issue of discussions is emerging. 

I am glad that you have said on 19th December, you had given February as a deadline. You can see up to now nothing has been done. With due respect to the Learned Attorney-General, even at lunch time we were together with you and hon. Sseggona but you did not say anything about this meeting. I think Government must come out clean and tell us if they want these negotiations or they are just buying time. The governance issue in KCCA is very important. We should be taken as serious people on this issue. 

3.58
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, Parliament is equally entitled to know the other side of the coin, about litigation. There was an avenue of litigation, which had initially proceeded seemingly well. At one time, there was a pending injunction in the Supreme Court and have been waiting for so many months without hearing from court on what is happening.

Now that we have an Attorney-General, who is tied down to ensure the rule of law, we would like to be briefed by him regarding the court avenue. Has it been suffocated? What do you have to say?

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an issue to raise as a matter of procedure especially with the negotiation committee. I am a key stakeholder and as somebody who represents the eight constituencies of Kampala, I have never been consulted. If this is a political issue and not a legal one, I think the quorum of the negotiation team should be expanded.

I should be included because this is a political issue. It is not legal and I would like the Prime Minister to intimate why he did not deem it fit for me, as an MP of Kampala, to also be consulted on some of these matters.

4.00
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember the day when we were caught up in that impasse and we all agreed, in a bi-partisan manner, that for the good of this nation, it would look bad to say no to money meant for the development of this country and Kampala.

However, we all agreed that all matters of governance should be put to rest at that reasonable time that you chose. I remember that it was a painful decision from you and from amongst us. In the same spirit therefore, it has been clearly shown that a process has been initiated and that both parties would like to presume that with utmost good faith. They have gone into this negotiation with the will to steer forward our desire of bringing back the city of Kampala in regard to good infrastructural development but also political accountability. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that this gets you in a ‘Catch 22 situation’ but we would like to seek your indulgence again that even if you have come to believe that some steps have been taken, let us have a new timeline. We are discussing today because of the timeline you put. Due to this timeline, people have been tasked to give clear resolutions of what they would like Kampala to be like from both sides.

Therefore, even if the Attorney-General has agreed with our brother, hon. Sseggona to go ahead with the legal negotiations in order to break the impasse, Mr Speaker, it is from you within a bi-partisan manner – Like hon. Kivumbi said, we do not want to be looked at as people who came here and said, no to the passing of the Budget.

However, we would not like the others to take us for a ride that we make statements here and we let them pass through the drain. In the wisdom of this House, let us again put up a very stringent timeline so that these people meet it.

You heard the Attorney-General say that we will meet tomorrow. Let us be specific and set a specific number of days so that we can have this issue buried once and for all. We need to break this impasse and move forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two pieces of information that I would like to pass on to the House. It is true that the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and I were part of the group and initially, there was good dialogue. There was honesty and like the lawyers do, you first thrash out the issues of contention. We agreed that the technical lawyers from both sides meet and discuss the host of cases in the different courts.

It was also observed and this is the point that I would like my colleagues to look at, like you say in a bi-partisan manner, it takes two to tango. Who are parties in this conflict? Who are the people failing to transact business together? This House has its stakeholders; there are Members of Parliament; there is always a presiding Speaker, there is a clerk-at-the Table and all these people make the session functional.

We identified that Mr Erias Lukwago, being the Mayor and the Chairperson of the Authority, had a conflict with councillors. We also realised, in our meetings of the Opposition leader and the Prime Minister, that it would not lead us anywhere if we did not bring the councillors on board.

I remember putting this to my colleague, hon. Sseggona and saying, even if court decided now that Mr Lukwago goes back to office, the courts cannot force two political actors to work together. Let me give my opinion. It cannot force them if the issues they are disagreeing on are not resolved.

We also agreed in that meeting that we plan to have Mr Lukwago and the councillors at one time on one table in order to get to understand the issues of their disagreement. Honestly speaking, the conflicts in KCCA –(Interjection)– Kindly listen to me, hon. Mathias. I respect you and we have talked over these issues. The issues at KCCA or City Hall as you call it are not really issues of Government versus the Opposition.

I am being honest. They are issues of people working together. Therefore, even as you give us a timeline, we must also know the issues to thrash out. Our ultimate goal is to have Mr Lukwago and the councillors agree to work together for the good of Kampala.

It is by law and that is why they are in court. When social and political harmony is not achieved, the courts come in and we are saying that we are not resolving this issue through legal means alone. We have just said it. As such, even the lawyers will find their work easy on both sides. (Interjections) I thought I was just helping you –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, hon. Frank Tumwebaze is my very good friend but I have been forced to put him on order, which is very inconveniencing, over this matter.

The issue in KCCA is the issue of the question of powers between   the Lord Mayor and the Executive Director. It is a question of law. In his submission, the minister seems to dwell on Mr Lukwago thereby reducing it to the person of Lukwago rather than the person of the Lord Mayor. This tends to imply that if Mr Lukwago was not in office, even the legal issues would be null and void or the question of the KCCA Act being very conflicting would be null and void.

Is he really in order to keep on referring to this matter and reducing it to Mr Lukwago versus other actors yet it is actually a question of the Lord Mayor in the person of anybody that could even be me in the future as I am also a resident of Kampala? Is he really in order? Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think all of us have been here and that is why, for me, each time these matters come up, I do not feel very good. The Lord Mayor himself petitioned this Parliament and that petition was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The whole process was undertaken and we all followed what happened. Again, other processes came to this Parliament and discussions were intense about these issues of KCCA. Even when the KCCA people are appearing here, some sit there and some sit here. You know that. 

There are problems with even the personalities there; it is a mixture of issues in KCCA. That is why I am seeking to be updated on whether there has been any progress made on my issue and my issue was that I would be very unprepared to handle any matter of KCCA until I am satisfied that the governance issues in KCCA are resolved. 

As I speak, have there been any steps taken towards that? How far has it gone? This is my decision not yours. Are those steps satisfactory to me as the person who made those statements? This is what I have to say. The steps taken are legitimate steps; the negotiations by the Prime Minister, the involvement of the legal team - All those are indications that my directives were not disobeyed. Has it achieved a measurable result? The answer is, no. Has it resolved the governance issues in KCCA? The answer is not yet, not no. Do we give another opportunity for these people to deal with the issues with finality?

I made the directive here when the Prime Minister was here in person. Is there a possibility that these processes can still make any headway? From the statement of the Attorney-General, I believe that if they can continue to talk, and from the statement from the Member for Kampala District, she believes that she can be a good factor if she was part of the committee doing the negotiations.

Therefore, I am still hopeful that these processes of negotiations can bear results. My orders were not in vain as it has triggered a process that has made us to come this far. This is what I have to say now. There needs to be a clear – and I want the Attorney-General and Prime Minister to listen to me carefully. I need a clear update because I made those statements myself. I need a clear undertaking, on the record of the House, that in one month these matters will become clearer to us on how far we have gone with them. 

If there are laws going to be proposed to improve on the mandate issues in the KCCA Act, I need an assurance that those Bills are coming to this House so that where there are legislative issues creating conflict, we can solve them by amending the law. I would like a commitment on that before I make the next statement. Please let me listen to the Attorney-General: Do we have a Bill that can resolve these things?

4.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, we shall convey your directive to the Prime Minister and on his behalf, we have committed him to report back to the House within one month, subject to the other party also being available. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My other issue is: do we have a Bill coming to this House to harmonise those mandate issues within the KCCA Act itself? Is there any movement towards that?

MAJ. GEN (RTD) ALI: Yes, there is a Bill to harmonise these issues. We are in the government of course and you know where it is. It is with the government.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at pain to understand what is taking place but the procedural issue I am raising is, now that you have ruled on this matter, isn’t it procedurally right to expunge the statement of the Prime Minister, which has gone on record? My justification is that if you read the statement, it clearly shows you that as far as Government is concerned and as long as those matters are in court, they are not going to delve into those matters. That is what prompted us to continue discussion on this matter. Therefore, if we leave that statement on record, it will be very misleading for the future readers of the Hansard because it will be like what we are doing is alien. 

The Prime Minister has put it on record that the Attorney–General has advised that as long as these matters are in court, this is a no-go area. I am wondering if it is procedurally right -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that was not the complete statement. I listened to that statement and it said, even if the legal situation is this and the matter is in court, we are still prepared to go the extra mile to do this. That is what was read. The records are very clear on that. It was said that the Attorney-General advised that while the matter is in court, there is nothing you can do. However, in spite of that, we can start a process. That is what was read on the record.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, you asked the Prime Minister what the conclusion on this matter is and that was his conclusion. Of course we are politicians and we know that this statement is actually empty. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze is actually the best person at the centre of this issue. When we are looking for a solution for what he has caused, he should treat us with respect.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker,  we need to appreciate the pain you have taken to allow the government side to make a presentation and to put on the record of this Parliament, what has been done and what they have failed to do following the resolution that was made. I think this is something we need to appreciate. 

However, the point of procedure I am trying to raise is, you have given one month for the government and for us to go and ensure that this matter is brought to a conclusion. I would like to pledge a commitment, on behalf of our side, that we will cooperate. 

I would also like to put before this Parliament that a commitment by the Prime Minister that as a starting point, to kick off the process of good will, the issue of payment of the Lord Mayor was going to resolved there and then. I would like to make sure that this is done because it does not harm any side. It was a statement made by Government as a show of good will and I feel that, that show should be done.

Mr Speaker, the summary that you have made today, of giving us one month, was made as the Speaker of Parliament and this will make all of us committed to the statement. I would not want anybody to come tomorrow and say hon. Jacob Oulanyah made it as an individual and not as the Speaker.

Therefore, I would like the record to capture that you made this summary as the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. Otherwise, I would like to appreciate what you have done, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a clear distinction in these matters. This matter has come back because I made a commitment to myself and to the House that I will not be prepared – Now regarding the question I was asking as to whether circumstances have changed that can now make me review what I said in the past, that is where we are and I am saying that circumstances have occurred that have made me able to review my previous position. 

I am now imposing a new timeline of one month and I want that Bill, which the Prime Minister is talking about. This is because from the report that you have read and even from the petition, there are issues with the law. When is this Bill coming so that it can harmonise those difficulties, which are created by the law itself? The other issue is what was intimated by the Prime Minister.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, the Bill is before Cabinet and as soon as Cabinet concludes it, it will be drafted and I am very sure that within one month, the amendment Bill will be before this House.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, there is a small and critical matter and right now, I think we can also sort that out. We agreed that while all this is going on, the Lord Mayor of Kampala is entitled to remuneration. There is nothing legally standing in that regard. The agreement then was - I remember that the Prime Minister attested to it - that by the time we went for Christmas then, at least on that one issue they would make it good to kick-start the goodwill. As we wait, can the Lord Mayor get paid all his entitlements? Mr Speaker, I would like a commitment to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those undertakings were made by the Prime Minister who is not in the House. I do not know how to handle that. 

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the request on the Floor is an important one. The only challenge, in a negotiation of this nature, is that you should not be seen to put either side at a disadvantage.

The key issue in this process of negotiation is the issue of impeachment. The moment you have that in mind then you bear in mind also that if for instance you said that you allow a person who is deemed to have been impeached by the councillors and by the authority, which impeachment was never challenged, then the act of impeachment - Most of the cases in courts of law are either arising out of saying that a person should remain in office and not addressing the act of impeachment itself and I can tell you this as a fact. The point is clear. 

My view is that this is an important matter but it should come out as a package. Assuming we are to reach a conclusion and a positive one, it should be part of the package that should come at the end of the entire transaction so that we do not seem to be prejudicing either side. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My only issue is the person who made that undertaking is not here to have gone on record and confirmed this, because if he had confirmed it on the record, the situation would be different.

I am sure hon. Muwanga Kivumbi understands this because now the record has captured you saying that the Prime Minister made that undertaking in the presence of hon. Banyenzaki. If the Prime Minister was around, he would have confirmed so that it goes on record. Now that he is not here-

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this House should know where the Prime Minister was coming from. It was acknowledged and it is a fact that the Lord Mayor has the official KCCA official vehicle. The Lord Mayor is entitled to full escort, fully paid and that is where the Prime Minister was starting from, that as long as the Mayor has the official vehicle and the official escort, it is recognition that he is the Lord Mayor. Therefore, the Prime Minister felt that there was a loophole somewhere, which needed to be plugged. That is where he was coming from. Some Members do not know this information and it is important that we all know it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have agreed on this framework, let us pursue it. In a month, we need to come back to the House with the Bill aimed at improving on the condition of the law and also clarify on this. I would not want to say it on record but we will also make consultations with the Prime Minister on the previous statement and see what the implications of those statements were. However, we cannot say that on the record of the House. Thank you. We can proceed with business.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you have ten minutes. I need leaders from this side to represent those sectors. They will speak for five minutes each and then the minister will have five minutes.

4.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Col. (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure, committees are mandated to, among other things, critically examine Government recurrent Budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House and to examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries covered by them.

In line with this mandate, I have the honour and pleasure to present, for your consideration and adoption, the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs in respect of the policy statement and Budget provisions for the fiscal year 2015/2016 covering the following Votes:

    1. Vote 001 – Office of the President
    2. Vote 002 – State House
    3. Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister
    4. Vote 107 – Uganda AIDS Commission
    5. Vote 112 – Ethics and Integrity
    6. Vote 159 – External Security Organisation
    7. Vote 122 - Kampala City Council Authority 

However, Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I have extracted a summary of the main report and I beg to lay a copy of the main report and the minutes on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, Office of the President: Vote 001. We have a table, which shows the approved Budget of 2014/2015. What was approved was Shs 39 billion and what was realised was Shs 41.324 billion indicating over performance 104 per cent.

Mr Speaker, from the above table, the overall performance is attributed to the following: the non-wage budget in which Shs 25.26 billion was released by March 2015 compared to the approved budget of Shs 24.65 billion and arrears were Shs 6.345 billion.

Observations and recommendations

Mr Speaker, regarding the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), the committee observed that although the RDCs and deputy RDCs are doing a good job for the country, they require regular supervision and assessment while executing their mandate.

The committee recommends that RDCs and deputy RDCs should concentrate on their core mandate. They should separate managerial duties from political duties. 

The committee further recommends that any RDCs intending to get involved in elective politics should adhere to the legal requirements of resigning within 90 days before the nomination.

National Secretariat for Patriotism Clubs 

The committee observed that there is increased demand from the youth and public out of schools to be included in the on-going patriotism activities. The Constitution of Uganda enjoins all citizens to undergo this type of training. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the National Secretariat for Patriotism Clubs provides, in its strategic plan, a well-defined scope within which it operates. Patriotism should be extended beyond schools in order to incorporate all Ugandans and the impact of patriotic studies should be evaluated regularly in order to assess its effectiveness.

Coordination for Security Sectors 

The committee observed that the office of the Minister for Security, which coordinates, supervises, harmonises and simulates security information, has continuously remained underfunded. The committee recommends that Shs 23 billion be provided to enhance coordination of the security sector for supervision, harmonisation and simulation of security information.

VOTE 002- STATE HOUSE 

There is a table provided and it shows the approved budget for 2014/2015. The approved budget was Shs 25.236 billion and what was released was Shs 210,770,000,000 indicating a performance of 83 per cent. 

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee observed that the idea of model villages is a good one especially after oversight visits in Western Uganda in the districts of Mbarara, Ntungamo and Rukungiri and Ibanda. The committee further observed that the flexibility to recruit out of all regions is constrained by the limited budget.

The committee recommends that as a matter of urgency, State House should budget for well-balanced model villages covering all regions and each region should have at least two or more model villages. Individual lobbying to His Excellency the President should be discouraged.

The committee recommends that efforts to advise the President should be made on selection of model villages so that all regions benefit.

UGANDA AIDS COMMISSION 

Budget Performance 

The table provided shows that Shs 7 billion was approved and Shs 5,922,000,000 was released. Overall, Uganda AIDS Commission performed at 84 per cent. Recurrent budget performed at 71 per cent and 87 per cent with exceptional performance registered by the development budget at 100 per cent.

Observations and Recommendations 

Oversight to Uganda AIDS Commission 

The committee observed that due to its nature of work, operations and set up, the budget for UAC and the oversight function should be carried out by the Committee on HIV/AIDS.

The committee strongly recommends that for purposes of proper monitoring, control and oversight, as mandated by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee should be overseen by the Committee on Health under the Ministry of Health.

ETHICS AND INTEGRITY 

The table is provided for the financial year 2014/2015 and shows that Shs 4,133,000,000 had been released by March 2015 compared to the total approved budget of Shs 5.9 billion, registering a release performance of 70 per cent.

Observations and recommendations 

The committee observed that Parliament approved Shs 780,000,000 as part of payment for acquisition of land for construction of directorate office premises. However, citing high prices for the land acquisition, funds were diverted to other uses. 

It was further observed that plans to acquire land have been abandoned in the current budget proposals yet the rent expenses are projected to increase from Shs 440 million to Shs 500 million per annum.

The committee recommends that land to construct directorate premises be reinstated as a priority and that Shs 1 billion be reallocated back from recurrent to development for the purchase of land. The directorate should continue to look for land.

VOTE 159 - EXTERNAL SECURITY ORGANISATION 

The budget performance is provided in the table of the report and from the above table, Shs 13.214 billion had been released by the end of March compared to total approved budget of Shs 16.588 billion registering a release performance of 80 per cent.

Observations and recommendations 

Continuous Budgetary Limitations in ESO 

The committee observed that ESO has continuously experienced budgetary constraints, which have regularly impaired on the operations resulting into continuous security threats in and outside Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, if you are reading the summary, go to page 17 and if you are reading the main report, go to page 38.

MR MWESIGYE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, Mr Speaker and Members, in light of the above, the Committee on Presidential Affairs therefore recommends that the House do approve the proposed budget estimates for the respective Government ministries and departments for the financial year 2015/2016. The details of the budget proposals are attached and here provided.

Proposed Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2015/2016 

Office of the President 

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 102,286,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 5,284,000,000

Vote 002 – State House

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 234,884,129,685
    b) Development expenditure Shs 18,343,295,302

Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 73,976,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 95,783,000,000

Vote 107 – Uganda AIDS Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 7,620,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 128,000,000

Vote 112 – Ethics and Integrity 

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 4,218,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 1,211,000,000

Vote 122 - Kampala City Council Authority

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 66,880,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 167,800,000,000
    c) Non-tax revenue Shs 111,080,000,000

Vote 139 – External Security Organisation

    a) Recurrent expenditure Shs 17,967,000,000
    b) Development expenditure Shs 392,000,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I will now use the usual procedure and invite the Shadow Minister or a person standing in that place to speak.

4.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi): Mr Speaker, I am standing in for the shadow Minister for the Presidency, hon. Hussein Kyanjo who, as we all know, is in India undergoing critical medical treatment and for the shadow Minister for Kampala, hon. Osegge.

Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to associate myself with some of the good recommendations of the committee and I thank the committee. 

Secondly, to the Office of the President, I will be very specific. There are critical issues to look at. First of all, there is money that is allocated in anticipation that the Pope would visit Uganda and money was allocated to be given to RDCs for that mobilisation to a tune a Shs 9 billion. We propose that, that cannot be seen to fruition and therefore, that money should be reallocated because as you are aware, next month the Pope will not visit this country and there is no justification for that money.

Mr Speaker, we also note that the welfare and entertainment budget of the Office of the President has been increasing every year. This year, it is increasing to a tune of 62 per cent from Shs 206.1 billion to Shs 365.7 billion. We are concerned with that incredible increment in the office of welfare and entertainment of the Office of the President.

In addition, the budget for special meals in the Office of the President is increasing by 22 per cent. We would like an explanation to justify those increments. 

Mr Speaker, we are also critically concerned that the Office of the President continues to receive and in this budget, it is entitled to classified expenditure. In the Financial Act of 2015, it is only Defence and Security that are entitled to classified expenditure. ISO, which is under Vote 0011 is well budgeted for. Therefore, we do not see a need for Shs 18 billion to be spent on classified expenditure and that is contrary to the Financial Management Act, 2015. It is true that the Office of the President coordinates national security under ISO but it is well budgeted for. 

Mr Speaker, we are grossly concerned, and I will be very particular on this, that the Office of the President ordinarily does not stick to the commitments of activities budgeted for. A case in point, in the last financial year, was when they were supposed to finance two office blocks; one in Butambala and another Bundibugyo. The one in Bundibugyo is well under way but the one in Butambala was reallocated to Lwengo. We would like to get a justification why. I am very particular about that one. No, I am reading a prepared text by the Shadow minister, hon. Kyanjo. 

Regarding capacity, competence and the role of RDCs, we are gearing towards national elections and we would like RDCs to stick to their roles. There are many RDCs who are interested in being candidates and right now, they are cruising across various constituencies in Government vehicles and we guess on Government funds. This is an abuse of Government facilities by RDCs. 

I have several examples of RDCs who are aspiring to be Members of Parliament and I have found them at functions campaigning officially as candidates in Government vehicles. I will not mention them but keep my dignity. However, the minister knows that this is true. RDCs are entitled to be ambitious and have the right to stand but they must know that while they go to campaign, they must leave Government facilities behind, including the security, which they have.

In addition, RDCs are interfering grossly in party primaries especially those of the ruling party. I have noted that they are at the forefront of de-campaigning several candidates with the perceived view that those candidates are not well favoured by the Office of the President. I think the office of the RDCs should not be used in that regard and a clear line and guideline - I think training and refresher courses should be given to the RDCs as we go towards the general elections.

On KCCA, there are still issues that require being resolved. Much as the infrastructure development in KCCA is commendable and they could have some improvements, we are very keen to ensure that human rights and people’s property are protected. We have seen KCCA go in overdrive in trying to fulfil their mandate. A case in point was when they were evicting people in Nateete along the railway line. They caused a lot of public outcry. The mandate of KCCA law enforcement needs to be checked as well as their training and recruitment. 

For the record, we have also seen KCCA trying to replace some traffic officials or put up some traffic control officers. We would like to see that these are well trained people and know what they are doing because essentially, that is Police work. KCCA seems to be taking over that job and I am meant to understand that almost 1000 young men and women have been recruited to undertake that exercise. We are keen to know how well equipped and trained they are in managing traffic.

As you may know, the record of law enforcement is not enviable and for the record, KCCA headquarters is a public institution. It is not a military facility. However, to access KCCA is like you are going to a military facility. The people of Kampala have a right to access their leaders, councillors and even the Executive Director. However, they go through stringent security checks to an unwarranted extent. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to recommend that the issues we have raised get the due attention of the state. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any response from the minister or shall I put the question?

4.51
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to assure the House that the recommendations of the committee will be taken seriously. We have been working on some of those made earlier like the issue of RDCs and we are strictly re-tooling RDCs. 

Mr Speaker, you represented Madam Speaker and you addressed them in Kyankwanzi. True, there are those who want to go and contest and we have asked them to resign. So far, one RDC from Mayuge, Mrs Margaret Mbeiza has resigned as she is going to contest. Let me know those who are misusing Government vehicles and we shall take action. 

However, we are also trying to ensure that they do their work especially of security coordination and monitoring of Government programmes. I would like to encourage honourable colleagues that if you work with your RDC in your area, you can form a strong partnership aimed at checking on Government projects. Sometimes they are also frustrated by the technical accounting officers as they are denied information. If you form a team with them, these RDC are Ugandans, they are our brothers and sisters and this House actually has some former RDCs. Therefore, they are not really what people want them to portray - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the statement made by the minister. I happen to have been personally present in Amuru during the campaigns and I also appreciate that there were other Members of Parliament and ministers who were also present from the other side. 

I was amazed and surprised that the RDCs were openly or overtly campaigning for the candidates of NRM. My heart was broken because they should not have any side in the matter. If there was any conflict, I would have wanted to report to the RDC but instead, the RDC was already on the other side and I felt that maybe what we need, as a Parliament, is to give these people training. Maybe they do not know and they think that they are supposed to be political operatives when actually they are supposed to check on Government programmes.

Therefore Mr Speaker, I appreciate the initiative being taken by the minister and I would like to ensure that all of us – By the way, I have seen that when it comes to campaigns, it is not only the Opposition who are de-campaigned by the RDCs. Within the NRM, particularly during your primaries, the RDCs tend to side with some other candidates and that is not fair. We would like them to be neutral so that we can appeal to them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information, honourable member. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am giving him information and I am putting meat to this information so that he understands. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you for the meat. I am constrained, by the Speaker. Mr Speaker, there is no allocation whatsoever made to RDCs to coordinate the Pope’s visit. Regarding the money that was proposed to be allocated, its release will be conditional to confirmation of the coming of the Pope. If he does not come, there is no money whatsoever.

On the question of Butambala versus Lwengo, I will check and give you information but at least Lwengo is near Butambala. However, I will know what the issue was and I will get back to you. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2015/2016 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I was raising is that I am a Shadow Minister for Special Regions, which is under this report and I have not presented the alternative on special regions. Mr Speaker, how do we -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I consulted with the Leader of the Opposition. You saw me consulting and that is why I gave the honourable member eight minutes because he was representing all the sectors from the Opposition. There might have been a problem but we now leave it for -

MR OCHOLA: Mr Speaker, it had not come to my knowledge but if that was the case, I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the case. Honourable members, I had indicated that tomorrow, the Budget Committee would be sitting and it is true the Budget Committee should sit tomorrow but they will only sit in the morning because at 2 o’clock, Parliament plenary will resume to deal with the figures. 

I am also instructing the Clerk and the people who work in the Budget Office to extract those figures that have been prepared so that they are ready for the Budget Committee and all those details are harmonised because the Speaker, hon. Kadaga will be sitting at 2 o’clock to handle the supply of those figures. 

Please harmonise the figures in the morning and it is a matter of urgency. The Speaker will be here to do the supply. That is the communication I needed to make so this House is now adjourned until tomorrow 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 May 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
