Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 29 May 2019

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I would like to apologise for the late start; I was receiving a series of petitions on many governance issues from around the country. I am sorry that we have started late. 

Secondly, you might smell some paint; we are trying to improve the environment in which you work. What we have done is to leave the doors and windows open so that you can breathe. I hope you will not be badly affected. 

Thirdly, I would like to amend the Order Paper to allow hon. Janepher Nantume Egunyu to give a personal explanation. 

In all, I am happy to be with you again. (Applause) As you are aware, I was not well. I would like to thank you very much for your support, concern and the prayers. I know a number of you tried to come and check on me but it was difficult to have a lot of people coming, but I am here. 

During that time in the hospital, I found a lot of Ugandans at the Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi. The main request they made to me was for us to facilitate our hospitals here so that they do not have to go to Kenya for treatment. I would like the Government to take note of that; if we could have more equitable distribution of the medical facilities in the country so that people are able to access them. 

Honourable members, we have heard the sad news of the demise of “Mr Lugubrious”, the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, which occurred yesterday at his home in Bulange. He was the longest serving Prime Minister of Uganda, - 12 years - a distinguished scholar and a leader whose illustrious legacy spans various institutions. He was a Chancellor of Makerere University, Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences, Director of Makerere Institute of Social Research (MISR) and so much more. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, we would like to convey condolences to Esther and the children, his relatives, friends and the people of Uganda. I invite you to observe a minute of silence in his honour. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in relation to that, I am giving notice that on Friday, we shall have a special sitting because hon. Nsibambi is entitled to an official burial. Please be here so that we can accord him the necessary farewell. 

Let me thank the Members and committees for the work done during this session. There has been a lot of work and I will give the details during the State of the Nation Address. Thank you so much. 

I understand that hon. Janepher Nantume Egunyu is not ready to make her statement but she had written to me saying she wanted to make a statement. That is okay. 

Honourable members, we are going towards the fourth year of this Parliament and usually, there is heightened political activity and a lot of things that go on. I received a letter from the Chairman of the Electoral Commission issuing guidelines about campaigning and what constitutes campaigning during this period. I will be circulating the letter to the honourable members so that you can internalise it.

I also give notice that on Thursday, 6 June 2019, we shall have the State of the Nation Address, which will mark the beginning of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament. You are going to receive official invitations for that function. 

Honourable members, I also received a very serious petition from children who say that on Fridays, throughout the country, they demonstrate for the environment. They came and brought demands that they would like the Government to attend to. I would like to read them out and then I will pass on the petition to the ministries concerned and the Committee on Natural Resources. 

The demands include: 

    1. That Government declares a climate emergency and prioritises the protection of life on earth, taking active steps to achieve climate justice; 
    2. The national curriculum is reformed to address the ecological crisis as an educational priority; 
    3. Government communicates the severity of the ecological crisis and the necessity to act now to the general public; 
    4. Government recognises that young people are the biggest stake in our future by incorporating youth views into policy making and bringing the voting age down to 16 years; 
    5. They demand for the serious implementation of the ban on plastic bags; 
    6. That Government does follow the Paris Agreement so that we stay below the 1.5 degrees Celsius and focus on the aspect of equity and climate justice stated throughout the Paris Agreement because no manifesto can be more radical than that; unite us behind science. 

The movers were Aliyah Namugerwa (14 years), Bob Matovu, Hilda Nakabuye (Climate activist) and Shadrack Nirere (Climate activist). Honourable members, the children are demanding that we pay attention. 

Honourable members, the other matter, which I would like us to handle, probably in the Fourth Session, is the establishing of a panel of Speakers. I know that Members are concerned that we sit here for very many long hours. Many times, I have informed you that in this region, it is I and hon. Oulanyah who sit here for five hours and so on. Our colleagues take the first hour in the plenary and they hand over to four or five other deputies. Since 2005, we have tried to amend those rules but this was rejected. Hon. Ayume had requested that we have a Speaker’s panel but the Government came and fought it here and defeated us. It came up again sometime back and again it was defeated. 

I just want you to hear what my colleague from the Federal House of Australia wrote to us all: “The Speaker, like all Members, has many responsibilities to attend to outside of the Chamber during a sitting, so it is not practical for me to occupy the Chair continuously while the House is in session. I am supported and assisted by the elected Deputy Speaker and Second Deputy Speaker, who act as Speaker in my absence and relieve the Chair as Deputy Speaker whenever requested to do so.” 

Currently, they have 14 Members on the Speaker’s Panel who may also take the Chair as Deputy Speaker. Members of the Speaker’s Panel are appointed by warrants and they include Government and Opposition backbench Members. When in the Chair, they exercise similar procedural powers and functions to the Speaker. 

I would like us to look at all those failed attempts again so that we can synchronise the arrangements within the region. I think a formal proposal will be placed so that we can deal with it. 

There were a few issues of public concern. Hon. Emmanuel Ssempala Kigozi, please take two minutes.

3.19
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I start, I would like to request you to give me a little more time because this is a very crucial issue. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are just requesting the Government to act.

MR SSEMPALA KIGOZI: On Sunday 26 in the morning, we had very heavy rainfall, which killed eight people. Five of them were from one family - a wife, 16-year-old son and three grandchildren. In another incident, two people died - a mother and her child – and in another incident, one person died. All these deaths occurred when walls of houses fell down after the heavy rainfall. A lot of household property was also lost and destroyed beyond recognition. 

I would like to thank the Uganda Red Cross Society, who were very timely in providing tents for the homeless people and blankets for people who did not have anything to cover themselves. 

In my opinion, the problem emanates from the fact that the municipality has no physical plan. This means that 99 per cent of the buildings we have are not planned. This is a result of the fact that the area took long to be elevated to a town council and then to a municipality and for about 40 years, people were building in any way they wanted. We have –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR SSEMPALA KIGOZI: This incident happened in a catchment area for all the water from the neighbouring areas of Mutundwe, Ndejje, Lubowa, Bunamwaya and others. This therefore is a collection centre for the water from the area before it goes to Lake Victoria. We urgently need a physical development plan in place so that the authorities can guide the people on how to build and they leave the water channels and drainage. 

Secondly, we need a well-funded programme to drain all the water into Lake Victoria. This cannot be handled by the local authorities but it can be handled through either the Central Government or World Bank in order to get things moving.

Thirdly, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) used to get people to drain the channels along Entebbe Road in Lufuka, Zana and Namasuba. However, for the last six months, we have not seen them and all the culverts that were about two metres long have all been blocked. There is now no way the water can flow up to Lake Victoria; it gets blocked and floods houses.

We also request that an audit of the residents is carried out. This is because we have many big developments in the area; we want to see how those people got the plans to build in the water channels and we have this corrected.

Madam Speaker, we pray that the ministry takes it up seriously and very – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, I know that the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill was given the First Reading in this House; so partly, we have a role to play. The minister in charge of urban development is here; he may wish to say something about this issue.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I condole with the families that lost very many people in the downpour that caused the walls of the house where they lived to fall in; it is very sad. 

However, as you have said, the issue is not just about having a plan because even where we have plans, there are weaknesses in enforcement and implementation. I came to this House with amendments - hon. Ssempala is a member of the committee – and I am waiting for that amendment Bill to be brought for the second and third reading so that we can strengthen the enforcement of the physical plans nationwide. 

3.24
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also condole with the families where that tragedy befell. 

On another note, we are also to blame for some of these disasters because of the way we litter – throwing bottles and other things everywhere. I know people will ask, “Where is the law?” We do not have to wait for the law. It is as if we have turned Uganda into one big dustbin. 

When I was a backbencher, I remember you gave hon. Christopher Kibanzanga and I leave of Parliament to go and prepare an anti-litter Bill. When we joined Cabinet, we handed it over. The Ministry of Water and Environment is working on it but even as the ministry works on that Bill, we do not have to wait for the law; we should do our bit by not littering the environment. Otherwise, we shall also have a situation where the whole country will be chocked with garbage. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is not supposed to be for debate.

3.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to give my condolences to the bereaved people. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, particularly the department of physical planning and urban development, in spite of the fact that the law you need is still in the making, can you create a programme to interface with the local governments, particularly those in small towns. I am saying this because I know that the problem with our people here is that they pay attention to the big towns more than the small ones yet, as stated by my colleague here, the problem started from the town board level to the town council level before it reached municipality level. 

It is, therefore, better to deal with this problem at the infancy stage of urban development - sensitisation of the local people and training of the Local Councils I (LCs I). Make some small standards for them; for example, if you are building a house, how far should it be from the drainage channel? This is what we are trying to do in Obongi, only that sometimes people blame us and say that we are doing things wrongly. I tell people if they want a town, they do it now before they make mistakes. 

Madam Speaker, last year, we organised a study tour for 65 local government officials to Arusha to learn how towns should be before they become a town, so that they start planning early. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, the first meeting of the new session will be dedicated to legislation. I would like to invite Members to attend and even those who are not Members to go there and give their views so that we can have a rich Bill and end this issue of misapplication of our resources.

3.28
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 28 May 2019, the Daily Monitor newspaper reported that Government has cancelled the tender process for the construction of Atiak-Laropi Road. This has angered the entire region. The number of calls I have received cannot be easily summed up. The question is whether this is still speculation or it is a reality. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. The relevant ministry provides a comprehensive answer as it prepares to start the construction of the road.
    2. The ministry protects His Excellency the President. As he toured the region, he told us that the roadworks were about to start and then we saw cancellations the following day.
    3. The procurement authority does not look for potential bidders but real bidders who can do the work. “Potential” means possible bidders. 

This came after 11 days after the New Vision reported that Government has come up with a list of 20 new projects and this road was on top of the list. The Opposition tells us that this thing was just done like that in order to facilitate the movement of Iteso to the President. Now the Daily Monitor is trying to prove that the statement from the Opposition is correct. Those are the three prayers I have.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport is directed to come early in the fourth session to explain to us whether they have cancelled the tender process for Atiak-Laropi Road and when the road is going to start.

3.31
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 25 April 2019, the Ministry of Local Government placed an advert in the public media for bids to supply 2000 motorcycles for subcounties, town councils and some municipalities. It was an open bid advert. 

I have been petitioned by a number of local suppliers that this particular advert had “eyes” and was therefore discriminatory.  It required a bidder to at least have supplied two contracts, each of 500 motorcycles, at once. Members of Parliament here know very well how local governments work. Are they aware of any local government in Uganda that has ever procured 500 motorcycles at once? Secondly, it required a 10 year experience. 

The gist of this concern, and why Parliament has now become the last arbiter for these local bidders, is that the law requires them to petition the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) in case they are aggrieved. They actually petitioned PPDA and they were ignored. The Ministry of Local Government is going ahead to procure and this advert as it is has “eyes”. They are alleging that the ministry is targeting some briefcase company and is therefore edging them out technically.

The prayer here is to request Parliament to halt this procurement until clarification is given as to the nature of this bid, which is entirely anti-local content and therefore is supportive of capital flight by discriminating local suppliers. The minister should come here and explain this.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You remember that there were some former LC officials who missed their bicycles because they were swindled by some Government official. I remember you ordered the Minister of Local Government to ensure that when they are making the arrangement to bring transport facilities, they should ensure that those LC officials who missed get their bicycles. I saw the advert and that arrangement was not catered for.

Since hon. Mpuuga has brought it to the Floor, I request that the Ministry of Local Government is reminded to ensure that they make arrangements for the former LC officials to receive their bicycles. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very difficult situation because I do not know of any company that has a 10 year experience in supplying motorcycles in this country, not even 12 but 500 motorcycles. It is only the Government that can give such a tender. Has the Government bought those motorcycles in the last 10 years? No, it has not. Therefore, this means that the advert is targeting some foreign suppliers. 

This is our taxpayers’ money and Ugandans deserve an opportunity to participate in this contract. The minister is directed to halt the bidding process and come here early in the fourth session to explain to us how Ugandans will participate. In this country, we have said, “Buy Ugandan, Build Uganda”; if you are closing out the Ugandans, I think it is a very big problem.

3.36
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had a clarification to seek following your statement and I am so grateful that you raised it. I am happy that we passed the budget but I think we did not have enough time for everybody to enjoy the way we always do. 

It is unfortunate that our health sector is not good. I lost my best friend yesterday. She was returning to Mulago Hospital for check-up. She had been there and they discharged her yet we do not have services in Kanungu. When you look around, we have given money to supply electricity but our health centres are not connected to the power grid. Even some of our senior midwives use torches when our women are giving birth. 

It was unfortunate that this woman died but I think we need to look beyond that. Can we enforce rural electrification and supply electricity to all our health centres? I do not know how capable we are of putting scanning machines in every health centre III so that the challenges we have there are dealt with. Most women have developed fibroids and they do not know that they have fibroids because they cannot be checked in the villages. If we have scan machines there, we can diagnose better. The services are very far from the people and they are dying of small illnesses that should not be the cause of their death.

Madam Speaker, we are very happy to see you here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometime back I read a big advert by Umeme about free connections. I do not know whether they are for domestic users or they can be given to health centres also. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, Umeme ran that big advert and went into a crisis. What happened is that the demand surpassed the supply and they could not meet the demand. Even people who could afford to connect themselves could no longer get access to that service. Therefore, there is a very big crisis because of poor planning, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does it mean that power may not be available for our health centres?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Contrary to what the honourable member has raised, there is a campaign going on in all districts of northern Uganda and Umeme is telling every household to complete their wiring and earthing. For health centres and schools, they are telling the Government to do the necessary wiring and the earthing but I do not know whether the Government cannot do the minor work of wiring. However, the electricity distribution company is giving free services to the people of northern Uganda. 

I completed the wiring in my house one week ago and they came to my place and connected me for free. They are telling leaders to inform the people on the ground and they are moving, to the extent of wiring grass-thatched buildings. They said that as long as the wiring has been done fully, they are free to connect power to that grass-thatched house. Therefore, the process is going on very well in northern Uganda.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, from the two submissions that I have heard, it seems there is a bigger problem. We all know that the service providers in the energy sector are different. We have Umeme as the national service provider, while for places like West Nile, we have a private company called West Nile Rural Electrification Company Limited (WENRECo). 

This company is the worst thing that has ever happened to the people of West Nile. They were given a 20-year concession to generate, supply and sell electricity as a monopoly. However, for the last 15 years, the best they have done is to supply darkness. For this particular project in West Nile, which is World Bank-funded, they have kept it under the table just waiting for the contract to expire so that they resume their business of selling electricity poles at Shs 1.5 million each. 

As Parliament, we need to interest ourselves in this project. In order not to disenfranchise some people in his country, let us review this project and come up with a solution so that everybody benefits. Demand is surpassing the services available in some regions, while in Acholi sub region it is moving on well. We know the money is there and the poles are there but the service provider is not giving information to the consumers. I think there is something wrong that we need to address. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we would want the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to brief this House, first, on whether the power is available for the institutions; secondly, on this famous WENRECo. The debate on WENRECo has been on this Floor in each Parliament. The minister should come and update us about what WENRECo is doing to supply power to West Nile.

MAJ (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural question. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has ministers Irene Muloni, Simon D’Ujanga and Peter Lokeris. Madam Speaker, why don’t you link up with the Prime Minister to police these ministers so that at least at every sitting, there is a minister from every sector so that all these vital questions Members raise are answered instantly?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is sitting in for the Prime Minister. Is it hon. Okurut? The standing instruction of this House is that there must be somebody from each ministry here.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: I agree with you, Madam Speaker. Today, especially because of what has happened, some of them are not around; they are in a meeting. However, the point has been taken.

THE SPEAKER: Please, ensure that the ministers come to answer the issue of the free power for the institutions as well as WENRECo, which is a pain to the people of West Nile.

3.45
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning girl-child prostitution in western Uganda, specifically Mbarara, as quoted by today’s Daily Monitor.

Madam Speaker, prostitution is illegal, according to section 136 of the Penal Code Act. We have women nicknamed “aunties” in Mbarara who own between 10 to 20 young girls and they sell these girls through owners of bars and lodges at Shs 50,000 within Mbarara and Shs 100,000 outside Mbarara. 

Can the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development come up with an action plan to curb this vice as soon as possible before it spreads to other parts of the country and report back to this House? (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, for Members who are on social media, there is something trending – pictures and numbers of girls called “Sure”. They say that as long as you reach them, it is a sure deal if your pocket is “smiling”. It started trending on social media this week. They are on Facebook and WhatsApp.

Madam Speaker, they are beautiful by the way. (Laughter) Selling yourself does not take away your beauty. It is a very big concern. I would like to supplement my colleague’s concern that the minister in charge should investigate this matter. I will volunteer some of these forwarded WhatsApp information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all concerned about the fate of our children. Can the Minister of Internal Affairs report to us about allegations of child prostitution and the people who own them as soon as we commence? The minister should also check on “Sure” which is on Facebook, targeting customers.

3.48
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This is also a matter of procedure because I have raised this matter on the Floor of Parliament many times. I raised it in November when I had just come and in May 2018, hon. Kalemba also raised it but nothing has been done. This concerns the Kyaapa–Kasensero Road in Kakuuto Subcounty, Kyotera District.

As I speak now, the bridge is on the verge of collapsing. The water has flooded the entire road and children going to school cannot cross. Patients referred from Kasensero and part of Kyeebe Subcounty cannot go to Kakuuto Subcounty for medical care. Business is at a standstill and everything is on the verge of collapse.

I came here and the prayer at that time was that if Government is not considering the people of Kasensero-Kyeebe-Kakuuto, they should consider the offer that was given by His Excellency President Paul Kagame to tarmac that road. He had offered to work on that road but the Government refused. Up to now, the road is in a terrible state. People are paying taxes but they are not being considered. If you look at social media, they are abusing us and saying hon. Kalemba and I are not doing anything. 

I have come here several times. People pay taxes but patients are dying, children are not going to school, there is no business, and on top of the fishing problem in Kasensero now the road is a disaster.

Our prayer – This is the last time I am coming here on the Floor of Parliament to talk about Kyaapa-Kasensero road. We need action. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Works and Transport but I would like to confirm that the honourable member has repeatedly raised this matter. Works minister, please come in the First Sitting of the Fourth Session to explain the issue of Kasensero so that we can give comfort to the citizens.

3.51
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We welcome you back very warmly to the House and to the Chair of the Speaker. (Applause)

I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. On 12 March 2019, this august House, amidst very intense debate, approved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve $379.71 million as promissory notes to Finasi/Roko Construction SPV. As you might know, this project has been delayed for a long time. 

I would like to inform the House that the East and South African Trade Development Bank released $87 million on 16 May 2019. To date, Stanbic Bank has only received $50 million of the $87 million. The curious question you would want to ask is: Before work has begun, where has the $37 million gone?

This is a call to this House not to only carry out oversight post-squandering of money. I would like to state the prayers here. This Parliament required a strict schedule of disbursement of this money. Can we request the Minister of Health, who is responsible for this project, to provide this Parliament with a strict breakdown of signatories and disbursement of this money?

Secondly, the committee did not get the opportunity to interface with the direct implementers of the project, that is, Finasi International and Roko Construction. This House should cause the two contractors to appear before the relevant committees in order to provide the committees with clarity on management of these funds before we lose and it becomes like another Katosi project.

The other prayer is in relation to the resolution of this House that Engineer Wakabi was not the rightful person with the best disposition to be the project engineer or the owner’s engineer. As of 16 May, Engineer Wakabi was still communicating to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as the owner’s engineer. 

Would the Ministry of Health, therefore, clarify to this House what happened to the directives of this House that Engineer Wakabi must be dropped from being the owners engineer of this project? These are pertinent issues in relation to a lot of money that this House approved, amidst acrimonious debate, for us to give promissory notes. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: Honourable colleagues, this is a very serious issue. If these allegations are true, I am beginning to get a bit worried. 

Is it not possible for us as Parliament, for instance the committee on National Economy, to interact with these concerned people like the Italian, Roko and the other contractor? Is it not possible? I would like to suggest that Parliament also gets interested in this, through our Committee on National Economy, and we interact with them as well, so that they come up with some sort of report upon which we can conduct debate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know our work is not just on budgeting but we are supposed to be monitoring those sectors. Even on our own, we can cause a meeting. Who is going to supervise that? I think it will be the Committee on Health because the Committee on National Economy handed over when the resolution was made by this House. So, can we ask the Committee on Health to actually invite those people.

I also heard that they did not come to defend the proposal here. Can we ask the Committee on Health to invite them so that they give us an update at the earliest opportunity and also have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development give us the timelines for the action plans.  

Honourable members, join me in welcoming guests of the President. They are here from the United States of America and have come to observe our proceedings. I have not been told which state they come from. We have:

    1. Mr Barry Lenhardt
    2. Mr Leland Hershey
    3. Mr Reuben Egolf
    4. Mr Everett Hershey
    5. Mr Dave Rowdan

You are welcome. Thank you very much. (Applause)

3.58
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 26 February this year, I raised a matter of national importance regarding the fraud by Bayport and Platinum, which concerns civil servants of Agago District and many other districts.

However, the concern I raised was mainly about civil servants of Agago and Pader who had approached me and Madam Speaker, you ruled wisely that the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance) comes and explains the following week. It was a Tuesday and you ruled that he should come the following week and explain to this House and to Uganda why Bayport is defrauding Ugandans, especially civil servants, of their money. Bayport is actually robbing civil servants.

As I speak, the minister has not reported to this House; from February. The worst part is that those civil servants have repeatedly complained. Some of them are in Kampala walking and sleeping on the streets because they are following up this matter with Bayport. They have not recovered their money and yet the deductions continue every now and then. Imagine someone wakes up in the morning and money is deducted from his or her account. When you ask why, you are told you applied for a loan and when you ask how many months the loan is, they will tell you, “60 months”. 

Madam Speaker, from 2011 to date, some people’s accounts are still being deducted. This is a very serious matter –(Interruption)– hon. Silas Aogon, what is it?

MR AOGON: Thank you, for giving way. This is a very serious matter. Madam Speaker, I am a victim. Platinum gave me a loan when I was still a civil servant in the local government. After deducting what I thought was enough for them, these people continued to deduct my money. Recently, when I was already in Parliament, they called me again and said that I had not completed my loan. I said, “Why don’t you come and we meet?” I wanted to grab the person so that they get their lawyers and I also get mine and we see how to sort out this matter. (Laughter) That is the information I wanted to give.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. This is a very serious matter, which must be addressed as it cuts across the country. I will give you an example of some of these cases, which have happened to civil servants in Agago. For instance, Mr Geoffrey Olweny who is an askari of Patongo Health Centre III found money on his account in 2011. Thereafter, they started deducting money from his account. They stated, “You borrowed this loan and it is repayable after 60 months”. Six months is five years but imagine that from 2011 up to 2019 is nine years and the deductions have not stopped. He went to the Bayport office but they are not giving him an answer. This matter does not only concern Mr Olweny; there are quite a number of people like him. 

When this matter is raised, the minister does not come with any response. We are worried. Where should Ugandans go for assistance? Their hands are tied and their money is now tied up in loans and yet these are poor civil servants. Some of them have not solicited for these loans but they found money deposited on their accounts. You then wonder how they get details of your particulars. That means it is a racket from the human resource offices up to these institutions. I also suspect the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because this issue should have been dealt with a long time ago.

I move that action be taken. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We direct the Prime Minister to cause two things: first, the attendance of that minister in this House. He should come. The second one is to respond to this long standing issue. It was raised in February and we are going into June. Has he responded to this issue?

4.03
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker, indeed it is a very serious issue and it has taken time. Action is going to be taken and that mafia must be cracked. I can assure you.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to help my sister, hon. Franca Akello and the House because this is a grave issue. A lot of money in trillions - almost all civil servants, including our teachers and people who are working for private companies, have been conned. Therefore, for us to just leave it to the ministry or the Prime Minister would not yield the results we want.

My proposal is that we set up a select committee where victims will come and testify; we compile a report and discuss this matter conclusively. (Applause) We have monies to recover from these companies and therefore, it is important that this House establishes a select committee that will listen to people and come up with a clear and workable way forward. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give my ruling. Sometimes, I feel sorry for Ugandans. You know, a few years ago there was Team and Dutch who took people’s money and nothing has happened to them. It was a lot of money - from Jinja up to Karamoja. Now Bayport is back. I will give my ruling on this.

4.05
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Sunday, I visited Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. I had gone to see a patient and what I saw in the emergency and casualty wards proved to me that the hospital is in a sorry state. It has no mattresses and people who are in coma are treated on wooden beds. I asked the administration why they cannot allow people to bring their mattresses if they do not have any and they said, they cannot allow mattresses in the hospital. You would be lucky if your patient survives from the casualty ward. People bleed all over the place. 

My prayer to the Ministry of Health is, you need to quickly visit the hospital and look at the situation because it is terrible.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is actually here. 

MR ABALA: This problem is not only in Mbarara; it is also in districts like Ngora, Mbale, Arua, Soroti – everywhere. That means that the ministry must come here with a comprehensive report and a plan to address this matter because it is very serious and our people are dying.

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my brother is that when you talk about referral hospitals, at Mulago Heart Institute you will cry. We have people –(Interjections)– even the Uganda Cancer Institute, but I am talking about Mulago because I have a patient who is looking for help. 

They cannot operate on the girl of seven years because there are no beds. The Intensive Care Unit (ICU) is occupied and they only have two beds and they have to wait for a patient to recover before they operate on another. They also give it a week or three weeks until that person recovers.

Madam Speaker, it is really hurting. I was told by the doctors that sometimes the number is so big that even some die before they are given that treatment.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Health is here. I do not know what undertaking she can make in that regard.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, we have 14 regional referral hospitals as we speak. I have visited Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, not once, but what I would like to state is that the challenge we have with Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital is that most of the people are shunning the lower health facilities and moving to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. If one moved to the maternity ward, they will wonder what is going on. 

However, that aside, we presented to this Parliament the state of the health sector in this country. We gave Parliament that report showing the gaps that exist. In some of the regional referral hospitals like Soroti, we have not had major infrastructural improvements at all. For the others, we have been able to increase the capacity and infrastructural developments have been done. Therefore, for Soroti, it is a regional referral Hospital but with limited infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, we gave that report to this House and even Mulago Hospital that my sister is talking about, the Uganda Heart Institute used to have a whole floor but they cannot now operate because the repairs at the Mulago Specialised Hospital had stalled.

However, in the supplementary that Parliament passed recently, we were given Shs 20 billion out of the Shs 37 billion that we need. We hope that with this money, the contractor will be engaged to complete the work at Mulago so that by June or July hopefully, the facility is complete and handed over. Of course the Uganda Heart Institute will then operate and equally, the Uganda Cancer Institute will use some of those wards.

Therefore, we are working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to address the challenges within the regional referral hospitals and other general hospitals. That is what I can state.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I confirm that the minister gave Parliament an update on the state of health in the country. What we would like to ask the Committee on Health is to monitor whether supplementary funding has been sent to the ministry and carryout oversight and report back. Thank you.

4.11
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, the people of Tororo woke up to a fire that gutted the market and a lot of traders’ merchandise was destroyed.  Many of these traders have been surviving on loans. The situation is so pathetic that many families are going to be affected by this situation.

My prayer is that just like Government has supported other areas that have had their markets burnt down like Jinja among others, we also call upon the Government to come to the rescue of the people of Tororo through the disaster ministry. We also call upon Government to look at what can be done to get these families and traders back into business before it becomes very bad to them.

Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence; I have another issue I would like to raise. A few weeks ago, while you presided over the House, we raised an issue concerning a team that travelled from Uganda to London about issues in Tororo. We have been asking the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to bring a report to this House about the conflict between Tororo County and West Budama but he has not come up with it. 

The minister assured us that she had presented the report to the President. Madam Speaker, I also remember that you ruled that we should not continue discussing this issue until the report has been brought to Parliament. Unfortunately, I had an opportunity the day before yesterday to meet the President on other issues. The first thing he asked about was the report. He emphasised the question on the report of the team that went to London. 

I told the President that as far as we are concerned, the report had been presented to him by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We added that she had even reported to the House that the President had received the report. The President went ahead to ask how many people travelled to London.

We should find out from the minister whether her report was received by State House or she gave it directly to the President. The President said that this is a very urgent issue that should have reached him and been concluded.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to state that while you were away, Cabinet handled the issue of a new district that is to be created, which is Terego District. Terego District should have come with Tororo but if the minister has not handed over the report, we might continue to see more discomfort in Tororo yet we have had to keep the situation calm as we wait - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development to confirm whether he delivered the report?

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information that has just come to this House is good feedback because the system of delivery of mail to State House has its own road network. (Laughter)

Therefore, we are going to take up this matter and if need be resubmit the report through the system. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please understand that time is of essence. The issue of Tororo has been in this House since the Seventh Parliament. How long shall we continue keeping the people of Tororo in suspense?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the report is ready. It was handed to the President through the system. We have now got feedback that maybe the President is yet to see the report. We are going to follow up and we shall inform this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we direct that in the next Cabinet meeting, you carry a copy by yourself?

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES TO THE PETITION OF TOBACCO FARMERS FROM KAKUMIRO DISTRICT

4.11
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Trade) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that a comprehensive report is yet to be presented in two weeks. I would like to further inform the august House that the payments have commenced in Bunyoro and the technical team or officials from the ministry right now in the field and in two weeks, we will be bringing a comprehensive report as regards to the payments that have commenced.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why is it that each time the tobacco farmers are to be paid they must first come to this House and petition? Why can’t these companies pay? Every financial year, their MPs come here. Who is supervising these companies?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, some of the companies have been blacklisted and the permits have been denied to some of them because of perennial non-payment but there are new ones that have come on board and are now working with farmers closely. Therefore, I believe that when we bring the comprehensive report we will be able to give concrete answers to this issue.

MR MUHEIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from a tobacco growing area. I have come to confirm that whereas the minister says that they have blacklisted some companies, over the years, it is the same directors and same addresses that are used for the old companies that they claim to have blacklisted and the new ones.

You will find that it is the same company, which defrauded the farmers last season, but has changed names; the directors, address, staff members and the method of the work including the technology used for example the species of tobacco, the type of fertilisers are completely the same.

Honourable minister, I pray that you pronounce yourself and tell us who exactly is continuing to defraud Ugandans within your ministry because it is a racket. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you have noted minister?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, as I said, we will bring out all these issues in the report and pronounce ourselves. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TO THE PETITION ON THE FRAUDULENT TAKEOVER OF MARKET LAND IN RWAMUCUCU SUBCOUNTY, RUKIGA COUNTY, RUKIGA DISTRICT

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Urban Development) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, it is true that this petition was presented before the House. We have had an examination and found that there are legal issues in it and we have enlisted the input of the Attorney-General to ensure that they are addressed and we shall report to this House, thank you.

4.27
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the Rukiga people in this petition on the fraudulent takeover of the market. Under rule 30 (7) of the Rules of Procedure, the minister in sub rule (6) shall report back to Parliament within a stated time.

This petition was urgently referred to the minister to report back to Parliament in two weeks and it was given priority because of budget time due to the clashes which were about to cause bloodshed between the people of Rukiga who are in that wangle.

The minister has not given a report - he has not given it time and we expect him, by this rule, to give us the fact why he is referring the matter to the Attorney-General - which can be right - and he was directed to go on the locus to investigate the matter on the ground and find out the real fact. It is not fair to just take it causally when people are about kill each other. 

My prayer is that if the minister can be serious to bring a report - it is may be your decision or theirs to refer to the Attorney-General when the facts are spelt out for the people of Rukiga to understand because some of them are in the parliamentary gallery. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we have taken this matter seriously but the petition arose out of the dispute between land that is claimed by both a sub county and some individuals. The chief magistrate entered a judgement in favour of one party and subsequent thereto, was an appeal in the High Court. While the matter was in the High Court, a decree was given by the High Court that a certain amount of money be awarded to one of the parties.

Madam Speaker, the issue is not the ownership of the land exclusive of the legal issues that were raised both in the Magistrate’s court and in the High Court. That is why we referred this matter to the Attorney-General for their input. We shall report as soon as the Attorney-General gives us their input. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the impact of your research on the budget? Was there intention to provide money for the market?

MR KABAFUNZAKI: The fact is that bloodshed was about to be caused and the urgency was to calm down the situation. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was supposed to go on locus to investigate the matter and bring out the fraudulent issues, which were legal. The land itself does not belong to any party; it belongs to the district but the fight is between wrong parties.

The attachment made was erroneous and automatically, the land in question is not in issue. The people of Rukiga want their land so, the minister was to leave the people who are in wrangles to sort out their legal wrangles but handover the market to the rightful owners who are the people of Rukiga because it is not in any way connected to the issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under the Constitution, the principal legal advisor of Government is the Attorney-General; let us give him an opportunity to give us a position on this matter, which will allow the people of Rukiga to either get their market or give it to the other people. However, we would like to ask that you put in time so that we can have it before 13th June; the Attorney-General is here in Kampala.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE INADEQUATE LOCAL CONTENT IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS WITH GOVERNMENT AWARDING 30 PER CENT TO FOREIGN COMPANIES AT THE EXCLUSION OF LOCAL COMPANIES (THE CASE OF 23KM BUSEGA-MPIGI ROAD PROJECT AWARDED TO CHINA CIVIL ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION AND CHINA RAILWAY 19TH BUREAU GROUP)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is not yet here; let us defer it.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT ON THE SURVEY OF LAND AND PLANTING OF MARKSTONES BY STAFF FROM AMITA PRISON IN ABIM DISTRICT EXTENDING UP TO 2KM INTO AGAGO DISTRICT

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, our investigation revealed that the survey was done by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They are staff of the Uganda Prisons Service. 

We have taken interest as the people nationally in charge of the survey and we have ordered an appropriate survey and we shall inform this House as soon as the report is available.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for attempting to respond – (Laughter) – it was an attempt because I expected a response in writing.

However, indeed the minister is right because when this matter was raised, I stated clearly that the Prisons staff were the ones cited in this survey. I expected this matter to be responded to by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Therefore, we can wait because this is a serious matter where you wake up in the morning and the communities see activities two kilometres deep inside their land from the border. It is quite alarming. People got so concerned; they are waiting up to now although informally we are told that the prisons officers communicated that it was erroneously done. 

Until this is done formally by way of communicating to Parliament so that Government and Ugandans who live in Agago, in that parish of Lagwa, get assurance that it was erroneously done, we will still definitely imagine it was an illegal activity, which has some bad intentions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe this matter touches on two ministries but the answer given by the minister seems to imply that the Prisons officers were working as Government agents. Was that the position?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, they were on their own. The surveying of land of the Government is a responsibility of our ministry and not the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us what action he has taken against the people who acted outside their jurisdiction.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON CONDUCTING ELECTIONS IN NEWLY CREATED DISTRICTS, THE DELAYED RESPONSE ON THE OUTSTANDING CONTESTED BORDER BETWEEN YUMBE AND ARUA DISTRICT AT EWANGA AND THE DELAYED OPERATIONALISATION OF NEW SUBCOUNTIES AND TOWN COUNCILS

THE SPEAKER: The minister and his deputy are not here. Has anyone been assigned to respond on their behalf? (Interjection) No? Honourable members, I wish Government could solve the issue of the new districts. The number of petitions I am getting and delegations is too much for me - Kikuube, Kassanda, Bugweri, Nabilatuk and so on.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, I am the Member of Parliament representing Buhaguzi in Kikuube District. Kikuube has a unique challenge that whereas other districts do not have substantive leadership, we do not even have an interim government. Currently, we cannot get services of a district service commission without a minute from the council. We have had no council for a year. 

Therefore, we should find a way of having the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs make sure that we at least have an interim government. The Electoral Commission tells us the interim period has expired. We are waiting for money to put in place substantive leadership.

What are we doing as Parliament to hold these people accountable and make sure elections are conducted in those districts? Otherwise, we are just sending money but there is no leadership. We cannot even borrow a grader without a minute of the council. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is why the members for Kassanda had come to request whether the minister, in the absence of their council, can allow them borrow machinery from the Central Government to go and work in their district. It is really bad that there is no one to answer.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, there are very many pertinent matters on this Order Paper that needed serious attention from the front bench. At the same time, majority of them are not here. Even the ones who are here show signs that they were not sent to represent those who are absent. I know the best item we are going for is No.7. I suggest that when we are opening the first sitting of the next session, those very pertinent issues be put on the “front line”.

I would love to find out whether it is not procedurally proper for us to drive ourselves to No.7 on the Order Paper – prorogation – so that we give people chance to go and reorganise. There are Members who are travelling to Mbale. Actually, nearly all the Public Accounts committees are moving to Mbale. There is a meeting.

The Rt Hon. Speaker also needs to have adequate time to rest. This is just her first time to resume work. Isn’t it right that we proceed in that manner?

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone in Government who can tell us what is going to happen to the newly created districts and town councils? When you go for a wedding, the chairperson stands to say, “Madam Speaker, our town council has not been operationalised.” We have no answers.

4.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not see the Minister for Local Government. These ministers are either two or three and some are even five. The Local Government is a big problem to all of us. We are asked all the time; the moment you are in the communities, the first thing they ask is, “What is the delay? You are not here to give us the answers.”

Please ministers, wherever you are, if you are here to serve – at least my shadow ministers are here. How many ministers do we have? They are about 80 but we have 30 Shadow Ministers – (Interjections) – at least they are here. If you compare the number, ours is bigger than yours in terms of percentage.

It is the ministers that should answer a lot of questions that are raised. Unless you want to tell me that you and your people are comfortable. 

There are very many issues that came here and the ministers are not there to answer them. The Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development also attempted to answer some issues but he could not give us satisfactory answers. Honourable ministers, who are here, please tell your colleagues that they are doing a disservice to the country. Thank you. 

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I think as Government, we will have to put our house in order. When we create these administrative units (the town councils and the municipalities), they come to Parliament with a Certificate Of Financial Implications. 

However, at the end of the day, after they have been created, the competing needs in our budget demand that money is put elsewhere and not where we have agreed to put it entirely. The main reason these have not been operationalised is money; there is no other reason.

We are hoping that in this coming financial year, we will be able to operationalise majority of them. It is a question of putting our House in order and coordinating our activities. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the chairperson of the Committee on Budget if we appropriated money for the new districts and subcounties? 

4.40
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Budget Committee but before I comment on that, I think what hon. Musumba said is very important to Government.

The moment the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issues a Certificate of Financial Implication and Parliament pronounces itself on that, it means Government is able and has the money. There is no excuse; unless the Certificate of Financial Implication is not issued or it is wrong. The essence is that whatever you bring here and Parliament has taken a decision, the Government is able. 

Therefore, it is incumbent upon Government to tell us what it wants. According to the Committee on Budget, the money was an unfunded priority. We did not give it money. You are in Government but you are saying it is an unfunded priority. I am a member of the Committee on Budget but we did not give it money. Please help us and organise yourself. What Members are talking about – it is you people –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Hon. Kakooza, thank you for giving me way.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, it now becomes a game for all of us. The information I would like to give is in regards to what hon. James Kakooza already commented on. We established these administrative units and they were supposed to have been operational a long time ago but it did not take place. 

I looked at the figures. I also realised that we did not appropriate for these new administrative units, in terms of allocating resources for the elections to take place. First of all, we should question the line ministry as to why they did not give it a priority, in terms of their policy statements to Parliament to say new districts were a must have so that we could have cut resources from other items to halt elections.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament and as a country, besides those districts that you already passed, we are talking about the different administrative units. I think it is high time that the Ministry of Local Government came to this Floor, gave us time and updated us on all the local administrative units that are supposed to take place, including the cities. 

As the people of Teso, with thousands of people coming from the 12 districts, you cannot talk about cities in Uganda without talking about the historical municipalities of Uganda like Soroti. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member that is now speculation. Those matters are not before this House. Let us deal with what we created; the districts. People have had primaries and there are no elections. We are talking to ourselves because the ministers are not here. 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Local Government to consider that Parliament is busy and it is representative of all people of Uganda. Let them lay on Table all the administrative units; all the villages and parishes we passed, pending districts and cities. We want to debate those issues once and then we can now tell which area did not qualify for a particular issue, especially the “hot issue” on cities.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the cities has not come to this House. We are speculating. I wish we could find a solution to what we have created. There are people who have done primaries and have not had elections. They are suffering there with the population. There are districts where we are sending money but there is no Government. They do not have a Committee on Public Accounts or a District Service Commission. It is a terrible thing, honourable members. 

4.45
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kwania is among the new districts that were created last year on 1 July 2018. I would also like to inform the House that there are supposed to be more new districts created from 1 July 2019 - about six of them.

This Parliament has spoken to Government several times to provide funds for election of leaders in the new districts. You, yourself here, have always directed. I would like somebody from the Budget Committee to comment on when we requested them to provide about Shs 3 billion for elections in the new district in their supplementary appropriation. I do not know why, after the Budget committee sat, the report that came out had left out provision of funds for elections in the new districts. We would like Government to tell us why it was so because that is where the problem is. 

Government must come out clearly and tell us if they do not want to conduct elections in the new districts so that they give guidelines on how the new districts should operate because there is too much speculation. People in these new districts are fighting to put up a District Service Commission and draw up a budget because they do not trust the interim Government. This is causing a lot of problems, yet we are sending money there. 

Therefore, I think Government must only be very clear and say that elections are not going to take place. If they are not going to take place, they should come up with guidelines on how the new districts should operate. This will enable us put things to rest, other than making those people speculate and putting us on pressure here; wherever you go, everybody is demanding for that. I think Government must be clear on this. 

Are we still going to hold elections for the upcoming new districts? However, for the case of lower local governments, it was the Ministry of Local Government that moved to create those new subcounties without the consent of Parliament. They only brought it here and we approved it but we did not demand for that. We can only agree on the districts. They are the same group that brought the new subcounties but they are the ones saying that there is no money. 

I think that the statement made by the minister is very wrong and misleading. The minister should come with a better statement on these issues of elections in new districts and local governments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is now becoming a big debate. Unfortunately, we are talking to ourselves. 

4.48
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a biting issue. Every time you send us to meet our community members, it is raised and we have limited responses.

I am concerned about what the minister said; that one of the prerequisites is to have a Certificate of Financial Implication. However, what I have heard from the corridors, which I would like to request the minister to prove, is that the Ministry for Local Government did not provide all the certificates of financial implication for processing these new units. Therefore, many of the new units created were not provided for and this was discussed at higher levels. I therefore request the minister to tell us the truth so that we know how to handle it.

Madam Speaker, as we sit here, the creation of new units, including subcounties, is ongoing. Therefore, I request the Ministry of Local Government to work with other ministries, including Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, so that if we do not have the money to create more units, our local governments can be advised not to initiate these processes. However, as we talk, the processes are ongoing and some have been submitted to the Ministry of Local Government but there are no responses.

Madam Speaker, the public looks at Parliament as an avenue to solve major issues like this but we normally get to know about these processes at the tail end. I would like to request the Ministry of Local Government to always inform this House so that when we get to our districts – 

Last week when I was in Adjumani District, people were asking me how far the Ministry of Local Government has gone. Unfortunately, Parliament is not aware about the processes initiated and the submissions received by the Ministry of Local Government. I pray that the Ministry of Local Government should always brief Parliament about the creation of new units, whether districts, subcounties or town councils. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes I also get confronted; people tell me, “We sent a letter to the ministry of so and so”, but they do not copy me in. I do not know whether that is in the Act, but they go straight and later demand from me what happened to their letter.

4.51
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues, which are very critical:

One, there is a contradiction between what the minister said and what my brother, hon. James Kakooza, said. The minister said that the Government is going to operationalise some administration units and leave out others, if I understood him properly. Hon. James Kakooza said that there was nothing in the budget. This is where the dilemma is. I would like the minister to come out clearly so that it does not go on the record that he gives wrong information to the public.

Secondly, when we say that a certificate of financial implication was issued, unless this certificate was forged, it is a bit challenging to know. That time, the ministry clearly said that they had the ability to operationalise all the administration units but they are now saying that there is no money. 

Thirdly, I would like to understand what they mean when they say, “unfunded priority”. How does something that is unfunded become a priority if you planned very well? I thank you. 

4.52
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, we have come to this because of inadequate responses to the many questions raised on the Floor of the House. The Order Paper has a lot of petitions and issues. Members have raised concerns about land but they have not received adequate answers. Why? It is because the ministers responsible are not here and those who are here have no questions to answer. (Laughter) 

I would like to propose that when citizens of this country have made petitions, after having travelled long distances and these concerns are raised in this House, the sectors responsible should be commanded to come and give their responses. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is not within your power to direct that if an issue appears on the Order Paper and it concerns your ministry, please appear here and give responses to this House and Ugandans; otherwise, we shall be seen as a joking matter. How can important issues be raised and we do not give proper answers and tomorrow, we come back again with the same petitions? It cannot go on like this. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore your high office, maybe through the Clerk, to direct that when important questions are raised and they are on the Order Paper, the sectors responsible should be here to give the answers. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to think that all the questions raised are important; otherwise we would not be giving them time. However, I must express my disappointment because we have asked these questions many times. Can we look at the Appropriation Act, when it is completed, so that we know who got money and who did not and which districts or subcounties to deal with?

4.55
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, before we come to that, the laws we pass here are very important. You were in that Chair when we passed the Budget Act in 2003 and said that any certificate given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a guarantee that they are able to implement the decision that Parliament has taken. We went into the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and said that for resources to be spent, there must be an investment plan and work plan within that ministry. This is in section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act. 

It is on this basis that Government and Parliament appropriates money. A certificate of financial implications cannot be given and then you say that you are not able. That means you do not know what you are doing. Maybe there is a different agenda, which we cannot understand as Parliament because the moment you give it, it means you are able to implement that decision.

I wanted to make it clear that Parliament passed that decision into law and Government assured us that the moment they give that certificate, they are sure to implement the decision that Parliament has taken. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that it has come to this. To be honest, I think we have brought ourselves to this because when we had the opportunity to hold Government accountable, we let it be. When we were handling the budget, these are the questions we should have raised and probably even withheld the budget and said, “This is what you have planned but we do not see it in the budget”. 

Going forward, this will help us because referring to what one honourable colleague has said, ministers are given deadlines to come and respond to questions and bring reports to this House. However, those times arrive and nobody comes and it is not even on the Order Paper. If a Member does not remember to raise it, it just passes. It has become a culture here. They know we make noise and nothing is done.

May I request that we realise the power that we have. On that note, may I ask that this House resolves that we do not handle Government business until they have responded to this adequately?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to direct the Clerk to examine all the questions that are outstanding, count the number of days they have been outstanding to help us write to each minister indicating the number of days by which they are late and we see whether they will not come to the House. (Applause) Clerk, those letters should be ready before the State-of-the-Nation Address. Each minister should get the update on their performance on answering questions before we start the next session.

4.59
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, you have done your best, the Members have done their best and so have the ministers that are present. I think for now I might not be wrong to move a motion, without notice, that we go to the very last item on the Order Paper, which is Prorogation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Nsubuga is not here and I also see hon. Luttamaguzi is not here. 

MR AOGON: No, Madam Speaker, it is item No.7, which is prorogation.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, when we assembled this afternoon, I informed you that we have lost a very senior person in the country and we shall have to have a special sitting. So if we prorogue the House today, there will be no session in which that sitting is held. We shall therefore prorogue on Friday after the special sitting.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO GIVE THANKS TO GOD FOR THE HEALTH OF THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT, REBECCA ALITWALA KADAGA

5.01
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for allowing us to move our motion. This motion is moved under rules 55, 59 and 62 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS in the month of March 2019 Parliament received disconcerting information regarding the state of the health of the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, to the effect that the Rt Hon. Speaker had been taken ill soon after her return from international engagements on behalf of Parliament;

AWARE THAT Parliament learnt afterwards that the Rt Hon. Speaker was subsequently admitted to Nakasero Hospital and later relocated to the Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi, Kenya;

MINDFUL THAT the office of the Speaker, as head of one of the three arms of Government, stands peerless in providing leadership over the institution of Parliament which undergirds Uganda's democracy;

FURTHER MINDFUL THAT a threat to the health of those entrusted as watchmen over our democracy is invariably a threat on the very core of the security of our democracy;

APPRECIATIING THAT above all else, only the awesome grace of God can account for the recovery of the Rt Hon. Speaker of this Parliament to full health within such a short span of time;

APPRECIATING FURTHER THAT it is biblically commanded of all living things to give thanks to God in all things at all times;

RECALLING THAT on numerous occasions, Parliament has doubtlessly benefitted from having the person of the Rt Hon. Speaker at the helm of its leadership in ways that only the Rt Hon. Speaker could provide;

RECAILING FURTHER THAT in the leadership of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Parliament has waded through turbulent times with valour and resilience;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    1. This august House collectively gives thanks to the Almighty God for the return to health of hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Rt Hon. Speaker of this House;
    2. In unison, we all do henceforth commit the wellbeing of the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, honourable members and staff of Parliament in the sovereign hands of the Almighty God; and
    3. In compliance with the biblical command in Luke l7:15 and Philippians 4:6-7, Parliament shall, at an appropriate time, hold a thanksgiving prayer to give thanks to God for restoring the health of hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Oaky, it is seconded. Please give your justification. 

Before we do that, I have just received a letter from the Ministry of Local Government requesting the Minister of Works and Transport to avail equipment to Kassanda District. They are not here but now he has written. The Members from Kassanda should get these copies and proceed.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to refer all of us to the Book of 2 Kings 20:1-11, but specifically, I would like to read from verse 3. This is about King Hezekiah who fell sick. He was ill and could not do any business and was about to die, and the prophet went to him with a message from God that said that he was surely going to die. The king responded in verse 3: “Remember now, O Lord, I beseech You, how I have walked before You in truth and with a loyal heart, and have done what was good in Your sight.” Verse 4 and 5 say, “Before Isaiah had gone out into the middle court, the word of the Lord came to him, saying, “Return and say to Hezekiah…” - In this case, return and say to Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala – “…the leader of my people, thus says the Lord, the God of your father David: “I have heard your prayer and I have seen your tears. Behold, I will heal you. On the third day, you shall go to the house of the Lord. I will add fifteen years to your life.”

Madam Speaker, people are dying in Uganda every day. If you read the report by the World Health Organisation, every second, someone dies. That means about 60 million people die every year worldwide. When we received information about your sickness, Madam Speaker, it was shocking. In all the corridors of this House, people were not strong. People had lost hope. People were wondering what would happen to our Speaker. 

That is why people were praying everywhere in this country; in the mosques, churches and synagogues. People prayed when the Speaker was in Nakasero Hospital and Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi.

When that sickness attacked you, people came together in solidarity and prayed. Some people fasted. When God has done something wonderful, it would be bad manners for us to keep quiet and not thank God for what he has done to you and this House as well as this country because the heart of democracy is actually this House. We welcome you back and we would like to say that the powerful God should continue blessing you.

The other thing that was threatening us was that there were all forms of reports – positive and negative – on social media regarding the life of the Speaker. We said the only thing was to go for “kneeology” - kneeling down and praying so that God could help us. Many people prayed, including the people of Ngora. Whenever I went to Ngora every weekend, they would ask: How is the Speaker of Parliament?” Now that the Speaker has come back, I am energised and happy that the God who took you there has brought you back. We must thank him for his goodness to all of us.

Allow me to read the last verse before I ask my colleague to come in and share with the whole House. Psalms 107(1) says: “Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good; his love endures forever.” 

1 Thessalonians 5:18 says: “Give thanks in all circumstances” – including sickness – “for this is God’s will for you in Christ.” Madam Speaker, it is God’s will that you have come back. God wants you to be here and available to serve this country.

I would like to conclude by reading Luke 17:15, which talks about Jesus healing 10 lepers but only one leper went back to Jesus and thanked him. The other nine, who did not go back to him, got back their leprosy. For you, Madam Speaker, the mere fact that you thanked God, Luke 17:15 says: “One of them, when he saw he was healed, came back, praising God in a loud voice.” 

That is basically my appeal to you and this House – in our third prayer – that we should organise a thanksgiving, not only for you but for the entire Parliament because it is good manners. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Ogwal, I did not announce Members who were not able to attend Parliament today because I have not yet got the full list of those who are sick. However, I would like to inform you that hon. Ogwang was involved in an accident. He is okay but it was close – a trailer nearly finished him. He is under observation.

5.13
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing us to move this motion. I thank the Members who have managed to be in the House to be part of this discussion. The motion is about thanksgiving and I think it is appropriate that we do as the Bible commands of us that in all circumstances, we must give thanks to God.

The Bible tells us that everything happens for the good of those who trust in the Lord. I think that touching the health of the Speaker at a time like this woke Parliament up. I must thank God that every Member of Parliament across the political divide was concerned about the health of the Speaker. I watched some of the Members in tears, saying: “I hope the worst will not come out of this.”

Madam Speaker, you are dear to Members and staff of Parliament and you are dear to the people of Uganda. As the Bible says; “touch not the apple of my eye”, touching the health of the Speaker was like touching the apple of our eyes – we the Members of this House and the people of Uganda. I am not only going to thank God but I think we also need to thank Members and staff of Parliament for this solidarity. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, as I said, everything happens for a reason. You said earlier on that after all these things happened, you have also looked around and found that in many Parliaments, there are other members in the Speaker’s Bench and it is important that we reflect on the importance of having additional people to help the workload of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

All of us have to balance between being a workaholic as a result of the pressures of politics as well as the social pressures. We need to balance between work and our health because, once we lose our health, all this important work driving us members of Parliament crazy will not be done. 

Therefore, it is important that we look at ourselves and say: “Yes, we should give dedicated service but reflecting on our individual health does not mean we are compromising on that.” That is why, as Parliament and the Head of the Commission, you have attached a lot of importance to medical insurance models that takes care of our treatment. However, before we reach hospital, we should try and see how we can help our Lord to keep us alive because they also say, “God helps those who help themselves”.

So, my plea is on prayer No.3, that “at an appropriate time, Parliament will hold a thanksgiving prayer”. (Applause) I believe that before we start the new session, that will be our theme on how we can take care of our health while at the same time, executing our duties as members of Parliament.

Allow me to end with a message, not only for you but for all of us, from the Book of Psalms 124: 6-8. I am going to use the name of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga but all of us can put our names. We are not allowed to change the Bible but instead of saying “us”, we can say “Rebecca Kadaga” since this time we are praying for the Speaker; 

“Blessed be the Lord, who has not given the Rt hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga as a prey to the enemy. Her soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers. The snare is broken and she has escaped. Our help comes from the Lord who made heaven and earth”. 

I give this prayer in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much to the movers. Honourable members, the motion is really about having a thanksgiving so maybe we can have a few comments. Let us do one and a half minutes and we end this.

5.20
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all prayed to the Almighty God to see that you are back in that Chair. I only have one thing to say. As somebody who started with you, you were in the National Resistance Council (NRC) while I was in the Constituent Assembly (CA).

I have heard people saying that the Speaker is a workaholic. From day one since 1996, this is how I have seen the Rt Hon. Speaker work – from CA to NRC and then to Parliament. She has the zeal to work and has that in her blood. We thank you for that.

Madam Speaker, we were on the same flight. When we reached Dubai, you asked where I was going and I said I was going to New York. I said; “I thought we are going together” but you said you were going to Morocco. In my heart, I said the Speaker is going to Morocco but the weather there is not good – because I was there. We parted ways and wished each other well.

When you found us in New York, you did a lot of work, moving here and there. I was in the African Union. You were everywhere. Everybody is proud of you because of the hard work. When I was in Washington, that is when I saw that the Rt Hon. Speaker was not well. Whoever was with me, we knelt down and prayed for you. I have had many sessions with you in your office. You touch everybody.

Finally, even during your sickness, you did your best to ensure that you are passionate about the girl-child. One of my relatives was very sick and had just returned from the hospital. I had a case in Malaysia where one of my relatives was sentenced to death, after she had been acquitted to be deported. When the Speaker read about it in the newspapers, she said she would come to the office. She has been working to ensure that she sees the President so that she saves the life of this girl.

We are hopeful that this girl’s life will be saved. The whole family is grateful. Thank you, Madam Speaker and I wish you well. I will always wish you well.
 
5.24
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Abala, who was my campaign manager in Teso sub-region, until I sent him to Parliament. (Laughter) I would like to thank the seconder of the motion and all Members.

Unfortunately, I missed the verses. I am a Christian who believes in God but my campaign manager did not take me through how to read the Bible very well and so, I will not quote the verses. I know they would explain better my message but I had not prepared and did not see the Order Paper early. Maybe, I should have gone through the Bible.

I realised the importance the people attach to you when the women –(Member timed out.)– This is a Commissioner speaking. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The women with children living with autism came to my office to seek an appointment with you to honour the day of children living with autism. When I told them the following day that you were not well, they were so disappointed and even said they no longer wanted a guest of honour. 

I realised that this nation has a lot of respect for you, Madam Speaker. We thank God, therefore, that He kept you and brought you back safe. I would like to ask the Almighty God to protect our Speaker and give her 100 years such that you continue serving this country.

I thank you for the spirit of hard work. Despite your sickness, you are very much concerned with the issues of this country. If it was not for a strong spirit, other people would have given up and not shown concern for matters of this country. However, you are still strong and pushing to make sure this –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not know that we have pastors. Today, I realised that the House is a better one. 

It is said that when your absence cannot be felt, then your presence is worthless. I realised this when you became sick and I saw Parliament and Uganda at large worried. As I stated and my colleagues have already pointed out verses, as we thank God and Parliament, we also thank you because you must have faced the wall and asked your Lord to allow you continue serving this nation. There is nothing more important than that. 

Out of this, as we thank God for keeping you alive, may we also ask God – because you have just talked about accidents claiming lives of Members of Parliament and many other Ugandans. In that thanksgiving, we also put our request that the Almighty God should prevail over this devil that is killing us on the roads. I thank the movers for this motion.  

5.28
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the mover of the motion and support the prayers therein. As the motto of our country says, “For God and My Country”, it is the strength of this nation that we put things in the hands of God. 

When we had the message of you falling sick, we were all filled with sadness. Firstly, we thank you that your faith was so strong that you were able to go through that hard situation in addition to the prayers Ugandans have been putting to God. I would like to let you know, if you did not know, that you are among some people Ugandans love very much for what you do for this country. We would like to think that God should accept that you continue being there to serve this country in all areas that you have laid your hands on.

Madam Speaker, I really felt so bad when you were down and when the majority of the people were in prayers that other people were taking it for a joke. They were using social media to say –(Member timed out.)

5.30
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I thank the mover of the motion and I support it. It was not possible, even if we wanted to, for us to come and visit you in hospital, given your condition; whether in Nakasero Hospital or Nairobi. However, you should know that the whole House and the country were in prayer for your quick recovery. We thank God that we were able to pass through that.

I would like to pay a special tribute to your old lady, your mother. She was forthright besides you. She kept communicating to us and the outside world that you were in safe hands despite all the rumour that was going on. So, your mother really played a critical role in keeping us informed of your condition.

Lastly, I would like to thank you for your courage and fighting spirit. I did not know you were that resilient and tough to fight an ailment that had put you into an Intensive Care Unit and then transferred to Nairobi in very difficult circumstances. You kept your faith alive and - (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in celebrating this milestone. Hon. James Baba has touched on the issue of toughness. I think when disease comes, that is the time you have to be very tough but most of us weaken. Personally, I was concerned on one thing, which my wife shared with me when you were sick; she said, “This lady always fights for the less privileged”. She reminded me that it is not the duty of the less privileged to fight for themselves but it is the duty of the privileged to fight for them. You have done that. 

Like hon. Ayoo has said, when I saw some of the messages on Facebook, I laughed. I said some of these people who are writing this nonsense do not know that the Speaker fights for them. There is a story when a man who used to chase the monkeys and baboons out of the mango trees died, the monkeys and baboons celebrated. Then, the next year, there were no mangoes to steal and when they started –(Interjections)- that is when they realised that the dead man was the farmer who was growing the mangoes. 

So, those people who were writing some of these things, one day when you are gone, that is when they will realise that you were the one fighting for them. Thank you.

5.33
MS SYLIVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. We have a saying in Buganda that you cannot tell the strength and the energy of a tall tree until it falls. When you were sick, we felt your pain and strength and we felt your absence too. There was a vacuum. However, we kept praying to God and we thank everyone who prayed. 

To us, the young women in politics, we look at you like our hero and mother. We are inspired by everything that you do. So, when we heard that you were sick, we thought our own, someone we look up to, was leaving. We thank God that you are healed and we pray that God protects, guides and gives you a thousand years of happiness and joy, victory and good work. Thank you.

5.34
MR LAWRENCE BATEGEKA (NRM, Hoima Municipality, Hoima): Mr Speaker, I stand here to thank God that you returned alive and you are through this sickness that when it was reported, it shocked the entire country. We look at you as a pillar of building democracy in this country. We have hope that democracy can take root. As a champion and a voice for the vulnerable and women, you can talk the truth to power. It is very rare to speak the truth to power. Sometimes, we chicken out but you have demonstrated that you can speak the truth to power when the welfare of the vulnerable are threatened. I remember the way you handled the Sugar Bill. Very few people could dare do that with entrenched interest. 

Therefore, I really thank God. I also thank the movers of this motion and – (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the seconders. My name is Itungo and in my language, the name means wealth and the only wealth you can have in this world is life. Now that God has brought back your itungo, there is need to thank God and celebrate because you are back in office to serve the nation. Therefore, I support the motion and I am also willing to make a contribution for the service. Thank you.

5.37
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): I would also like to thank God because you are back in your Chair. You know very well that I prayed for you because you were supposed to be my chief guest on 30 March on the thanksgiving and memorial service of my father. Therefore, if there are any prayers that made you recover quickly, count mine. (Laughter) 

I would like to thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the President in a special way for his consideration about your health. I would like to thank the doctors here in Nakasero Hospital and in Aga Khan University Hospital who worked hard to make sure that your life was restored. I thank those people who were caretaking; washing, cleaning and looking after you. It is very important that they should be thanked.

Let me tell you one thing. In the Bible, they say that I will bless you such that you become a blessing to others. Indeed, that is why God blessed you. You have another chance, use it appropriately. Thank you.

5.38
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Surely, it is a great opportunity that we are able to express our joy to be with you, our mother. This is the Tenth Parliament and in Parliament, we consider ourselves as a family and in the family, there is a mother who is Rt hon. Kadaga. We are very grateful that we are together again.

You relate very well, not only with the parliamentarians but also with the electorate. You have very good relations with our electorate. I bring greetings from the Karimojong, who were concerned. They were very hurt and all the time they were asking us, “Has our mother come back?” We would say, “not yet but she is about to come back.” When you came, I communicated to them and they were very delighted. I now have this opportunity to be able to officially say that they are very grateful and happy for you to have come back in very good health.

Another important point I would like to bring out here is to thank you for that courage and resilience. Even when you were weak, you were still able to accommodate and receive visitors in your office. One time, I passed there and found very many people. Some were coming to thank you for coming back although some were coming because of other challenges. However, you were still very resilient to be able to accommodate them. That is very courageous and we appreciate you, our dear mother. Thank you.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion. However, I would like to say that life is not something that should be played around with. It is a short four letter word but when there is a threat to the life of any person, it is always important, especially if the health is affected, for timely intervention.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the people who were with you.  As we thank the Lord, let us thank the people who were with the Speaker because the decision to rush you to the hospital saved your life. You were attended to by doctors who resuscitated you and we need to thank those doctors for doing their work. 

However, I would like to state that we have many Ugandans out there dying of preventable causes, sometimes due to failure to access timely health care. Any delay in accessing timely health care can cost a life. You can get a heart attack and if you are not near that skilled health worker in a timely manner you can lose life.  

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank Parliament, His Excellency the President and we need to appreciate our doctors. We need to have these consultants and senior consultants in all the regional referral hospitals. Currently, we have less than 31 per cent available in this country in the regional referral hospitals. Because of the pay, they cannot be attracted to work in those places. Therefore, we need to pay our doctors better so that they are available in all parts of the country and provide that quality health care that all Ugandans need.

Thank you very much for increasing their pay. We hope that in the next financial year, we should be able to attract them so that all our regional facilities are fully equipped; not only with equipment but also with the human resources that we need. Thank you very much.

5.43
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join others to thank and appreciate God for your life. While you were away, as Parliament, we realised a huge gap. I have been in this Parliament for three years but I had not realised that you are a unifying factor in this House. You work very hard and you are here for long. We always chat in the lobby and crack jokes saying, “Mama may go up to 9.00 p.m. or 10.00 p.m.” You enter this House at 2.00 p.m. and you are the last to leave.

However, it also made me learn that when you work very hard, you have to be mindful of your health. Mama, now that you are back, you should work, but sometimes you also need to stop because you may end up breaking. You have worked very hard and you have done very much. People were crying - There was a group of women that had come to meet you from Busoga. They were in tears.

I would like to thank you for being a light and for showing good stewardship and leading this country. I pray that God gives you long life so that you continue serving us decently and diligently. I thank God and pray that you continue living and blowing more candles. For God and my country.

5.45
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues thanking God for the health that he has accorded you and that you are back. The mainstream media was sober and they exhibited a bit of sobriety. However, when I went to social media, I realised how your health was turned into a subject of gossip and generated lots of funny comments. 

However, I would like to salute you for one thing - you allowed this motion of thanksgiving. I have seen a prayer that we should, at an appropriate time, hold a thanksgiving prayer. It will just be a second prayer to this one because this motion in itself is a prayer. There are various types of prayers - it may be supplications or petitions - but also there is a form of prayer of thanksgiving and there are very few, like it was observed by the mover of the motion, who go back to say “thank you”. There were ten lepers but only one was able to go back and given thanks. 

My concern is: for how long shall we continue to seek medical healthcare from other civilisations? Moments like this should help us do soul-searching so that even if we operate with meagre resources, focus must be deliberately concentrated and directed to at least equipping and revamping the existing facilities like Mulago Hospital.

It is on record like in Botswana, the late President, Ketumile Masire, that he died in Bohoron Hospital, which is in their country. However, for anyone in Uganda to access any healthcare services in any of our health facilities is suicidal –(Interjections)– it is indeed suicidal. It is high time we changed our planning and –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank my voter, hon. Abala and hon. Cecilia Ogwal for bringing this motion to this House. 

On behalf of the people of Ngora that I represent in this House, I would like to say being a woman seated on that chair is an inspiration to so many of the young people especially the ladies who do not dream about one time sitting on such a seat. You are an inspiration to so many people in this country.

I would like to state it clearly that you have inspired most of us and that today I am proud to speak before my mentor, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, and I thank God for saving your life. The health sector in this country is an issue that we have to look at as we thank God for healing you. I am saying this because you are seated there because of that doctor who worked hard to save your life.

The health services that you were accorded in Aga Khan Hospital and those other hospitals that were mentioned - I think it is imperative for this Parliament to look at how we can have a specialised medical facility in Uganda to attend to the complicated illnesses that usually come up.

Lastly, I would like to call upon the House that on top of the prayer that was made by hon. Abala - we normally praise people when they are no more. The House could suggest an institute called “Rebecca Institute for Parliamentary Studies” or something named after hon. Rebecca Kadaga because she is one of the highly respected women in this world. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Ongeritho, it was very ironical, the last thing I did before I went on that journey was to preside over that very acrimonious debate on that hospital. So, when I was there, I said to myself, “by the way I didn’t expect to be here.” 

The Ugandans there told me that they would be happy not to go to Kenya. They asked me to help them and tell the Government to put facilities in Uganda so that they can use our own facilities in the country with their caregivers to save Ugandans from spending money on air tickets.

Anyway, if we are going to do that I would like to propose that we have equitable distribution. Suppose we have a facility in Kidepo, even if it is an international hospital, to capture the Sudanese, the people of Djibouti, the Ethiopians - we can make money there but also serve our people instead of everybody coming here to Lubowa. Minister and members, let us find a way of doing some equity.

5.52
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the movers of this motion; I support it. This message got some of us out of the country. I am a fairly religious person and so, immediately I got that message, apart from praying I sent a message to my wife who is a member of the Catholic Charismatic Renewal.

In their prayer group, after three days she sent me a message and said that their head of the prayer group had told them that the Speaker was smiling. To me that was a sign of life. From that time, I got the courage that our Speaker would be fine and we thank God for that.

When I came back, I found that the priests and reverends in Pakwach had asked for prayers in all the churches because -Madam Speaker, you know what you are about to help us on. So, everybody had to pray because you are like their hope. We still feel good that you are going to be their hope.

Finally, the Minister of Health is here – and I wish there were more ministers here - I ask them to be diligent in their work to avoid being a source of stress to you. From this afternoon’s sitting, you can see the way they have stressed you; they should not do that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.54
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you the movers of the motion; I support it. On behalf of the people of Rukungiri District, I sincerely welcome you back. I would like to let you know that the people of Rukungiri, both Christians and Muslims, prayed for you.

However, I would like us to remind ourselves that everything that God allows to come our way is always with a purpose. He uses us even in the greatest error and deepest pain to mould us into better persons. That could be the reason he made you go through that situation.

I liked that statement in your communication when you told us that you met many Ugandans at Aga khan Hospital. I hope what you shared with them is encouraging you to continue working well and helping all Ugandans. We keep praying for one another as we continue to serve this country. May God bless you and give you many more years like the mover of the motion quoted the Bible. Thank you very much.

5.56
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I decided to move forward to speak from the main Table just to emphasise the importance of this motion. 

Madam Speaker, it is important that we ally with hon. Abala and agree that we need to have a thanksgiving ceremony. If Busoga can arrange it, how can we, as Parliament fail to have one? We need to have a day, thank God and be happy.

Usually, when we are talking about thanksgiving, it is not just about talking but it involves real happiness. When it comes to dancing, we dance; we eat and enjoy and say, “Thank you” to God while stretching our hands upwards. I think that is the way to thank God.

Madam Speaker, I have ten issues to say; number one –(Member was timed out)- 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR AOGON: There have been contentious issues and God knew that he needed you to handle them; issues of Apaa and Tororo - you see how people have always been struggling here – issues of landslides in Bududa and land grabbing everywhere. 

The health facilities – in my constituency the situation is dire; there are no operating theatres for the women. The issues of women empowerment are still pending. We have not completed the fight against homosexuality that you started. Even God knew that He needed you still to be here.

There is the issue of cities; Soroti needs a city. Therefore, you needed to be there still. (Applause) There is Uganda Airlines; you needed to first witness the bombardiers and test to see how they are moving to make sure that we are okay. You first work on the International Specialised Hospital in Lubowa. You have a lot to do. Climate change is a reality and we needed you here.

The final one is that at least at one point we needed to see you as the President of this country called Uganda. (Applause) There we shall know you have worked. You still have a long journey; it has just started. It started from Agha khan and you have returned. You are just a new person. We wish you all the best. For God and my country.

5.58
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues who have thanked God for your life. There is a verse in the book of Muhamad. It is written in the Muhammadan books. When they were cursing a servant of His, others were appreciating. When they said, “Why doesn’t God punish this person,” in that verse they say God said, “Leave this person; he is still having a mission for my people.”

The reason was simple; that you have an assignment to complete. You have done a lot of work to this country and you are still doing more. For some of us who have been in this House, you made this Parliament to protect this institution as much as you could. There is nobody who has ever protected the independence of this institution like you. I still think that if you are still around, we still have more. That is why God is still leaving you around. We are going to continue praying.

Also in that motion, we need to go and –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: We need also to thank the people of Kamuli who have been voting for you all this time that they identified the right person who has done a lot for this country and will still do more. People need to hear from us because they do not know the value you have.

Therefore, all of us need to go to your constituency and thank you for the work you have done for this country.

6.00
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (IND, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I am happy to see you sit in that chair. It is God’s plan. Often when people undergo such circumstances, it is very difficult to speak like the colleagues have spoken and you do not hear those words because you could be long gone.

With this, we are sure that God has a purpose why He did this and we would like to thank Him for that. In our language, when better things are to come, you have to go through difficulties. This is what I envisage.

Madam Speaker, what touched me most is that I got to learn about your illness through social media. It was posted on our platform by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She said, “We need to pray now; Speaker is not well.” I stopped what I was doing and we started consulting each other; “What has happened to her?” –
Madam Speaker, your name was being talked about in the whole country; in meetings, churches and we were petitioning God to give you back your life. We would like to thank God because He listened to our prayers.

Finally, we know you work hard but you also need to take good care of yourself. You sit for long hours in that chair. Some of us get opportunities to walk out a bit and stretch and come back but you do not. I would like to implore you to take the doctor’s advice and keep yourself healthy. This country still needs you. For God and my country. 

6.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, we prayed and we thank God. Most of us would have been by your bedside and that is what we wanted to do but definitely when you are very sick, the doctors control. 

We thank God that His long Hand touched you and you are back with us. Now that you are back, never forget God. It is Him who took control of you. This is the trial and temptation.

I always go to Psalms 23; that is my best. I would like to say that life is just but one. I remember when we had the committee on Appointments meeting; you went to another meeting immediately then another and another. I feel that you should reduce on those series of meetings. If you meet, try to control.

Also, at an appropriate time, there is need for this Parliament to think about a Committee of Speakers so that some time when – in some other Parliaments, for example, in Ghana and I think in Zambia, when you sit and feel that you should rest, another person comes in. There is a Committee of Speakers. Therefore, this should be thought of. Even after this Parliament, your family needs you very much. We need your life and we pray for it.

I support all that has been proposed by the mover of this motion but make an addition of this Committee of Speakers. Thank you. We pray that God should continue to be with you and bless you until you recover fully.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the Speakers’ panel has come here since 2005. At that time, it was the Government that defeated us. They came and rejected it. It came again another time and it was defeated by members when we were trying to amend the Rules of Procedure. We defeated ourselves.

6.06
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Madam Speaker, I am happy that you are alive and well. I am not very old in this Parliament but when I came, in the few days I interacted with you in your office and here, I saw a mother. 

In tackling the issues here at Parliament, especially those that we, Members of Parliament, bring to the Floor of this House that concern our voters, you are empathetic. This is because you feel with us. The way you articulate and resolve issues is for the people. 

You are exemplary and I pray that you become a lesson to us; you got sick and got well. You are a leader, not a politician. We should learn from you that when we also get problems, we must get comments and prayers like you got, which is not very common. There are very many people that were on your side and prayed for your health.

There is what they call “care for the carers”. You are a carer but you must get care so that you can live positively as a mother, a leader and our –(Member timed out.) 

6.07
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Almighty God for keeping you alive. 

The good Lord is keeping you for a purpose and you may not know it. Honourable members, the Rt Hon. Speaker is very determined in everything she does. Let me give you an example: When I came in the Ninth Parliament, we used to park our cars on the roadside and thieves used to vandalise them. The Rt Hon. Speaker told us that we would soon get the best parking space and within two years, everything was done. The way the Speaker used to monitor the constructors, you cannot believe; it was as if she was doing her own personal job. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Almighty God is keeping you for a purpose. I am happy that you promised us that very soon, we shall have new Chamber and we can see the work going on. I am very confident, given the level of your determination, that within two or three years, the Chamber shall have been completed. 

We pray that the good Lord –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we pray that the Almighty God takes care of you forever and ever. What encouraged honourable members is that whenever we were in the villages, even the young school-going children asked us how the Speaker was doing. For someone at the primary level, deep in Amuru, to take that concern, it shows that, Madam Speaker, you are being loved but you do not know. 

Thank you very much. I pray for your health and I pray that we continue doing more for the citizens of this country.

6.10
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this motion. On behalf of the people of Soroti and Soroti Municipality, we thank God for your return to health. The children of Soroti Municipal S.S. were uncontrollably at pains worried about your health. 

To show how much you are committed to your work, on your immediate return, you found that the South Sudan traders’ probe committee at a standstill. One of the first things you signed at your sick bed was to ensure that this committee concludes its work. 

When I requested you, together with my colleagues, who were moving the Anti-Slavery Bill, to come and preside over the consultative workshop, even as weak as you were still, you made it a point to come there. What more would you ask of a person that is committed to their work than these kinds of sacrifices? 

Indeed as the people of Soroti, we feel that you still have a lot to do. At this time when we are discussing the issue of creation of cities, I know that Soroti needed you the most in that seat. (Applause) 

I would like to conclude by saying Oliver Scott Curry, a lecturer of Anthropology – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, Oliver Scott Curry, in his discussion about the morals that unite human beings, postulated seven of them. I will talk about just two due to lack of time. 

When you help your family, then people will stand with you. You have been there with your family in Parliament. You have been there for us. Whenever we have come crying to you, you quickly send a helping hand. This is the reason, morally, we must cry to God that you stay with us longer. 

Madam Speaker, morally, you need to stand with your group. Whenever Parliament has come under attack, you have stood with your group. Therefore, we thank God that you should be there to stand with us.

Oliver Scott Curry said that when you are moral, then you return favours. Madam Speaker, you have never let down those that stand with the principles that you stand for. I would have said more but for lack of time, I will end here. 

We say, “Ebenezer”, and thank God for your health. Thank you for your return. 

6.12
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I join my colleagues in thanking God for the mercy that you experienced. Indeed, there is no amount of time today that is enough for us to give our expressions about you.

In brief, on behalf of the people of Apac Municipality, Madam Speaker, I pray that the good Lord continues to show you the path which He desires of you and continue to lead you to be the light of His divine mercy. Thank you.

6.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and all the resolutions therein.

I received the news about your ill-health from my voters when I was in the district. I was not listening to radio neither was I on WhatsApp nor any form of communication. However, in the evening, when I returned to my village home, I received four women, who broke that bad news to me. That is already a very good sign that information about you reaches the grassroots people. 

The whole of that day I was not on phone but I was deep in some village called Kalongo in Wol Sub-county. When I returned in the evening, that is when four women came and told me about the bad news on the health of our Speaker. I asked them to tell me what I had not heard. Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that as long as God has not yet seen the achievements or the purpose for which you were created in this world, even if devils want to make their way through your life, they will never succeed.
 
I would like to say that God has not yet –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I was just concluding that God has not yet accomplished the reasons as to why He created you in this world for us. Why He moulded you for Uganda - the reason is best known to him. We still want to praise Him and give Him the glory that your life still remains. We want to see you through until His purpose is achieved. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the thrust of your submissions is that I should work less but I now see more Members standing up. What do we do? There are eight Members.

6.16
COL. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had wanted to disagree with hon. Solomon Silwanyi but I am supporting the motion basing on three reasons:

One, thanking God is a must because He has been good to us. Two, He preserved you for a purpose. Until that purpose is served, Madam Speaker, you are still here. Three, you have set an example of commitment to work. I would wish that all Ugandans emulate those who are hardworking like the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. If people were doing their part as the Speaker of this Parliament, this country would be very far. (Applause)

Therefore, I would like to thank God and I am not praying that you reduce on your working schedule because the one who brought you here, knew you before you were born, He has a purpose for you and plans about your life. Until those plans are fulfilled, you are going nowhere. 

Hon. Franca Akello, I would like to tell you that in Okwadoko where you were, the node has network and I used to use it. When you are there, you should claim that node. May God bless this country. (Laughter)  

6.16
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (Independent, Woman Representative Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to support the motion and thank God for your life. On that fateful day, I could not control my phone; every phone call that I received from the people of Buhweju, they were asking me “how is our Speaker?” I loved the words “our Speaker” because I thought people would ask me, how is the Rt Hon. Speaker, but they would add “our Speaker?” 

Madam Speaker, that showed me that this country loves you very much. They know what you are doing for this country and I believe that they are very grateful for your work.

We thank God for healing you and we pray that God gives you more time with us because this country still needs you and we want you to be with us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.19
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank God for your health and on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo, I also join my colleagues to welcome you back and we continue to pray for your good health. 

I know you work tirelessly for this country. I remember when you came to Bundibugyo District you had about three functions to attend on the same day. That is when I realised that this mama can really fulfil all the appointments. By the time you finished the three appointments – I think the first one was in Rwenzori, second was in Tooro region and last one was in your region.

Madam Speaker, we thank God for your health and love you. We want to see that you continue serving this nation. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.20
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A story is told in the Bible when Jesus healed the 10 lepers. The nine lepers went their ways except one who came back and said “Oh Lord thank you”. This is the time for us to also say to the Lord, thank you for bringing back our beloved Speaker. 

I would like to thank you and you have always been there for us. I remember last year in July, August and September when I was ailing, I do not remember telling anybody except my wife and you. I came to you and you counselled me on what to do and not to do. You have touched everybody’s heart and you have cried with us and have been with us in good and bad times. I would like to thank the Almighty God for saving your good life. There is a reason why you are here with us today. 

You could have gone, and we may have prayed and shouted but God said no, we still need our beloved Speaker. Here is another challenge; you had to be flown very far away and we wanted to see you and would have loved to be with you all the time, but you were very far away. We have cried about our national health services, why is it not coming to pass? What is –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alex Byarugaba, please conclude.

MR BYARUGABA: What is wrong with the national health services and health centres IV? We are about to start going to the fields and you will start hearing about ailments attacking us; but our health centres IV are completely down; there are no ambulances, no drugs and health staff. There is a problem with this. Otherwise, we would like to thank the Almighty God for your wonderful life, and we will always pray and be with you. Thank you and God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed with the Committee on Health that this session should end and the minister has not yet brought the Bill on insurance. Therefore, our committee is going to move their Bill on Health Insurance in the first week when we resume. We are not waiting for Government.

6.20
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bunyaruguru and on my own behalf, we would like to thank God who has enabled you to be back in this House. I remember at that time when you had just come, I was in the constituency visiting different women groups and I visited one group where you paid a courtesy call and signed in the visitors’ book and they told me everything that you did. When I am in the constituency, they call me Mr Twesigye. They told me engineer, go and tell Mama that we prayed for her quick recovery but we are at pain when we realised that she was in the hospital and we were wondering whether one day she will come back and pay us a visit. Recently, they were very happy when they were here at the exhibition. We love you.

Above all, I remember when we were in Nairobi on official duty with the Committee on Education and Sports, we visited you in the hospital and we were not able to see you but we remained in prayer. We thank God that you are back in your Chair and we continue praying that the Almighty God gives you more strength to continue serving us and this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.24
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In John 6:68 –

THE SPEAKER: You know our Muslim brothers are almost - 

MR SONGA: John 6:68 says, “To whom, shall we go?” To whom shall we go if the Speaker goes away? It came as a shock to us and we would like to thank God. On behalf of the people of Ora who I represent, I would like to thank God and all the people who prayed for the Speaker to come back. It is very important to us because you have a task. God is keeping you because you have a task to accomplish not only in Kamuli and Uganda but the whole world knows the work you are doing. We thank you for that courage and commitment. I would like to ask you to pray every day and the prayer should be short: “Let your will be done.” God bless you.

6.25
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was a Thursday evening when the country and entire world came to learn that you were not in good health. When the message broke on social media, everybody broke down and all the calls that we were receiving from the various parts of the country were to find out how our Speaker was doing.

Madam Speaker, you are one person who has demystified the fact that Ugandans are lazy. It is said that the work done by one Kenyan is done by six Ugandans. However, I can assure you that with all that you have done in this country, you have made us proud. If our ministers could see what you are doing and emulate it, our country would go very far. We thank you for the hard work and we thank the Almighty God for bringing you back to this Chair. Thank you.

6.26
MR JAMES BUTURO NSABA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, it is an established fact that you are one of the finest public officers that this nation has. As such, the news reverberated across the nation, from Koboko to Kisoro to Kaabong, concerning your situation indicating indeed that you are a treasure to this nation and we are duty bound to continue praying for you. 

Your situation, Madam Speaker, reminded me about my own experience earlier on and how you, together with the Clerk to Parliament, played a critical role in seeing me come through that situation. It is a good turn that indeed, you too experienced the grace of God.

Finally, your experience does bring into sharp focus the issue concerning health in this nation. I remember how we treated Kony; we set aside a certain percentage of the national Budget. We may consider doing the same so that this nation can, once and for all, fix this issue concerning the health of its citizens. Thank you.

6.28
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moroto Municipality and on my own behalf, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and to thank God for the good health that He has bestowed on you.

Madam Speaker, I have always wondered what kind of food you eat and what you are made of. Most times, you find members going out because they cannot sit for long hours the way you do. When I came to your office, I reminded you that you still had a lot to do. The word of God says that those who trust in God will have a long life. I would like all of us in this Parliament to rely on the word of God and always take it seriously. Madam Speaker, I do not think you are about to leave this earth because you trust in God.

When I heard about your illness, I thought it was a rumour. Honestly speaking - I got a bit mixed up and I failed to drive. I called someone to help me drive and when I reached home, I invited my family, we got on our knees and we prayed for you. 

We thank God that He is still keeping you and may God keep you for many more years to come. Thank you.

6.30
MR ISMAIL OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the mover of the motion. On behalf of my constituency, the Parliamentary Youth Forum and on my own behalf, I felt it necessary to add my support to the mover of the motion. 

Madam Speaker, four days before you fell sick, I was with you in Morocco for the Islamic conference and before that conference, you confirmed that you had arrived from another duty somewhere else. 

On the evening when we got information that you were admitted in the hospital, we did not only receive local calls from within the country but calls came in from outside the country as well. People we interacted with during the conference kept asking about you because of what they had seen on the international media. Of course this had circulated all over the internet. It was from that point that we got to know how important you have been to us in this country.

One thing I would like to observe about your situation, that I felt would trickle down to many more hardworking leaders in this country, is an issue, which should be of concern to us all; the failure in systems, the failure of departments, either in Government or agencies to do their work. 

Madam Speaker, some of the work that you do in this Parliament is not even work meant for the Speaker of Parliament and it accrues from people failing to do their work. People have failed to handle land issues, which is a responsibility of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Then you will see people from Apaa, Kyotera and Arua petitioning you. Everyone wants you to handle that problem. 

The failure of these departments goes with impunity. In developed countries, people resign when they fail to handle responsibilities that have been assigned to them. I sympathise with you. This applies to many of the few good leaders we have in this country. Much of the sicknesses that they succumb to – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Several members have contributed to this motion. There was a proposal to add one line on the issue of the Panel of Speakers in the prayers and then we can conclude. 

6.34
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I have taken very serious note, as one of the movers of this motion, that people seem to have reached a consensus that there is need for this Parliament to adopt the Speakers’ Panel. I therefore beg to move a minor amendment in our prayer number four that Parliament urges the Government –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I beg that you forgive me. I am purely a commercial person; I know very little law. 

I beg to move that Parliament considers adopting the Speakers’ Panel.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you could add, “As it is in the region” because all the other parliaments have. I think we need to add that.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Okay, let me add this: that Parliament considers adopting the Speaker’s Panel as it is practiced in the region. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question – what is the amendment, hon. Amongin?

6.36
MS AMONGIN: Madam Speakers, in the different parts of the world, prominent people have been recognised and recognition is not necessarily done when someone is not there. Recognition can also be done when someone is still serving. I remember that when I spent six months in the United States while I was a Mandela Fellow, we had the Kennedy Institute of Parliamentary Studies. In Ghana, there is a precedent that has already been set. In Kenya, there is an institute named after the former president of Kenya. 

I would, therefore, like to make an amendment to the motion that has been moved in the House - aware of the role that you have played in this country and continent and aware that today we have talked about you in your presence. I urge Members to join me to make an amendment to have the “The Rebecca Institute of Parliamentary Studies.” I beg to move. (Applause)

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The House is in the process of considering a Bill on the Institute of Parliamentary Studies.  We already have an institute which name is not attributed specifically to a certain honour as it is in many countries. 

In line with the amendment raised by hon. Jacquiline Amongin, indeed we would propose here that the House goes ahead to make a proposal that in the Bill, the institute is given a name that is in line with the motion we are considering now. 

Therefore, instead of calling it the “Institute of Parliamentary Studies”, we should call it “The Rebecca Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary Studies.” I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the motion be further amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the motion be adopted by this House.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Members very much for having adopted this motion because the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has steered this House beyond her borders of responsibility. I would like to cite one example. When there was a fiasco in the House, some our staff were injured. Madam Speaker, one of the staff came to me, almost in tears, to say he was very humbled that you went to his humble home in Bweyogerere to see him in person. He said that was unthinkable. Members, we are dealing with a very serious matter. It is not that you have just been –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for bringing up this important matter. I would also like to inform the House that during that time, many Members of Parliament, including myself, were injured in the process. Some Members got injured circumstantially while others got injured because they participated. I do not know whether God had planned it that way – I did not know that I was expecting the baby that I have now. During that scuffle, I just found myself in the hospital and that was when I was announced pregnant. (Laughter)

When the Speaker came to see me, I was very humbled. She came to my home and I could not imagine it. When she prayed with me, I felt it was beyond something that someone could imagine. 

I was busy here doing what I was doing and unfortunately, I became a victim. I found myself in the hospital and I got the news that there was something inside and it was almost getting out. For being someone who visits her flock – because she visited all of us who were in hospitals – I really thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May God bless you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I think hon. Franca is telling us that when the baby comes out she will be called Rebecca Kadaga –(Interjection)- No, the next girl will come. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, finally, the Institute of Parliamentary Studies is a reality. We have already successfully asked for permission from Parliament and the Bill was already read for the first time. We are almost getting ready for the second reading. Therefore, that is one of the amendments that will come on the Floor – to rename the Institute of Parliamentary Studies – do we call it “Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga –

THE SPEAKER: You will do that when the Bill comes.

MS OGWAL: Exactly. It will be one of the amendments to come. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank all Members for wholeheartedly supporting this motion. May God bless you all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the month of Ramadhan and the longer we stay here, the more we oppress our colleagues – you know it is coming to 7.00 p.m. We had the intentions of proroguing the House today but because we have been invited to come back on Friday, I think we can adjourn to tomorrow so that we complete – there are two small items on the Order Paper. Let us finish those and then complete the tribute to Prof. Nsibambi and you can go home. So, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 May at 2.00 p.m.)
