Thursday, 26 May 2005

Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this morning session and to inform you that the Members of Parliament from the greater North have organized a get together party in the Members’ bar at 7.00 p.m. this evening. I do not know the components of the greater North but all of you are invited to this get-together at 7.00 p.m.

Next, I would like to save the pending work of the committees of this House, so we shall ask the committee chairpersons to report on the status of the business they have before them so that it can be recorded in the Hansard and accordingly saved for the next session.

10.49
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am actually rising on two points, one is procedural and another is expressing a matter of national concern. The procedural issue is that on the Order Paper two days ago the hon. Minister of Works, Housing and Communications was supposed to answer some questions, which I believe he was ready to answer but unfortunately he fell sick and he was unable to come. I am glad to report with collaborated evidence that he is now here this morning. So I hope you will accord him an opportunity to answer those questions, which I put to him some time back. 

Next, I rise to express concern over the matter of respect accorded to Members of the Cabinet particularly three offices: the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister, among others. Those are the three I feel we should accord the respect they deserve. Essentially I am raising a matter of lack of respect for the Vice-President, Dr Gilbert Bukenya. He is being assaulted in public, not physically but his name is and subsequently his office and this is a matter of the Cabinet or the Government. 

We cannot have a situation whereby the No.2 person in the country is subjected to all kinds of investigations and probes, which should be accorded some kind of confidentiality but which have become a matter of public knowledge and public information. The reason I am saying we should accord these three persons some respect is on the account of what we have learnt that the Vice-President, Dr Gilbert Bukenya, is going through. 

The issues, which have been mentioned in the media are of concern to us. For that matter, those issues and concerns have been corroborated by the most highly placed person on the matter of integrity in the Government, that is, the IGG. The IGG has confirmed that indeed the vice-President is being investigated on the property he owns and that, “We have been to his farm to take pictures of his paw paws, pineapples, cows and rice”. 

Over and above that, another minister who should be accorded respect, the Minister for Internal Security, is subjected to being investigated on her farm. Her cows’ photographs were taken. Since when did we need photographs of cows for whatever investigation? Madam Speaker, I do not want to go into the substance of the allegations against the Vice-President, among other ministers. I am expressing concern that if there is going to be any investigation into a highly placed person’s life, can it be done confidentially? For that matter, when I see minor operatives of State House filing reports on the integrity of a Vice-President, I shudder. 

When the No.2 person in the country is alleged to be consorting politically with the highly placed officers in the armed forces, I for one, given my previous experience in various governments in the past, I tremble in my boots. These are very serious allegations and if indeed what appeared in the papers today has anything to do with the truth, I think this august House deserves an explanation from the Government about this information in circulation. 

I know in the past when any of us referred to the media people jumped up and said, “Do not believe them”. But some of us are privy to that information. Actually before these reports came out in the media we had been hearing of these things. And as a Member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, I have been expressing concern on the matter of the vote of the Vice-Presidency. 

These are the issues, which we have been barring or ignoring but it has come to a point where we have said, “No, it cannot continue”. Madam Speaker, I know the four of you sometimes have no opportunity to defend yourselves. The President, the Vice-President, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the Prime Minister; it can be very hard for you to come out in public to say, “It is not true”, for the purpose of defending integrity of the office you are holding. But I do not think we can afford to ignore it this matter. We definitely demand an explanation from the Government, which is apparently -(Interruption)    

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to my brother, hon. Aggrey Awori and I know he was even in the Sixth Parliament where the Vice-President by then Dr Kazibwe was being talked about. Hon. Aggrey Awori himself has been talking about the President having flown the daughter for treatment outside the country, I am really perturbed whether he has double standards. He has been talking about senior leaders. Is it in order, therefore, for him to wake up now and start bringing these issues? 

And if a leader has committed mistakes, should we keep quiet about it? I beg your indulgence; is he in order? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I find it difficult to rule on that one. Each situation comes with its own circumstances. I do not know why the Vice-President features in the papers; I do not know whether it is true. Shall we ask the Leader of Government Business to tell us what is going on?

10.59
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. These matters will be urgently investigated and we shall take up appropriate actions.   

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I deeply appreciate the comments made by the Prime Minister on the subject. Draw a line between what is reported in the newspapers and what Aggrey Awori is talking about. First, when the Vice-President of a country is subjected to publicity like this, it undermines his authority to act for his subordinates. His subordinates reading this, if he directs them, there is a question of “Ah, even him!”. So the point the Prime Minister is raising is actually very commendable that he can take appropriate measures and clear this. 

Also, we should be careful about Aggrey Awori’s remarks. We run the risk of mistaking the message and the messenger. When Aggrey Awori as a messenger raises his matters, some people do not listen to the message, they look at Aggrey Awori and begin to read into it what motive Aggrey Awori may have. This is always a problem for which, Madam Speaker, we trust your guidance so that we do not fight wars, which we cannot win.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to shed some light onto this. Hon. Basaliza did refer to what happened in the Sixth Parliament where I was an active member. What happened in the Sixth Parliament is that it instituted a select committee to investigate the Minister of Agriculture, who was unfortunately also the Vice-President. Throughout our investigations we looked into the conduct of the Minister of Agriculture and our recommendation was that the Minister for Agriculture must leave. The President in his wisdom removed the Vice President from that portfolio. We did not investigate the Vice-President. This is what I wanted to throw light on.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to correct the wrong impression that Capt. Basaliza has about me. He seems to think I am a habitual critic of the state and for that matter the President as a person. The matter he has brought to the attention of the august House regarding my background in being a watchdog of the state is totally incorrect. 

I would like to reiterate that as a member of this august House I am performing one of the functions that are clearly defined in the Constitution. When I raise the matter of misuse of public resources, I am not being personal to Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I am talking about the incumbent whose family is accessing public resources in a fashion not authorized by the state. That is what I meant. So, for him to think that I am unable and I have been disabled to raise any concerns by my previous record, I think that he is missing the point.  

However, I want to seek clarification from the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business. Many a time in this august House, whenever we raise issues –(Interruptions)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I am reluctantly rising on a point of procedure. I thought that you had made a ruling that you are finding it very difficult to make the ruling upon the issue, which hon. Capt. Basaliza raised in that you do not know the authenticity of the story. I would like to say that about two days ago the Monitor did report a very sad story about a woman who was kicked and killed by her husband for not returning Shs 1,000. These are human rights violations and I thought that hon. Aggrey Awori would have come up with this particular story as well. We are talking about a matter of life and death –(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honorable colleague that as a matter of fact I have already put in a question. It is in the pipeline but unfortunately it is not coming today or tomorrow but until the House resumes. So over the matter of human rights, we are very concerned. For that matter I am surprised that my honorable colleague is not talking about the DRB, which is supposed to be debated in this august House and has been postponed indefinitely.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I think the concern has been noted and the Prime Minister –(Interruptions)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori. The issue I wanted to raise was on a matter of procedure. We do have a lot of newspaper stories coming up; we have headlines but the point here is, how do we deal with these headlines? I think as a matter of procedure maybe you could guide us so that - most of us have read the story, we are perturbed but we do not know how true it is.  

On the issue of the DRB, I would like to point out that I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for his comment but this is an issue of domestic violence and we do not have a specific law on domestic violence. Yes, indeed the DRB is pending but we also need to enact a specific law, which will deal with issues of domestic violence, which the DRB does not address.  So there are two issues. There is the DRB on its own and then there is the issue of domestic violence as a specific law to deal with issues of violence within the home. I hope when we bring this law, he will support it. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, the concerns have been noted and we shall await the information from the Prime Minister on all those issues.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: A Vice-President is No.2; he is a very important person in the country. So if these matters are investigated, obviously these matters go to the head of state. He may decide not to give a response to Parliament. I do not want to lie to you. It will be up to his discretion to authorize me or any other person to release the consequences or not. So, I do not want to make a false promise here. All I stated is that these matters will be urgently investigated and that appropriate actions will be taken. However, I do not promise that I will necessarily come back and report to you. That will be subject to the contingent element, subject to the discretion of the head of state. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us monitor events as they happen.

STATUS REPORTS BY CHAIRPERSONS ON PENDING BUSINESS IN THEIR COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 182 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 

11.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to report that the BIDCO report, which was saved last time because there was a case in court and we could not proceed with the report because of some technicalities, is still pending. 

We have a report, which is ready, on the computerization of driving permits by face technology. It is ready and it has been on the list of the Business Committee for some time. I want to inform the House that the delay of these reports is going to cost government a lot of money because these contracts involve a lot of money. I urge this House to take serious consideration of face technology because it is going to impact very much on our revenue.

We also have the report on the divestiture of the Dairy Corporation, which is ready. Last week we had thought it would find room today or tomorrow but it appears it has not been possible. As you may be aware, farmers are pouring milk and we need to find a solution to this sector so that we can advise government appropriately and we move in harmony.

We were about to conclude the compensation to Tahar Fourati of Tunisia, a company, which had a management contract with the Government of Uganda to run Nile Hotel Complex. They are claiming for compensation allegedly for wrongful termination of the contract. This matter was referred to our committee and I will ask you to give members of our committee a slot because we need three working days in this recess period so that we can also report to the House as this can cause government loss of money. We need to minimize expenditure.  

That is the status of our report. We have three reports, which are ready, and one, which is about to be ready that is urgently needed to be pronounced on by this House. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for those reports, which are ready. Arrange to lay them on the Table so that they can be circulated, then we shall appoint a date for their hearing.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Much obliged.

11.12
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Ogwel Loote): Madam Speaker, I wish to report that the Sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs had basically two issues to handle. The first one is the Refugee Bill. We would have concluded it today if it were not for the morning session of Parliament. 

We seek your indulgence because this government has already invested a lot in this Refugee Bill and it has been pending for the last two years. That is why it is in the view of the committee that we should finish it today and present the report before we could go for the short recess and start the debates on the budget. We seek your indulgence and request that possibly during the short break the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs could accomplish that bit of the Refugee Bill so that it is debated.

Then the second issue, which was referred to the committee is the security situation, especially within the Congo and Rwanda. We are compiling the report, it will be ready any minute to be presented to this House, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. For any report, which you can conclude, lay it on the Table and circulate it. I will appoint a date for its hearing.  

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, you remember before this Parliament passed a law of 2004/2005, that is, the Finance Act, which has been operating in the Customs Union, the Bill of East African Customs Union was given to us. It has never been handled and that Bill is affecting the whole internal revenue collection of the country. How is it handled? It has got some defects within it because some regimes within that Bill of East African Customs Union are not complete. That is why you find that the business community is suffering a lot.  There are two laws that are operating right now: the one we passed in Parliament and the one of East African Customs Union. 

You find that when people are importing goods, they get problems and it is left under the discretion of customs officers. I would like to know, what is the fate of that Bill and how is it going to operate within so that people can –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, you recall that we had a debate here and we asked your committee to go and come back with a more comprehensive report on the affairs of the East African Community?

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Madam Speaker, it was the third thing, which we were going to handle, but then we were not able to handle it immediately.

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that at one time when the Protocol on the Customs Union was laid on the Table here, the Speaker referred it to the Committee of Trade. I do not know whether there is a Bill and a Protocol, but the Protocol was referred to the Committee of Trade.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall come to your committee. Apparently the report on the East African Community is not ready. It will be completed in the next Session.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Madam Speaker, we hope to complete it. Much obliged.

MR AWORI: We are aware that the East African authority, that is, the three Presidents, set up a committee on the fast track of the East African Federation. This matter has been determined - the two partner states’ Parliaments have pronounced themselves on the matter of the fast track of the East African Federation but to date the Minister responsible has yet to come to this august House to tell us or give us a report on that. As a Member of the Committee of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs I can say that we have been expecting the matter so that we deal with it expeditiously. However, we cannot handle it until authorized by the House or until the Minister brings the matter to the House so that it can be given to the committee. 

My concern is that in the next few days the East African leaders are going to be meeting on this same matter. Tanzania has pronounced itself on the matter, Kenya has pronounced itself on the matter, Uganda, we are just there. Are we going to be taken for granted or is the President going to speak on our behalf without our input?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, I can refer the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs to the East African of this week, which says why Uganda is being singled out to be letting the other partner states down. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will the Leader of Government Business tell us something about this matter? Usually he has the information?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I must apologize for the absence of any Minister; Minister of State from Foreign Affairs because that is really the starting point. What I can say is that my recollection on that matter is a bit hazy because I have been handling a million issues. When you are handling so many issues you cannot remember everything especially, when you are ambushed. 

So, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of Education and Sports - because the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs is away, she is handling an urgent matter - to remind the Minister of Foreign Affairs to handle that matter expeditiously and ensure that Uganda is not blamed. I believe they are handling it in a manner, which will make you happy. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That matter should be given priority and be handled even before we go to the Budget. The Parliaments of East African Community give input to the tariff rates, which determines how the revenue collection and what effects it gives to the whole country as a nation, and the expenditure, which is budgeted within that budget year. Where Parliaments do not give an input it becomes a complicated matter and it cripples the economy. So, I beg that after recess that matter could be handled as the first issue so that the country can see how it can move with its expenditures and how government can prosper without crippling anything.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am worried as a citizen of this country because we seem to be very excited about the community but at the same time we tend to drag our feet on matters of the community. Surely, do we not deserve an explanation? What are we up to? Are we interested in the community or we are not interested in the community? 

On one side we speak so well of the community, its prospects and how it is going to benefit people of East Africa, and I can assure you people down there are really interested in the community. But then on the other side we tend to drag our feet. Why should this thing really take so long to come to the Floor of the House? We deserve some kind of explanation. I hope the Leader of Government Business will do us the favour of telling us which is which. Otherwise, we are confused and we do not know what to tell the people down there in our constituencies.

MR KIGYAGI: I would like to get some guidance. Do we have an East African Customs Bill laid on the Table or it is the Protocol? That is guidance that I need. 

Secondly, I would like to find out who should consider this. Is it the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs or the Committee on Finance and Planning? You know there is a confusion because if the Protocol involves the customs issues and you put it under Presidential and Foreign Affairs, are they able to handle it properly? I think that the technical Committee would be Finance and Planning. I would like to seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not recollect whether the Protocol was actually brought here. Was it? Where was it committed –(Interjections)- the Committed to committee on Trade? The honorable member will report from Trade, but if we find that it is not the appropriate committee we may have to retrieve it from there and send it to the correct committee. However, let us wait until Trade reports. 

MR KIGYAGI: Is there a bill or a protocol?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairman will report.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I want to add on to what hon. Kigyagi has said. We have had several meetings with our colleagues from Kenya, Tanzania and the East African Legislative Assembly in Arusha, in Dar-es-salaam, and in Kampala. We have been listening to our colleagues and they said on the side of Kenya and Tanzania they have ratified most of the Protocols but these Protocols have remained un-ratified on the Uganda side. 

Secondly, we put in place a fast tracking committee comprising very eminent personalities. One of the things that has been raised on many occasions was that there seems to be a problem on who should be conducting the matters of the East African Corporation because we do not have a substantive minister in charge of the Community, except the Minister of Regional Cooperation, who is always running for international conferences when the Community affairs are taking place. 

We received complaints that the three heads of state directed the secretariat in Arusha that the three governments must agree to negotiate as a block. But you cannot go to negotiate as a block when the three East African countries are joining with different regional configurations. Tanzania is with SADC, Uganda and Kenya are with COMESA. How do you form a customs union before you have overcome all those roadblocks?

The reason Ugandan traders are complaining is that the East African Customs tariffs have not been applicable in Kenya and Tanzania while the Ugandans are already applying the new rates. That is why we have been having a lot of people coming to Parliament to complain. So, the right hand of government should know what the left hand is doing and in my view Parliament has the power to sign those – because we are actually representing the people. The people of Uganda and East Africa are all interested in the integration. So, we come here to represent the views of the people.

We are asking the Speaker to make sure that this matter is put to question. The Leader of Government Business is here; is government paying lip service to the integration? Frankly the Community was broken by Uganda - they are not so sure whether they should even go in with Uganda because it seems Uganda is paying lip service to this. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can say on this is to urge the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to complete that report on the Community, bring it here, we debate it and take a position. I really urge you to expedite that.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am quite at a loss because next month, around the 8th, we are going to read the Budget. I am informed that it will be read together with other East African countries’ budgets. For Uganda’s case, we have this confusion and yet we had expected by the beginning of this year to have agreed on the issue of tariffs. How is Uganda handling this? 

I just want a clarification from the Leader of Government Business because this issue, you remember when we had a meeting with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the gardens you did put it to the Minister in charge of Regional Cooperation to come up and explain but to-date nothing has happened. How are we moving?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): First of all I would like to assure hon. Members of Parliament and the entire nation that Uganda is not dragging its seat with regard to the East African Community matters. On the contrary, our Head of State - and I am now forced to say this - has been putting pressure on other colleagues to ensure that we form the East African Federation. That is a fact. 

The second point I would like to make is that even when there was a strike by city traders they pointed out that taxes on Mivumba (second hand clothes), and rice, had gone up. Kenya and Tanzania had not complied with what was agreed upon. You see what I mean? What happened was that the Minister of Finance met his counterparts to find out what was happening. So, in fact we are forced to also stay the arrangements so that the taxes on Mivumba and rice are not higher than those in Kenya and Tanzania. So we have also had some problems with some of our neighbours but we are supposed to be diplomatic.

There are many other things, which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs may choose to disclose to you but we are brothers and sisters. We go and harmonize these positions. Uganda is the leading country, Uganda is leading the quest for the East African Federation and I want to assure you that when the minister comes here, all those things will be clarified. There is no cause for alarm. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to appeal to the committees that as they look into this matter, Uganda should stay firm on the tax on rice. We are mobilizing our farmers to grow rice for domestic consumption and that will reduce extensively the dollars that we spend to buy other peoples’ rice. So, I would urge the ministers who are negotiating in the East African Community to urge Kenya and Tanzania to come up to Uganda’s level in order to protect our farmers. Otherwise our mobilization for rice growing locally will be defeated if we have surplus from those countries that are already well off.

MS KIRASO: The minister who is going to participate in these discussions at that level is a colleague to the hon. Minister of Agriculture. He is not here. Does that indicate this statement that the Minister of Agriculture has just given us cannot get to him at Cabinet level? Is there not enough flow of information so that this appeal that the honourable minister is making to her colleague on the Floor of Parliament cannot be addressed at Cabinet level? 

Taking this opportunity, let me say that the federation is just a principle. It is the skeleton. For it to be operationalised there are so many other things that need to be done, which have not been done and that is the concern of this House. (Applause) There are those things that have got to be done at Cabinet level, there are those that have to be done by our representatives in the East African Legislative Assembly and there are those that have to be done by ourselves, Parliament. We are not on board and that is our complaint. 

And then on the Protocol, it has got different aspects. It may not be wise of us as Parliament to say, “Presidential and Foreign Affairs, handle; look at the whole Protocol and come out with a report”. There are aspects, which are trade related; there are aspects in the protocol, which are finance related and which we have to scrutinize, especially those that relate to taxes. There are also aspects in the protocol that touch on diplomacy and relations and which the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee can handle. From what the Minister of Agriculture is talking about, they are also agriculture related, long-term strategic issues like rice. I think we have to give this a little more thought. 

The Committees on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, Trade, and Finance could sit, look at this and get those aspects that are relevant to the different committees so that they are handled by the relevant committees and we come together with a report and a harmonized position. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we expect. When they report they should indicate which areas should remain with them and then we can discuss it here and send them to different committees.

MRS MUKWAYA: With all due respect to hon. Kiraso the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, if she listened very well, I was not appealing to my colleagues the ministers. The issue debated was appealing to the relevant committee and I know Parliament was discussing Cabinet. So I thought I could take this opportunity because either the committee may have not invited me so I just wanted to appeal to the committee. I know that we have already discussed this in Cabinet and my colleagues are aware -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Information, Madam Minister of Agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Let us leave this community matter. We shall debate it in full when the Presidential Committee reports. Chair, Public Service and Local Government?

11.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Capt. (Rtd) Charles Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have three Bills before the Committee. The report on the Local Government Rating Bill is ready. When we are put on the Order Paper we are ready to proceed. The development partners have interest in the Local Government Rating Bill and the release of the next LGDP II Funds is tagged to the passing of that Bill. So, we are ready to proceed with it.

We are also compiling the report on the Local Councils Courts Bill and it will be ready by next week; may be the clerks will proceed with it.  

On amending the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill to provide for the Contracts Committee, we have already met the Minister of Local Government to consider the amendment but we thought it wise to get an input from the Uganda Local Authorities Association. The meeting is going on now; we are meeting the Executive of the Uganda Local Government Authorities Association to get their input into how they think these contracts committees, which are going to replace the District Tender Boards, should work. 

Further, there are three petitions before the committee over the Local Government (Amendment) Bill. One is from the Busoga Charter, which may be solved by the regional tier. The Local Government Authorities Association are to also give us an input into the regional tier. There was also a petition from residents from Katanga in Kawempe, and a petition from the residents of Kabale Municipality. We have partially handled these petitions but we have not compiled a final report.

We are also compiling a report on some evaluation tours in the local governments, which is being finalized and we shall distribute it to members in due course. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Whatever report is ready should be laid on the Table here so that we can appoint a day for its discussion.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I will be ready to table the report on the Local Governments Rating Bill this afternoon.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Committee on Social Services?

11.38
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Herbert Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The pending business for the Committee of Social Services: we have the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005. Discussions with stakeholders have started. We have already discussed it with different universities, both private and public. 

We have the Pharmacy Bill, 2005. Discussions over that have not yet started.

The third Bill we have is the Uganda National Health Organizations Bill, 2005. We have not yet started discussing it with stakeholders.  

We have two petitions before the committee. One is from the drug sellers in Jinja, but the committee is of the view that the Pharmaceutical Bill will address this. The second petition we have is from the Kampala Business Disabled Community. The committee is yet to meet the Mayor to solve the problem. That is the status, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to remind this august House that last year in July there was a petition made by the people of Buvuma Islands regarding the education status of Buvuma College. I have been reminding the chairperson and even the office of the Speaker about it but that petition has not been considered and as we talk the situation is getting worse. So, I want to get guidance from the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee or from you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I cannot give – can you let me know how far you have gone with the petition of Buvuma College?

DR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, Buvuma College is being considered under institutions but the problem was basically financial. We are not yet in position to report back to the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, are you going to leave them in limbo?

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, the fact is that the committee has never addressed that complaint. That should be on record. Maybe the hon. Member from Buvuma islands has been handling it at the level of chairman but not that of chairman of the committee. So, this matter must come to the committee and be addressed accordingly.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I want to be guided because I read this petition and the Speaker referred it to the committee. Using my wisdom I have been pushing that when are you considering this petition - actually this is confirmation that as we talk, even Members of Parliament fear the waters. It is now a year and it has never been considered yet I always contact them but whenever I contact them they say, “Ah, you see, the ferry”. 

Actually this august House should consider the education status of Buvuma islands. Otherwise, if members cannot go and verify what is there, then who is to solve the problem? After all, I do not make the agenda for the committee; it is the chairperson and the members who make the agenda, but I have been reminding them. I thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to inform the committee that the ferry is sound. It is sound and the district of Mukono has two speed motorboats, which can take these members safely to Buvuma and back. I have gone on that ferry with all my vehicles. So, there is no reason for them not to go to Buvuma for fear of the water, and I can guarantee to give them life jackets.

MR OKUPA: I want clarification because I am getting contradictory statements. The chairperson said they are handling but the member of the committee has said they have not looked at it and it needs to be handed to them. So, what is the position? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lwanga, have you received the petition? What are you doing about it? Are you unable to complete the report because you have not gone to Buvuma yet? Buvuma is part of the country, you know. When will you complete the issue of Buvuma islands?

DR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honorable members should be assured that we do not fear the ferry. We have even gone to Kalangala and moved around but as I did state, we are going to put the situation under control. We are going to consider it and we shall be able to handle the matter. We have had a tight schedule but we are moving steadily but we shall definitely solve the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are going to report on it in the next session?

DR LWANGA: In the next session we shall definitely give a report to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am seeking from you, from what we have been hearing from these committee chairpersons, I am worried. Perhaps you can help me. What happens when the events have already overtaken what the committee is doing? You are going to hear that some committees - the chairpersons are going to report that they are still doing the work when actually certain decisions have been taken. In that case what will happen? Is it a matter of routine that we are doing this work or we are supposed to guide the Executive and the country? My fear is that we may be sitting here waiting for the others when we resume yet already things have been executed. What will be the use of the report to Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if they have been overtaken by events we shall be told that it is no longer necessary, but we cannot anticipate what will be overtaken and what will not be overtaken. What I can say is that when petitions come and these matters are before your committee, it is expected that it will be handled expeditiously and the affected people informed. However, I do not control how your committees work.

MR MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to jump the gun but you wait when you hear until the Committee of Energy reports. There was a petition about these tariffs but things have gone – what are we going to do about that one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us talk about it when we get to it.

MAJ.(RTD). RWAMIRAMA: I want to clarify on the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. The committee may be committed to reporting to this House expeditiously but sometimes we are bogged down by the Executive sometimes for failure to produce required information in time. I will take an example of this compensation to Tahar Fourati. I have been informing you of every development, Madam Speaker. 

The other day the Attorney-General had a meeting and aware that we are going for recess, he wrote to say that the matter is delicate and he needs time to internalize it and report back. We may come back from recess when some decisions are already taken yet it is not actually the making of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to design some sanctions for that situation.

11.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have about six areas upon which to report. One is the unfair dismissal of former employees of Uganda Tourist Board. The report is almost ready as we are missing little information. As hon. Rwamirama put it, at the last moment we asked for information, which we have not received until now. So we cannot hand in an incomplete report. Otherwise, we have done most of the investigations and the draft report is there.

Two is the petition on the vanilla prices, and its marketing. We have carried out all the investigations on this. We invited vanilla farmers from various districts; they are in the committee room now. At the time we invited them we did not know we would be having plenary in the morning on the status of the report.  

Number three is a report on National Parks. There was a petition on the road toll in Semliki Game Reserve, and Queen Elizabeth National Park. We shall present our report when we resume.

Another report is on the deteriorating industrial safety standards. We have not been able to move to the industries concerned as yet so it is not yet ready.  

Then comes the Protocol on the customs union. You are aware most of these bodies report through the Foreign Affairs Committee and under Article 123 of our Constitution, Parliament is supposed to make a law regarding these agreements and petitions. When the Protocol was passed on to our committee we made consultations and this type of protocol, we are advised, does not require a report from a committee of Parliament. It is only for presentation. However, from the discussions of today, Madam Speaker, you may advise us on how to proceed with this Protocol.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether I got you right: did you say that the Protocol does not require discussion?

MR MUGAMBE: We were advised that it only requires to be laid on the Table. There are Protocols that are ratified by Parliament and those that are ratified by Cabinet. Those to be ratified by Cabinet are only laid on the Table here for our information and we may not make a report about them.

MR KAKOOZA: I remember around April they gave us a Bill No. 12, which was first put in our pigeonholes but was not laid on the Table. I do not know whether the committee received it. That is the gist of the matter. There are financial problems within that Bill, which have never been handled. That is why the business community is now holding strikes. That is because Parliament has never put in an input. So, I would like to know whether they got that. How do they expect the committee to report if it was not laid on the Table? How are we going to handle that matter? It is causing a problem? 

Currently the customs officers are using two laws: one passed by Parliament another one by East Africa. It is left to an officer to charge an import tax on goods, and it is a problem. It is a complication. How are you hoping to handle that? We are entering into another budget year whereby also Parliament needs to ratify some tariff rates. So, this is a matter, which needs to be handled urgently. We should know how to go about it and we tell the people we represent.

MR OKUPA: I want a clarification. The chairperson of the committee has said that they were advised – who advised you that the Protocol was not to be discussed? We expect the advice to come from the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker. Who advised you to leave it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am lodging a formal protest in regard to the briefing as spearheaded by the chairperson of the committee. I was the chief petitioner on the petition on clean industrial production. I did play my role but I am saddened to hear from the chair saying we have not moved to the industries at the time when people are so worried about the lives of consumers in regard to sub-standard products. How can a responsible chairperson make such a statement? I am saddened and I need further explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable chairperson, I really do not believe that we were intended to only look at the document and leave it there. If it is laid on the Table, you are expected to read it, internalize it and if there are issues, which need to be discussed, we discuss them. But to say that you just note and forget it, that is not how we work.

MR MUGAMBE: After the Protocol was laid on the Table and passed on to our committee, we looked at it and looked at areas of concern. We even went to the extent of meeting some officials of the Ministry of Trade. In the process, as we wanted more research in this area, the clerk to our committee was asked to get more information from the clerks. That is when she came back with that information that we may not proceed. We are in the process of coming back to your office, Madam Speaker, for more guidance on how we should proceed.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My honorable colleague has not covered much ground in terms of taxation as the Minister of Agriculture tried to do. I am only raising concern over the issue of Common External Tax (CET), especially pertaining to rice. 

The hon. Minister of Agriculture could have told us that really in this country rice is the No. 3 foodstuff. Kenya, which is a signatory to the Protocol, established the Common External Tax at the rate of 75 percent taxation in the region, on rice. It has entered into an arrangement with Pakistan. They are stock piling rice in Mombasa and Kenya is arguing that because of their trade relations with Pakistan, and being the largest consumer of their tea, they cannot tax more than 28 percent, which is way below the 75 percent we agreed upon.

My concern is that Kenya is going to flood the market. By the time we apply the 78 to 25 percent tax the market will be flooded with cheap rice thereby affecting not only the Vice-President’s programme but the Ministry of Agriculture. Kenya rice growing has died. We are trying to encourage it on the Uganda side but through laxity, we are not pushing it enough. Tanzania cannot push it because they have got elections coming up in October so they want to relax because it is an issue. In Tanzania once you raise tax on rice you are a loser in politics so they are going slow. They do not want to apply this CET. What is the Cabinet doing about this urgent matter? Are you going to take action when it is too late?

REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It seems the Committee on Trade has been very slow in handling this salient matter concerning the people of Mukono, the vanilla growers. The petition was made and when we come to around July or August, people will begin harvesting and even selling vanilla. But up to now the committee has not come up with a position on the prices whereas our neighbours in Kenya have started coming in to buy our vanilla. 

So we are worried about what kind of procedure we are going to follow. It seems the committee has not been very bothered and our vanilla growers are worried. They think that the prices were left to fall so that they could be kicked out of business. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, this is really not time for a debate. The committee is complying with the requirement that they report how far they have gone with business, then we shall appoint time for debate on it. So, complete your report hon. Chairman of the Trade Committee.

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, as we were winding up, true the vanilla issue is an urgent matter. The next season is June-July and after today’s last meeting with the farmers, we shall definitely be ready with the report. 

However, I want to give information about the rice. Yesterday we met the Kenya Parliament’s Committee of Trade and they actually confirmed that they have reverted back to the old taxes in two areas: drugs and tea. That is because of blackmail from Pakistan, and also the drugs had attracted taxes. So, they have gone back. What hon. Aggrey Awori has said is true as confirmed by our colleagues. Our colleagues had an idea that we should establish a sort of Parliamentary Union where we can meet and discuss these issues of common interest, which concern us. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker and the august House, in the Bill they gave us there is the discretion of the Finance Minister that whenever he finds a problem he should write to the National Council of the East Africa Community to give an allowance to reduce those tariff rates. 

As hon. Aggrey Awori has said, in Kenya they have done it but in Uganda they have not done it. We know it requires the Cabinet, or the minister concerned, to tell the business community that there is a problem, as he did on second hand clothes because it went back to the original tariff rate we had passed by this Parliament. The minister should come out and tell the public that the rates we are using now are the original ones, instead of leaving it as a discriminate sort of law that somebody is using to penalize the business community.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have been given the privilege of standing in for the Prime Minister. (Applause) I am taking notes, and we shall draw the concerns of Members of Parliament to the attention of relevant ministers to respond.

MRS SSENTONGO: This is in regard to his report. I have not heard anything regarding the petition from some workers who were wrongly dismissed from the Uganda Tourist Board. How far have you gone with that petition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the first thing he reported on. Can you complete your report, please?

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, I completed my report and I mentioned the deteriorating standards in the industries. In as much as hon. Lukyamuzi wants to make it look as if it is something that has taken a short time, it is an issue that was presented by hon. Lukyamuzi some years ago and it was handled by the Minister of Trade and so many other bodies. But he brought it up again. So, the process is a bit longer than he wants Parliament to believe. We have made a lot of consultations and the last move is going to the industries to verify and crosscheck the information that we have received from the witnesses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we expect a report in the next session?

MR MUGAMBE: That is right.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, this Committee on Trade, and other sessional committees, their mandate will lapse when we are prorogued - is it today or tomorrow? Does that presuppose that the Committee on Trade should remain as it is with its able leadership?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All the sessional committees will be there, whatever the membership, so the committees remains; that should not worry you. 

12.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Madam Speaker, we have Bills, we have reports and we have one petition. We have the Domestic Relations Bill, which is already before this Parliament and the debates are supposed to begin in June. We presented the report of the committee on this. 

We have the International Criminal Court Bill (ICCB). A draft report was made on the 14th of December last year but debate could not move on because government said there were processes that are going on for negotiation with the LRA and they did not think it would be appropriate to begin discussing the ICC Bill that time. It was only two weeks ago that we received communication from the office of the Attorney-General that they are now ready to proceed with the Bill. We have the report. If necessary it can be laid on the Table.

We have the Constitution (Amendment No.2) Bill. A vote was taken at the second reading; what is left is the Committee Stage and the final completion of the process of that Bill. 

We have the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, which I am sure will be coming before this House for second reading. This afternoon the motion will be moved and the report is ready. It is being prepared for circulation.

We have the Copyright and Intellectual Rights Bill. Permission was granted to me by the House and the Bill was published on the 23rd of July last year. It is ready for processing to be brought to Parliament. I sadly inform the House that we have been waiting since for the Certificate of Financial Implications, which has never come. This matter has been raised very many times on the Floor of this House and I should put the House on notice that I will be moving a further motion next session to amend to delete section 10 of the Budget Act. It is becoming an obstacle to progress of this nature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that one, I wish to remind the Leader of Government Business that the Prime Minister made an undertaking here to secure that certificate about a month ago.

MR OULANYAH: The committee is mandated to report on the performance and reports of constitutional organs. We have reports that have been submitted by the Inspectorate of Government from June 2000, and no report has been made on them. The Human Rights Commission gave us a report from January 2001; no report has been made on them; and the Uganda Law Reform Commission from 2002. All these would have to be dealt with by the committee that will be constituted later.

We have a petition from one Kakwemiira on his dismissal from the National Drug Authority. We had started hearing this matter but as you will appreciate, the schedule became too tight and we could not complete this petition. That is the pending business before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Thank you.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have one clarification and I want to build it by preamble. By next session I will be beginning my tenth year in this Parliament, giving my honest and dedicated service to this Parliament, to Uganda and to Government. Really I expect that after ten years, when I am unable to perform, my country should take care of me in appreciation of my honest and dedicated services. I want to know the status of the Pensions Bill. 

The last time I served on the Legal and Parliamentary Committee, I saw that Bill when asked they said it is being negotiated between Parliament and the Executive –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, you did not really need to go very far on that one. Take it from me, the matter has been resolved. Just take it from me. I do not want public debate on this matter but it has been resolved.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, about a month ago the Speaker appointed a committee to look into the matter pertaining to the roadmap. My understanding of the committees of Parliament is that they are either a select committee, a standing committee or a sessional committee, but this was outside those parameters. I am just wondering if that committee is working in tandem with the Legal and parliamentary Affairs, which has the responsibility of looking into the roadmap?  

Two, will that committee report to the august House, report to the Office of the Speaker or report to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs?

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That committee, which was formed and called the roadmap committee, was actually created under rule 157 in our Rules or Procedure. It is an ad hoc committee. That committee is chaired by the Speaker and I am sure a report will be available. I am a member of that committee and the Vice-Chairman of the Legal Committee is also a member. We are just members and we are enjoined to report on the progress of this committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will receive a report from the Speaker.

MR AWORI: I want to correct the chairperson, if he is referring to rule 157. Can I read it for you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I said you are going to receive a report from the Speaker on the work of that committee. You do not have to go into those details.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do remember some time ago the report on the Parliamentary Commission was sent to this committee. What is the status of that report? We have not discussed that report of the Parliamentary Commission. I would have loved to hear from the chairperson.

MR OULANYAH: Sorry, Madam Speaker, that was an omission but it was reported to the Business Committee that it was one of the pending reports to be acted on by the committee. We have not handled it.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Indeed much as hon. Oulanyah has read a specific rule in our Rules of Procedure describing the arrangement underlining the roadmap, the way the committee was constituted is fairly new. The inquiry I want to make is, at what stage of relevance are we receiving that report? If we are going to make use of the contents of that report, my impression is that it should come before we even visit the third term report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker will determine when you receive it. Committee on Agriculture?

12.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, the committee has processed the following Bills and the reports are ready. 

One; the Uganda Tea Authority (Repeal) Bill is ready and we thought we would dispose of this report before we go for recess but I do not know what the schedule is like. I will lay it on the Table. 

Two, we have also processed the Uganda Tea Growers Corporation (Repeal) Bill and the report is ready. 

We are working on the Agricultural Chemicals Control Bill; it is not yet ready, and the Plant Protection and Health Bill is also not ready. 

Above all, we are now working on the Parliamentary resolution on cotton sub-sector. Three key witnesses have not yet met the committee and this includes the Minister responsible for Trade, who should have met us this morning but since we are sitting now, it is not possible. Then we have the Managing Director of the Cotton Management Development Organization; and the Chairman of the Uganda Ground Nuts Exporters Association. These are the last three key witnesses, after which we should be able to have the report on the resolution of Parliament. 

That is the business that was with our committee and any time, probably in the next session, we should be ready to present the whole report to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. If you have reports, which are ready, they should be laid on the Table and then we shall appoint a day for hearing them.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I remember towards the end of last year I did present to the Speaker’s, and the Clerk’s office, a petition duly signed by over 70 veterinarians in this country regarding the restructuring of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. According to our rules, rule 22 stipulates that the Speaker, in consultation with the Business Committee, is to direct when the petition would be laid on the Table. For about three or four times I have been promised this would be on the Order Paper but to-date nothing has happened. I do not know how to proceed with the petition. May I be clarified?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you have said the Speaker undertook to discuss it with the Business Committee but that has not been done. It will be done as soon as we return for the new session and we shall handle that petition. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs?

12.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Amon-Reeves Kabareebe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Defence and Internal Affairs Committee is proceeding very well and at table we have the NGO Registration (Amendment) Bill, and we are still harmonizing our position with the minister. We have also re-opened the discussions with the NGOs and the public. It has a lot of challenges but I believe we shall be able to table the report as quickly as possible, assuming that the minister is going to co-operate very fast.  

We are also handling an inquiry into the activities of CEDO-KAP, this is the Kalangala Action Plan. The inquiry is in its final stages. 

We are also handling the Prisons Bill, 2004 and the committee is still interacting with the stakeholders. We shall also table that report soon.

The committee is also handling the White Paper on Defence Transformation and Modernization of the UPDF. It is still under consideration and discussions are going on with the Ministry of Defence. That is what we currently have on the desk to report to the House.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairman has reported his work, part of which covers the Kalangala Action Plan. I have been reading in the papers that some hon. Members of Parliament, to be exact 150, have joined this - I do not know how to describe it - important organization. May I know whether the chairman who has just made a statement is a member of this organization? And if so will there not be conflict of interest in this particular case? 

This is a very important matter. The international community is concerned about this organization, Parliament is concerned about this organization too, and I want to be assured that the investigation will be free, fair and without any bias. Can I get the assurance from the chairman?

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, he has said he is relying on information from newspapers and I was also surprised when I was reading those newspapers because I found his name there. I think he is hon. Anang-Odur. Check properly in those papers, your name is there and mine is not. So, be careful. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My office has no knowledge of your membership to some of those things. So, my work is the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. I just want to know how far you have gone with the work so that I can plan. That is what I am interested in. Those other things, I do not know.

MR ANANG-ODUR: For the records in the Hansard records, Madam Speaker, I am a well-known multi- partyist, belonging to the Uganda People’s Congress Party, and even Maj. Mutale knows this very well. It cannot be anybody’s imagination to put my name anywhere near anything relating to NRM/O, especially Kalangala Action Plan. It is not possible. This was a concoction of the Chairman.  Thank you.

MR MUZOORA:  Madam Speaker, let me assure the honourable member that the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee is progressing very well.  The investigations are going on and the powers of the committee are well known constitutionally.  Therefore, there is no way a chairman of Defence Committee would be a Member of Kalangala Action Plan.
  	
MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am the custodian of the list of the members of Kalangala Action Plan and I want to be put on record and schedule that the chairman is not our member.  I thank you.

12.22
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you will notice, most of the UPDF representatives are on course in Kimaka, so really all of us, I think, are their voices here.  There are areas of concern and interest to the soldiers and I think even to all of us. I do not know whether they will appear and in what report.    

One is about the rampant cases of money lost between paymasters, and the other is about payment of auxiliary forces.  I have been to Lira of recent and there is a big outcry of non-payment. Then also the regular forces, I think in Kapchorwa, are not getting their salaries.

The other one is about salary enhancement of soldiers.  Much as the policy is that Defence, is bound by the MTEF problem, these soldiers are not very happy about the denial of salary enhancement in the UPDF.

Then the last one is about construction of houses.  Money is being recovered from what was known as housing allowance and I think it is some good money per month. We want a substantive report on the money lost between pay masters since so many cases have been reported, auxiliary forces payment, construction of houses and enhancement of salaries for soldiers.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matovu, are you asking the chairperson to explain those?

CAPT. MATOVU: No; at least to take note in their reports in future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see they cannot just be imported into their work. You ought to have moved a motion here or raised a question, which would have referred the committee to look into them. I do not think they have to handle that. The other alternative would be to handle it during the budget session, but I do not think the chairperson is prepared for that yet.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Only about two items of what he has brought are being handled by the committee, the salary enhancement for the soldiers, that is, the ten percent salary increase in 2000/2001 for all government workers including the soldiers. But it is only the soldiers or UPDF who were not paid this money, and it has risen to Shs 52 billion. We have now in the budget reallocated, due to the ceiling, money from somewhere, which will have to be paid to the soldiers beginning with the next financial year.

Then the second issue the committee realised was the housing. Money has been deducted from the package of the soldiers to put up the barracks.  This was agreed on by the Army Council in 1998 where the soldiers are building their own barracks.  But we have also recommended to the Budget Committee and to the President that, that is being unfair and should be handled in the next financial year.  Those are the two items we are handling. I think you will have to bring the rest to the table so that you can authorize the committee to handle them.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen on a point of procedure. Hon. Anang-Odur raised a pertinent issue regarding Kalangala Action Plan, and when the chairperson was assuring him, hon. Sitenda Sebalu assured this House that he is the custodian and he has the list. Procedurally you would find that members of the Defence Committee are members of Kalangala Action Plan and they are the same members investigating. Our rules here state that the moment you quote a document, you lay it on the Table.  Since he is the custodian, let him lay the list on the Table to allow –(Interruptions)- Yes, Madam Speaker, there is no way you can investigate. Some of them are even Members, let him lay the list on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, with that one, you will have to move a substantive motion.  You cannot lay documents on the Table from the air. You must move a substantive motion, make your case and then we proceed. If you want to actually take action against the chairperson of the committee, it must be a substantive motion. That is what our rules say.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I attended one meeting of the Committee on Defence, where Maj. Kakooza Mutale came as a witness. I was disappointed and horrified to see that members of the committee, who were supposed to be listening to the witness, took up in arms in his defence against honourable colleagues. So it was as if some of the members of the committee were lawyers for Kakooza Mutale.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, you are being dragged into a meeting where you were not, and the member who is submitting has no record which we can replay and see whether what he is stating was right Is he in order to submit without giving us the facts of that day in the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I cannot rule on matters, which you allege and someone denies since I do not attend your committee meetings. I have told you if you have got an issue against the chairperson of the committee, move substantively, not just locally.

12.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nathan Byanyima): Madam Speaker, recently through your ruling, you requested that the Committee on Works looks into the events that led to the collision of two vessels, MV Kaawa and MV Kabalega. Currently, the committee is going on and is receiving a number of witnesses so that they can, at the end of the day, come to a conclusion and report to this House. It is the only pending work that we have in the committee and hopefully when the committee is constituted in the next session, they will be able to report.

Secondly, I want to appeal to my colleagues that when they go for recess they should look at the two booklets from the Ministry of Works, Volume 1 and Volume 2. At the end of Volume 2 there are a number of schedules for a number of roads in your constituencies.  The committee is unable to move to all the roads because we do not have the time and means to reach there.  So we appeal that when you reach your constituencies, look at the schedule so that you look at the road that appears in your constituency.  

Normally there is a distance, the scope of work, how much money and when it was supposed to be done.  When this work is done, it will enable the committee, when they are consulting the Policy statement, to see which work has not been done so that it can be handled in the next financial year.  

Two, the ministry has committed itself that each constituency should have a Ministry of Works road. So when you go back and you find that you do not have any in your constituency, it would be proper and fitting to report to the committee so that it can be considered in the next financial year. Kindly, Madam Speaker, I also appeal to colleagues that quite often we write letters but you do not reply.  But for the sake of your constituencies, and for the sake of your political stature in your constituencies, help us.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.31
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The chairperson of the committee reported that the only pending work is the investigation of the accident that took place on the lake.  But, Madam Speaker, there is a petition of former workers of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications signed by over 600 workers representing 1000 workers who have been denied their terminal benefits.  This petition was presented to the Speaker - actually 50 workers representing others presented this petition to me, and I have had several interactions with the Speaker and he had said this petition would be taken over by the committee.

We have been waiting for workers to be called to present their issue. So I am really shocked to hear that this petition has not come to you because you are saying the “only pending work” when actually this petition came several months ago.  

Madam Speaker, my question therefore is, how do I proceed? These workers have been ringing me almost daily asking when they are going to come to the committee as witnesses. Do I lay this petition, because I have a copy of it, so that it is saved? Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence in this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether that petition was formally handed over to the Committee on Works.  Normally you are supposed to come here, move a motion and we hand it over officially to the committee.  I do not even know about that petition.

DR LYOMOKI: But, Madam Speaker, I presented it to the Speaker’s office and the Clerk, and the understanding was that it would be taken to the committee.  But if that is the case, then I have a petition. May I lay it on the Table so that it is saved? This thing has been pending for a long time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you know our rules, honourable member. You must come here and move a motion and we hand it over officially, on the Hansard. The rules are very clear.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable member is unfairly condemning the committee.  He has been here; this is the second time he is in Parliament. We expect him to be well versed with the rules on how the House proceeds.  Now to come here and say the committee has failed to work yet he did not follow the procedures - it is coming to about ten years. He should have come, laid the petition on the Table then the Speaker commits it to the committee.  So, do not give a false impression that the committee has failed to do its work.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable member is being unfair. You know that I am a member of the Legal Committee and I know that we have handled petitions that have never passed through this House. We have ever done that so I know the procedure. I know that actually there are certain petitions that have ever been handled without being laid here, and therefore I think the honourable member is unfair to insinuate that I do not know what I am talking about. But I –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the rules of the House are very clear and you should follow them. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear. Rule 22 is explicit on procedures to be followed in handling petitions. Indeed, to the best of my knowledge, all Members in this House have conformed to this rule while handling petitions.  Is it in order for Hon. Sam Lyomoki to allude to the fact that this House has always breached its own rules by handling certain petitions without going through the normal channels?  Is he in order to give such a false impression about the competence of this House in handling its work professionally and thus giving a wrong impression about the manner with which the Speaker is handling business in the House?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is completely out of order.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The matter of the workers to Uganda Posts and Telecommunications is of major importance, and therefore, I beg that I lay this petition on the Table.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, under Rule 59, I beg to move that the Member no longer be heard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would advise you to follow the right procedure. We shall then put you on the Order Paper and the petition will be handed over officially to the Committee on Works.

DR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect hon. Byanyima for being a chairman of the Committee on Works for quite long. I do not know whether he is aware that some time in 2003 around May the Minister of Works wrote to the chairman, LC5 Kapchorwa about the popular Kapchorwa-Swam Road, which is now worse than a cattle track, that it was supposed to have been re-gravelled starting April 2004. Then in 2004 they talked of starting in April 2005 and recently the Minister himself, I think that was in March 2005, promised that they would start working on it April this year, and to-date nothing is taking place.  

Now, who is lying to the other?  Is it the committee or the minister lying to the public?  May I get that clarification please?  What do I tell the people of Kween and Kongasis Counties, who have no road especially now that it is raining?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss because my honourable colleague knows that he and I have an oversight role to play, but we do not go into detail to know when the work is supposed to be done. You will recall that very recently the Minister stood here and said that the Kapchorwa-Swam Road, which I visited with you personally, was going to be worked on. I know he was talking of the first class murram, and together with you we are eagerly waiting for the same. Thank you.

MR KAPKWOMU: So, what do I tell the people of Kongasis?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Kapkwomu, the Minister of Works is here; why are you torturing the chairperson of the committee?  The person who is on the engine is there.

12.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the Kapchorwa/Swam Road is undergoing periodic maintenance. It is going to be re-gravelled. This is being done by DANIDA. I have not got the exact details, but we have already done the procurement. When we do the procurement, we choose the contractor and he is given time to mobilize. So, definitely the work will be done. Tell your people that everything is in place.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: I would like to advise my honourable colleague that when your people ask you, “what are we going to do?” Tell them to vote wisely. You know how you voted last time and you have lost. 

MR KAPKWOMU: Madam Speaker, once your mother is ugly and she has produced you, she will remain your mother. That is what I have to inform hon. Aggrey Awori. They will still vote this way. 

MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to request that during the recess, either the chairperson of the committee or the Minister get some time off and move in a taxi maybe from Makindye to Kampala or from Najjanakumbi to Kampala. It takes about ten hours from –(Interjections)- Yes, it is always good to exaggerate, Madam Speaker. But there is so much traffic congestion down town towards the Old Taxi Park. The Old Taxi Park has got only one entrance and only one exit; and people spend about three to four hours waiting either to enter or exit.  I want to know whether the Minister could look into this matter even if it is a City Council matter, but at least to help the public because there is so much outcry down town. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I stay in Gaba and we use the road coming through Mukwano Industries, but the road is so bad. I do not want to invite or praise hon. Lukyamuzi about what he did in planting banana suckers, because we are almost going to do the same. If you look at the 8th street from Kampala to Namuwongo, to go through Kampala Hill School, you can hardly pass.  Come back to Prince Badru Kakungulu Road coming through –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you know this sitting is intended for the committees to update the House on what is pending before them. The matters of that bad road- The Budget session is coming and the committees are just reporting on what is before them so that we know where to move in the next session.
 
MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are going on recess and this issue was for the Minister of Works. For two weeks now I have been trying to see whether I could report this matter to the Ministry of Works but I could not.  But down town here we are stuck and the way to Gaba is – Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mugerwa, the Minister of Works is here. Why don’t you actually go and sit with him out there and he gives you an answer. This is the second time you have raised this matter in the last two weeks. 

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, your advice is quite correct. She should come and consult with the ministry.  But basically I can inform the honourable member –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I do not think that the Minister should direct me to do his work. I think he should have enough staff to do the survey and see what is happening. If he does not know what is happening in town I think he is not in order to instruct me to go and help him. So, Madam Speaker, is he in order to pretend not to know what is happening in town so that I can do this work for him? I wish the President could appoint me to be the Minister of Works. Thank you.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have something to tell her? She does not want to hear you, I think.

MR AWUZU: She must hear –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, tell her.

MR AWUZU: You have to hear it because you are misleading this House. You should know that most of the roads in Kampala city belong to City Council and it is the Mayor Sebaana Kizito; you should be addressing.  You should not be blaming the Ministry of Works for Mayor Sebaana Kizito’s roads.  Thank you.

12.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Natural Resources got the following reports under consideration and some are ready as follows. The report on Tariff has been ready for a long, long time and it is waiting for a slot on the Order Paper to be presented. 

The other report, which is ready, is that of Nile Water and this is arising from the petition by Hon. Amon Muzoora. Hon. Amon Muzoora moved a motion and the committee now has got this report ready. But the last time we were asked to hold this report because Government was finding diplomatic ways of handling the problem. I have been waiting for the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, but so far they have not come back to me to advise me otherwise. But the report is ready and can be presented here anytime.  

There are two other reports, which are almost ready, that is, the petition on NORPAK Power that is the Karuma Power Project, and the Bujagali. These are being finalized. They are being written out. The committee has already concluded consideration of the facts and these reports can be ready anytime. There are two other reports, which are almost ready; the report on the petition by the residents of Kibale.  Madam Speaker, the committee has to make a journey to Kibale and the main constraint has been funding of that journey. But all other facts have now been compiled and as soon as the committee can travel to Kibale on a fact-finding tour, this report should be ready.  

The other one is the report on water level at Kiira.  Madam Speaker, and honourable members, you may recall that hon. Onek brought a complaint on the Floor and this matter was referred to the committee. We have gone a long way. What is now left is that during our course of work we decided that hon. Onek and some engineers from the Ministry of Energy should harmonize their position and report back to the committee. But I think this meeting has not taken place up to now because hon. Onek has not reported back on his discussion with the engineers from the ministry.  So, as soon as that report comes in, we can finalize this report as well and present it here.

Madam Speaker, last week there were two other matters referred to this committee, that is, the Thermal Power Plant and the Fuel Prices. We had scheduled the meeting this morning to consider these two matters but because of sitting in the morning we have not started on these two issues, but they are related. They will need a day or two only to be finalised. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity. That is the position of the Committee on Natural Resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, as regards those reports, which are ready, arrange to lay them on the Table so that we can  appoint a day for listening to them.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I will be very soft spoken. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources for the report he has given us. However, I am not happy with the way Parliament deals with demands especially of an emergency nature. For example, the unaffordable tariff report is as a result of a public demonstration last year, which attracted over 10,000 people in Kampala. I would like to know from the chairperson whether, much as he has given us that briefing, there is any hope that that report will ever feature on the Order Paper anytime?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already made a ruling. He has said his report is ready. I have asked him to lay it on the Table and I will give him time to present it. We have already agreed on that. 

Committee on Pornography? Members of the Committee on Pornography. There are no members of that Select Committee? The chair is hon. Kiyingi. Okay, may be we stand it over. Committee on Immigration?

12.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION (Dr Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall that I have had serious discussions with you regarding the report of the Select Committee on Immigration on a number of occasions. I am however informed that you have personally directed that the report should be finalized by the end of this month and accordingly presented to Parliament. Immediately the report is availed to my committee, I will request that it is put as a priority on the Order Paper as we resume the next session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I undertook to ensure that the technical work is done to enable the report to be presented quickly.  

12.51
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County,Rakai): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a concern with the chair of the Immigration Committee. I consulted him regularly over the committee work and I had requested the committee to visit Mutukula Border Post because it borders with Tanzania and we have a lot of Tanzanians who are entering Uganda illegally. We have a lot of border problems and the Committee chairperson assured me that when resources are available. 

I want the committee chairperson before the report is submitted, to assure me that at least he interfaces with the people on the border of Tanzania. There are so many problems like free entry of immigrants without any checkpoints. I hope that we can interface with the colleagues on the Tanzania side so that we are able to have a full report submitted to this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, as he has rightly pointed out, the committee was not availed the resources to visit many of the border points we had anticipated to visit. If we had been given resources we were even supposed to go outside the country and see how immigration is being handled in other countries. When we make the report, members will appreciate our concerns.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Further clarification on that Madam Speaker. My mother comes from Rakai and I regularly visit that place. This is a very serious matter as pointed by hon. Kasamba. It is now an established fact that many people from Tanzania freely enter Uganda through hon. Kasamba’s constituency unabated. Nobody cares to even ask for identity cards.  

The Government of Uganda, if it does exist, seriously should not give us reasons related to lack of funding or failing to check that important matter. Otherwise you are no longer in charge of the affairs of the state. So, I am standing here to demand that government takes up this matter seriously, otherwise we will soon be a no man’s land for anybody to enter. Once we have a government, which is in charge, no excuses related to funding should be given. Otherwise tell us so that we take you over if you have no responsibility to protect the borders of Uganda. 

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by the chairperson of the Select Committee does not tally with what hon. Lukyamuzi is raising. The crossing of people from Tanzania to Uganda and from Uganda to Tanzania casually visiting neighbours is at all borders. And it is in the spirit of the East African Cooperation that people move across borders to visit relatives and friends –(Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order in very, very serious terms. Uganda is an independent nation much as it has commitment in terms of membership to the African Union, United Nations and now the East African Community. It is a sovereign nation whose borders must be protected. You are aware that today people enter Uganda through hon. Kasamba’s constituency unabated. 

Is the Minister of Internal Affairs is in order to make a statement that because of the inter-relationship we have in the East African Community people can visit one another even if it means visiting Uganda to settle and acquire land unilaterally? Is he a responsible minister? Are we any man’s land? Can anyone enter Uganda and settle anyhow because of the partnership we owed with other nations? Should he remain a Minister of Internal Affairs? Is he in order to make such a statement without responsibility in terms of protectionism for the nation of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am also aware that Ugandans travel to Tanzania unabated; they also travel to other countries unabated. Yes and hon. Lukyamuzi you have said people of Rubaga South support the federation. You have said it here in this House. I have heard you; you are on record for saying they support East African Community, these are some of the things we have to contend with.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker those are not visitors. The people we are referring to come and settle permanently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, that matter  can be dealt with ordinarily through the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. That is their mandate. So, hon. Muzoora, take up this matter and – they have finished, but they say they are about to report.

12.57
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.  I have listened to the statement of the honourable Minister in charge of Internal Affairs and it is actually a very good statement. In the spirit of cooperation amongst the East Africans, there should be free movement of people across the borders. But what disturbs me is to hear that a number of Ugandans were collected and sent across the border from Tanzania.  

Similarly, we also hear of stories of Ugandans being collected together in the streets of Nairobi and then they are repatriated or thrown into prison. Such acts are not in the spirit of East African cooperation and I do not know whether the minister has taken trouble to get in touch with his colleagues across so that such a situation can be sorted out. Otherwise, it is very embarrassing for us Ugandans to welcome other people from Kenya and Tanzania very warmly and then when our people go there they are mistreated, imprisoned and subjected to all sorts of torture.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you honourable member for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give my colleague is that even on Lake Victoria, the Kenyans actually are allowed to fish in the waters of Lake Victoria but when our people cross to their waters, they pay for it.
  
We appeal to this government that there is need to speed up the treaty because from what was resolved in the debate between the three countries at Munyonyo, there is a lot which needs to be harmonised. Otherwise, the honourable Minister of Agriculture raised the issue regarding rice but it is not only rice, which is at stake, even the fishing sector.  

I think we need fair play. Otherwise, if they can come here freely and they do business yet we cannot, then the problem is that the demarcation is not easily identified.  When our people cross they pay the cost. Their equipment including engines is sometimes impounded.

MR NYENDWOHA MUTITI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk of immigration, at times I fail to understand if we really have a government here.  I really do not understand, because Uganda government wants to be more African than any other government in this world. When we talk of African spirit, you just cannot enter Congo without any document.  There are immigration units even in the bushes to see if any person enters Congo. But the Congolese are entering Uganda anytime and the frequency and numbers of members entering here is just too much.

MR AWUZU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of order because the member on the Floor is misleading this House. He says that Congolese can enter Uganda the way they wish, but you cannot enter Congo anywhere at all. I would like to inform him that –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Order, order.

MR AWUZU: Yes, I am giving a background to my order. I would like to inform him that my home is one mile from the Congo border and a lot of my relatives are in the Congo. We cross the border as we wish and the Congolese do not stop us in any way. In fact, we even graze our cattle in Congo.  So, is he in order to misinform the House that we cannot enter Congo as we wish?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member’s constituency also borders another part of Congo.  So, maybe the corner, which is near Vurra behaves differently from the corner where Mr Mutiti comes from.

MR NYENDWOHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. That is exactly what is happening. The honourable minister says his relatives are in Congo and he could be one of them. I do not know (Laughter) But I am bordering Congo.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you hon. Nyendwoha for giving way. Madam Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor made a serious statement. I wondered if there is a government because  I can see the honourable ministers in the Front Bench seated, including the Second Deputy Prime Minister and they kept quiet as if to confirm what the member was saying; as if there is no government.  I am wondering if they are concurring with the honourable member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister. (Laughter)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Kajura Muganwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, it is a hard remark, but was of so little significance that it did not call for reply, that is why we ignored it.

MR NYENDWOHA: I want to finish now. My constituency lies along Lake Albert and for the whole of that stretch, there is no immigration unit. The Congolese come into Uganda but we do not go there. The honourable minister is very lucky he can enter freely, but anybody from Buliisa, entering Congo without any document will be arrested and the next day brought back.
  
I was wondering. I said I want to reiterate this one, because when the Congolese enter Uganda, nobody touches them, and they are coming everyday. Even if you went today they are crossing.  But when we go there, because there is a government, we are arrested and asked to produce documents. I think this government should be very serious about protecting this land as somebody rightly put it. Otherwise within a very short time, you will not see any Ugandan in this country. Thank you very much.

MR SSENGO: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I want to appeal to the honourable Minister in charge of Internal Affairs to get in touch with his colleagues across so that they stop harassing people. Just as we are good to their people, they should also reciprocate.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the other person who should be asked to engage is the Minister for Regional Cooperation.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Madam Speaker, let me just conclude this way. For the East African Countries, I think the issue of our people crossing the borders is something that we must get used to. I am not talking about illegal settlement of aliens. This week we have just come back from Arusha and before the East African Parliament, there is a bill for free movement of people and this is being promoted within the East African Cooperation. We also have our immigration officers at certain points where they are issuing temporary travel documents for people who cross over from one side to another. I am saying, where the immigration points do exist. 

We appeared before the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee last week and we pointed out where we have some weaknesses and we have asked for strengths. Also we are recruiting more immigration officers to take up –(Interruption)-

MR MBALIBULHA: With a lot of pain, Madam Speaker, I am rising on point of order. Is it in order for the Minister to say that Uganda, which is under threat, according to the Minister of Defence, should get used to free entry and exit including those people in West Nile who smuggled a lot of guns into Uganda without his ministry knowing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the Minister was talking about what is imminent for the East African region and there is now a Bill to permit free movement of people of East Africa. That is what he is saying. He has also said that he does not have sufficient border posts. 

MR MWANDHA: Can I give information to the honourable minister? I think this would be useful for him to clarify to the House. Of course, as he said, people cross in from Kenya and everywhere to Uganda and Uganda people also cross. But you see what happens is that, particularly Kenyans, cross and come and get jobs which Ugandans would have got, even without work permits. 

I do not know whether this is also in the spirit of the East African Community that people should simply come here and get jobs without work permits when in fact it is next to impossible for a Ugandan to get a job in Kenya. It will be extremely difficult. But you get accountants here, you see people recruiting marketing officers, you get all sorts of people coming here. I think the Minister should clarify whether the jobs meant for Ugandans should be allowed to go to Kenyans.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we expect a report on immigration. Why don’t we save this debate for that report?  Please, let us wait for that report. We shall give it priority.

MR LUKYAMUZI: But the Minister of Internal Affairs is talking irresponsibly.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker , is the aspiring President of the Conservative Party - come 2006 -  in the names of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order, when most times he talks irresponsibly, to demand responsible debate from other people, when actually he put a question to which  you ruled that the best thing to do is to wait for the debate of the committee and anybody who has an issue should go to the committee? Is he in order to attack my colleague when you have already ruled on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we have taken a position that we wait for the report on Immigration and have a full debate on this matter. Committee on Acholi Bur 

1.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON ACHOLI BUR (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, you mandated us to investigate the circumstances that surrounded the beating of our colleagues in Acholi Bur. We took sometime to take off because of limited facilitation but I am happy to report that we are almost concluding our investigations. We went to Gulu, Kitgum and Pader and the only things, which are remaining are two statements from CID. Otherwise, we already have a draft report, unfortunately we are going to go for recess, but two or three weeks would be sufficient to conclude our report. Thank you very much. 

1.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Madam Speaker, I thank you.  The Committee on Industrial Relations completed its work. We visited several areas of this country, industries in Tororo, and some in Kampala like the Flower Industry. We also took the opportunity to go to Mbarara and saw some areas where there were some accidents. In one particular case an arm had been cut off when they were doing coffee hurray.  

We have a draft report and we are trying to move this into a final report. Hon. Martin Wandera and I should have this final report ready in about a week’s time. We shall use the recess and really plead that you put us on the Order Paper. So expect the report in the next session.

Madam Speaker, before I sit down, I also see an anomaly on this issue of committees. I believe we have standing committees, which have pending business and maybe other ad hoc committees. But for some reason, I do not know why standing committees are never given the same kind of respect the sessional committees are given. 

I would like to bring out the issue of the Equal Opportunities Committee. Madam Speaker, we have had our report pending for the last one year and it has not been put on the Order Paper. I wrote to the Speaker and I gave a copy to you and the Clerk stating that this committee does not have a committee room and a Clerk. It is even a wonder that we came out with the report. 

We are dealing with issues of marginalized people and we are marginalized. It is very, very difficult. I have kept quiet for the last two years but it is very difficult to operate in these circumstances. I do not know how money is allocated to committees. What happened to our allocation and how we are supposed to go on?

As you know Madam Speaker, we did seek leave of this House to move a Private Members Bill on persons with disabilities and this debate duly gave us leave. I would like to report that we got a Certificate of Financial Implications from the Minister of Finance. Therefore, I hope that Parliament will assist and publish the Bill expeditiously so that we can move on and work on this as a Private Members Bill.
  
Madam Speaker, this Committee is very ambitious. We also mean to table a Female Genital Mutilation or cutting Bill with the assistance of hon. Gertrude Kulany. We also hope to bring to light a Bill on Domestic Violence. We also asked for the Sexual Offences Bill but the Government has never told us what happened to it and yet, as you know, we have very many cases of incest and defilement. We would definitely like a statement on this matter. 

We also plan to go to Buvuma Islands as one of the geographically marginalized areas. So we have ambitious plans but we have the problem of non-facilitation and of generally being ignored. Madam Speaker, I would like to table this as our major concern.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, after your report I was going to ask the standing committees to report in the afternoon because I know that some of them have reports.  However, concerning some of your difficulties, by the 1st of June you will have additional staff to give you support.  

The Parliamentary Commission has recruited additional staff and they are reporting on 1st of June, so you will have staff attached to you. The other matters of marginalisation will also be handled.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I thought this sitting was particularly intended to save the work of the sessional committees. Without doing this, all the work would expire with the session. The Standing Committees, to my understanding, have their term going on  with Parliament.  So, I would think that even if we do not conduct another sitting for the standing committees to present whatever they have, their Business would be automatic since their work would continue even in the next session.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But isn’t it necessary that Parliament knows what they are doing in their committees? Many of them have never reported to this House since we begun this session.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: The Rules of this Parliament oblige some standing committees like the Equal Opportunities Committee to give a report and we have sought leave of the House. However, we appear on the Order Paper, then we disappear so definitely we are in breach of the rules. I do not believe that by virtue of the fact that a committee is sessional and another is standing they should be given different reference. I mean we should not be discriminated against.  I think we all facilitate the work of this House and we ask that we be facilitated to do our work.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The standing committees will also have to report because many have never reported since we started work here.  I think this House is entitled to know what it is that they are doing. So those who have something to report will report in the afternoon. Honourable Members the House is suspended until 2.30 p.m. to enable us do the rest of the business. Thank you.

(The House was suspended at 1.17 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.39 p.m._)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any chairpersons of standing committees ready to report? I think we stand it over  - (Interruption)

2.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Charles Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I promised to lay on the Table the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the local Government Rating Bill; so can I?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us amend the Order Paper and permit the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government to lay his report on the Table.

Capt. Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is a report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Local Government Rating Bill, 2003.  It is ready for discussion when we are given chance on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Clerk will circulate copies of that report and a day will be appointed to listen to the presentation. Are there any reports from standing committees?

2.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATE ENTERPRISES AND AUTHORITIES (Mr Elijah Okupa): Madam Speaker, the Standing Committee on Commissions, State Enterprises and Authorities yearly reports. These pertain to the accounts we are scrutinizing for the year 2000, 2001 and 2003.  Reports for 2000 and 2001 are ready; 2003 just has a few things remaining. We want to submit them as one report because they all pertain to one organization, that is, Uganda Revenue Authority.  So we ask to be taken care of when we return here such that we can have something to put to this House in respect to this committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We note the progress in your committee and shall give you an opportunity to lay on the Table as soon as possible when we return. Then we will give you time for debate.

2.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY (Ms Sarah Namusoke): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I wish to first of all apologize for not being in the House in the morning. The Committee on Pornography submitted its report beginning of March. We are waiting to be put on the Order Paper for presentation.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall try to bring forward that report which you completed sometime back for debate.

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Minister makes his statement, this week we have again been visited by students from Caltec Academy. This time it is senior 3 and their teachers. They come from Makerere in Kawempe South. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda.
 
2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Simon Mayende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education has got three issues on which to make statements; the first one is Namasagali University. 

Namasagali University had its provisional licence cancelled and they have subsequently taken the National Council for Higher Education to court under Section 129 of the Act.  In light of that, Madam Speaker and colleagues, it may not be in order to discuss the subject until court has made its ruling.  The matter is sub judice; we wish to advise accordingly.  

The next is the university in the East.  Madam Speaker and honourable members consultations are on going. About three weeks ago, the ministry received a report from the committee that was set up to give recommendations on the way forward.  We have received that report but further consultations are on going.  We request the ministry to give us a little more and we have already consulted the Social Services Committee of Parliament. We are yet to go to Cabinet.  We have a few other stakeholders we want to consult, and we believe that before the Budget is read we shall have come to a decision as to the way forward for the university in Eastern Uganda.  

We hope that there will be time at that point to report fully what will have transpired by then, because even this morning the minister herself was in a meeting regarding the same. We believe that, given a little more time, we will come up with a final position.  

The third and last issue, Madam Speaker, is the matter concerning formation and recruitment of the head of the construction units in the Ministry of Education. In essence this was a question raised by hon. James Kubeketerya requesting to know why Mr John Nakabago had been left out from among the candidates to compete. I would request for your indulgence to give a bit of background to this matter. Mr John Nakabago joined the Ministry of Education and Sports in 1998 as a director (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are clear here. When a statement is to be made by a Cabinet minister, we should be privileged to have copies but we have not yet seen the copies. I do not know what happened. Can the minister avail the Members with copies such that we are able to follow you and make fruitful deliberations?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The minister raised the issue of Namasagali that it is in court and it is sub judice. But, Madam Speaker, Namasagali University and the National Council of Higher Education is under the Ministry of Education. Why doesn’t the ministry handle these issues or guide these two institutions to solve issues out of court other than going for litigation. Can’t the ministry mediate the issue instead of having the university taking the National Council of Higher Education, which is under the ministry to court, which bears the costs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think a few copies have arrived.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before the minister starts, still on the issue of the university in the eastern part of this country. He has said that they will be able to make a statement before the Budget is read. But the Budget reading we know is on the 8th of June and I do not know whether we are going to come back here a week before for that report. It would have been better for it to be given to the House to allow input before the Budget. I am finding a bit of difficulty understanding how we are going to operate on that matter.  

I am also wondering, because there was a very comprehensive investigation into this matter, and a committee was set up when Members requested it. There were a lot of consultations and he has reported here that the report has been submitted to this committee. I am wondering what other consultations are still pending, because we are starting to get some fillers from different angles as regards this matter.  

So, I want the minister to clarify this matter concerning the eastern university basing on the fact that the Budget reading is on the 8th and possibly the President’s address on the 7th June. I think that is when we are most likely to be here; on the 7th and 8th(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no intention of supplementing or standing in for the Minister of Education. I would just like to inform my honourable colleague that I happened to attend the Sessional Committee on Social Services where the honourable minister and his senior colleague made a submission to the committee on matters pertaining to a public university for the eastern region. There were three major outstanding issues.

One; in the submission generally, the committee  accepted that there shall be a public university in eastern region with the main campus at Busitema whose name has yet to be determined. They were calling it “Nile” but Members of the committee objected to the name “Nile” because it is applicable elsewhere.
  
However, the outstanding issue was about the minister’s proposal. It was a hefty report, which as I said in principle, was acceptable. It suggested having several campuses in different areas of the region with the main campus at Busitema, they were three in one. The name was not agreeable and the minister will confirm that the government said we should consult as a region and come up with a recommendation. 

The second concern was the establishment. We said we wanted a substantial amount of money put on the Vote, but the government said they were going to give us something like project funding. We said, no. 

The second aspect of the concern was that next financial year there would be indictable budgetary allocation, something like Shs 50 million. We said no. Then the following year there would be recruitment of staff, we said, no.  Then the third year was when they would start on enrolment; we said no. All the things can be rolled into one year, so we want you to include that cost in the budget of this financial year, and basically they agreed.
 
The last point was that they were going back to the Cabinet to confirm the report. Some of us got concerned and said, “Look, you are the one who has brought the report to the committee, we assume you have cleared the matter in the Cabinet, so why do you want to go back to the Cabinet?”
  
So, Madam Speaker, essentially, I am saying we agreed but the two most outstanding issues are the name of the new university and the Budget. That is, we want a substantial amount of money for the purpose of recruiting staff and establishing the institution.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the Minister of Education has just advised us that he has three reports to make to this Parliament, and we are privileged to have one report, why don’t we allow him to read the report, we debate it, and at the end you rule regarding the two pending statements rather than us debating statements which have not come to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The one concerning Namasagali, we cannot obviously go into its merits because it is sub-judice. However the honourable member wanted to know if there is any other way of solving it other than going to court. I think that the minister can answer that.
  
About the eastern university, Members are concerned about whether there is going to be a budget provision and how big it will be and whether we will have any input before the budget, considering that we are going on recess. So for me those are not disturbing the minister, I think they are things he can answer before we go to the main statement.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Hon. Byaruhanga’s concern is whether there is no alternative to solving the Namasagali problem. Apparently not right now, because it is Namasagali that chose to go to court. We wanted to see if we would solve it administratively, but Namasagali thought they could resolve this matter in court. We cannot get the two people together if one part is unwilling. That is the position as far as the ministry is concerned. But we would definitely have desired to resolve that matter out of court.

I am sure hon. Aggrey Awori has ably explained some of the concerns that the Member of Parliament for Kasilo raised. But specifically the additional consultations are with Cabinet. If I may create the impression that hon. Aggrey Awori might have created, we came to consult the Social Services Committee not to report to them the position or decision of Cabinet. 

Apparently, in the past, ministries have been accused of bringing to the committees, and specifically Social Services committees, a finished decision by Cabinet, which would be difficult to reverse later. So we decided, this was an issue that the Social Services Committee had a big input into and treated it as a consultation meeting even before we went to Cabinet. We had not yet gone to Cabinet as far as the matter of this university was concerned. So the consultations were to find out views from Members of Parliament and then we would go to Cabinet, not the other way round.  

You are right about the name, and as I have said, that is part of the consultations that are going to take place about the suggested name of “Nile University”. It was found there is another “Nile University” in West Nile, but I am told it is not yet registered. It is just a proposal.

Secondly, Members of Parliament have also come up with other names, and other stakeholders have also come up with other names, so we want to look at all those and eventually come up with a decision. Those are part of the consultations that I referred to.

The budget is another very strict area. Apparently, we had three scenarios. One was what the ministry had made provision for. We thought we would get about Shs 200 million to start off the university as a project, just as Gulu University started off. That position was apparently not acceptable to the committee and the committee advised that it was better to start off with students. 

Now this Shs 200 million would not see Busitema University having any students for one whole academic year. We would only be putting administrative structures in place and really the set up. We also came up with another scenario where we thought we could start the Busitema University and another campus and about 100 students and that would cost us about Shs 800 million, which apparently we do not have in our budget.

The third scenario was to start off with very many students in the first year and this would require about Shs 1.5 billion which was way beyond what the ministry could afford. It is these consultations that we are continuing to hold with the Ministry of Finance. Yesterday we were supposed to have had a meeting with the Minister of Finance, regarding these positions and see whether we can secure Shs 800 million outside our ceiling and be able to start off with students this academic year.  But apparently the meeting did not take place and we are waiting. Even this morning, we were waiting for an invitation from the Ministry of Finance to see if we can meet with them and resolve this matter.

So I am not in a position to say whether Parliament will be consulted in a formal manner before the Budget. But well knowing that if Parliament is prorogued before then, this may be difficult, but we do hope that there might be an occasion to consult Members within Parliamentary provisions.  As far as we are concerned, we should have had the meetings, but we didn’t have them, so the consultations are continuing.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Minister. My main concern about what the honourable Minister is saying is that, there is no commitment yet that this matter is subject to further discussions with the Ministry of Finance for budgetary allocation.

The second aspect, which is of primary interest to me, is actually political. There is a political dimension to it.  Not long ago, the President was visiting the Eastern Region of Uganda and various districts. One of the pledges he made was establishment of a public university in the region.  Now we are getting into a new financial year, probably the last financial year before we get into elections. It could be problematic for the President or the Government of NRM/O, and if it is not solved, it might be in terms of votes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable Minister, we will hear from you in the new session and Members know what to do if he does not do the needful.  

MR MAYENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other issue was regarding Mr John Nakabago. But I had requested, Madam Speaker; it is important that I gave the background to this matter for Members of Parliament to fully appreciate it. 

Mr John Nakabago joined the Ministry of Education in 1998 as a Director for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). This was following the termination of the services of the former director for unsatisfactory performance. PIU was responsible for implementing the various projects in the Ministry of Education and Sports, which involved construction and procurement. One such big project was the Primary Education and Teacher Development Project (PETDP), which was funded by World Bank, and involving construction of classrooms and primary teachers colleges.  

Under the leadership of Mr Nakabago, the unit was able to implement the projects to the satisfaction of the donors and government. Indeed, subsequently, PIU was phased out, following the change of policy that is, from project funding to budget support. At the time of phasing out that project, the Minister of Education wrote to the Minister of Public Service for the formation of a Construction Management Services Unit to take care of the functions of the construction which were previously under the PIU.

After a considerable period of time, and I must say some reluctance, Ministry of Public Service granted the authority to Ministry of Education to establish that unit.  Meanwhile in the interim period, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education appointed Mr John Nakabago to head the unit as an Assistant Commissioner on short contract. 

Some former PIU staff members were also appointed to fill the vacant posts to make sure the continuation of construction went ahead. In the meantime, the Permanent Secretary of Public Service wrote to the Ministry of Education to say there are personal specifications for the staff of the unit, and I think that is where the problem started.  

Apparently, Mr John Nakabago is an accountant administrator, he holds an MBA, but the personal specifications that were sent in were restricted to that of an engineer, as head of this new construction unit. Indeed this meant Mr Nakabago would not get the job. But the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Education wrote to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Public Service, requesting for a review of the specifications for the post of assistant commissioner, to include non-engineers who had relevant and proven experience.  

During that period, the head of Public Service got to know about the issue and also wrote to advise that the job did not require an engineer per se, but a person of proven managerial capability. The Ministry of Public Service rejected the advice of the head of Public Service and insisted that an engineer was required to head the unit.  It is from there that we realized that there were advertisements put in the newspapers several times and subsequently the Ministry of Public Service insisted that the head of this construction unit must be an engineer. Several times no one was available until they eventually got someone. This is what led to Mr Nakabago not taking up that job.

As regards the way forward, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education has noted this matter and we have this morning consulted Ministry of Public Service because I was unable to consult them yesterday. I am also going to consult the Public Service Commission to find out whether this case will not be a test case for future similar cases.  Because an Assistant Commissioner basically should be a manager, not necessarily trained in that particular field in which he is supervising. So we want to go back and revise and see this matter, but I am again at pains to find out.  

Madam Speaker, again I do suppose this matter will be resolved when Parliament is prorogued and I request to be allowed to report the outcome of our consultations in the next session. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall we raised this matter the other day and we discussed it, taking on new dimensions. I would like to know why, notwithstanding what you have said, from paragraph 7 of this letter to paragraph 15, and especially that the head of the Public Service advised the administrative head of the Ministry that, “Please forego those conditions, go ahead and retain Mr Nakabago”. He adamantly refused notwithstanding the advice of the head of the Public Service.  

Two, who is this man in item number 15 that was eventually recruited? Can we assume that probably he applied external pressure on the Permanent Secretary to make sure Mr Nakabago is blocked and he gets the job? Item number 14, why is it that he said it is a matter of urgency, as if it was a matter of life and death that this job must be advertised and filled immediately, notwithstanding your intervention?  This is where we are going back to read ethnicity, corruption or some form of outside influence in the matter.  We want an explanation, who is number 15?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, before we go ahead, I think the Member who raised the matter indicated that this office would be occupied on the 1st of June; this House will be on recess.  So, are you going to prevent this man from entering the office until you have handled this matter, because he has been asked to take office on the 1st of June?  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want a small clarification from the honourable Minister whether Mr Nakabago was the head of Project Implementation Unit. Was he a project staff, or un-established staff; was he part of the establishment or purely a project staff?  In which case, if the project was phased out, didn’t Mr Nakabago have clear terms and conditions of service pegged to that project arrangement, which was phased out during the change over to budget support or programme approach?  I think this could help the honourable members to understand the issues at hand much clearer?  Thank you.

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, this matter was suddenly raised by a colleague of ours; I am concerned about bringing an issue of a civil servant in an ad-hoc manner to this House, and having it discussed at a plenary level; I really find it irregular. I thought that this matter came in a very unusual way - through your communication from the Chair. 

Being the last day, we should consider very important issues like the NARO bill. We have one or two other statements, yet we are discussing a case of an individual civil servant, which to me if it is so important, should go to a committee not to a plenary of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, if we are going to start handling individual public service complaints in this manner I do not know how far we are going to discuss. I am raising this matter because I want to help this House to complete the business that is of importance; I think the Minister was good enough to say that you give him time. He will handle it after we proceed, look at it; and if need be he can bring it when we resume from recess; So I think, we should handle what is important before we go on recess this evening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what you judge as not being important. I think in this House we represent all our constituents, and if there are matters, which you find, are not being handled appropriately, and the institutions that handle them have not handled them appropriately; I think it is okay to bring them here.  

The case, which the honourable member made here, was that an individual was deliberately blocked using official channels from accessing a job and wants the Government to explain, and they say they will come here with a preliminary explanation today, which they have done.  So we expect a further report from you and from Public Service to conclude this matter as the Leader of Government Business advised us the other day; but it is not less important than other things.

MR MAYENDE: I want to respond to what you raised. The gentleman is expected to take over on 1st July, and we anticipate by that time we shall have concluded and reported back to Parliament.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we shall get a feedback from you and Public Service when the House resumes.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Order Paper says that the statement is from the Ministry of Works. But this morning hon. Awori requested you for permission - because as far as we know, we do not have a statement to make to this House except for the statement on hon. Alaso’s committee. This was supposed to come together with others. They are about three ministries and we are supposed to present our statements together. So, can we have your ruling on this issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the issue of the question?

MR AWUZU: Yes, on the issue of whether we are going to answer the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just before the 15th of this month the minister indicated that certain work was going to commence on the Jinja/Bugiri road on the 15th of May. That is what we want to know. Has the work commenced on the Jinja/Bugiri road? We were promised 15th of May, today is the 26th.

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This morning when I read the Order Paper, I talked to my Minister about a statement to be made to Parliament and he told me he was not aware that he had to make a statement on the Jinja/Bugiri road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Minister, even –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker it is evident that this Parliament is being taken for granted and if this is how we are going to move, I request you to let the Minister inform us whether this road is going to be worked on or not so we can tell our people. 

Madam Speaker, this road was supposed to be worked on some time last year. Is the Minister, therefore, in order to say that he does not have anything to say, and yet we are two weeks into the time they told us they would be working on this road? They even stopped those who were working on this road to help us move in the issue that they will come and work. Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to tell us this, and to take this Parliament for granted?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I am disappointed, because on Monday I asked whether what was to happen on the 15th had happened and you people were in this House.  

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know that we have a substantive Minister who allocates that; we have our different portfolios.  As I informed the House already, when I came to –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, yesterday the Leader of Government Business told us that the Minister of Works represented by hon. Andruale Awuzu, who had the statement to deliver to the House by the Minister, was sick and he could not leave the bed without a statement. I do not know whether he left it on the bed. So, the Leader of Government Business committed himself before this Parliament and the Minister who was supposedly has left the statement and has come without anything.  So, is it procedurally right for the Minister to come here and mislead the House?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I remember yesterday Government made a commitment that the statement would be ready today. But from what I hear from my colleague, I think he had prepared a multi-sectoral statement for another issue. I think the issue on the Floor is the Jinja/Bugiri road and according to him that is the portfolio of the substantive Minister. I plead with the House, Madam Speaker, that you give us time; before the close of day, I will raise the Minister –(Interjection) - Yes, before the close of this meeting, let me go out briefly and raise the Minister to come and make a statement. 

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the impression hon. Byaruhanga is giving, which is misleading this House that I left my bed without the statement. It is very clear that on Tuesday I was supposed to answer oral questions raised by hon. Awori, and I was indisposed, so I have come here today and I have got the answers. So it is not correct to say that I got out of bed and came empty handed. The questions are here and I have already provided 300 copies to Parliament.  Thank you. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable Minister of Works that I have seen vehicles with red registration number plates, which I think are from the Ministry of works, working at a certain swamp after CMS as you come to Jinja. I think the place could be Bugodi. Today I have seen the vehicles of H and Young that used to work on that road moving on the road. So, I would like to inform the honourable minister that it seems the arrangements are in place to begin soon, but we should be informed when.  

Another issue, Madam Speaker, is that the Ministry of Works should inform the people who are doing the work to come in and begin off from all sides because it has worsened. There has been an accident today and I am sure the dead are the cream of Busoga. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have a feeling our rules of procedure are being flouted. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to inform the Minister who is not aware of his duties, of what is happening in his sector? And the Minister seems not to be bothered or to learn from all the laxity it takes. s the honourable member in order to take over the Minister’s portfolio without appointment and brief the House on what the Minister should have done?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the Minister has been sick and hon. Kasule traverses that road very regularly, so she is very knowledgeable about the Jinja/Bugiri road. So, there is no problem.  

Honourable members, let us hear from the Minister of Works this evening on the Jinja/Bugiri road. The questions can wait.

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, I do agree with your ruling. In fact after here I will go and get the Minister and tell him what has happened. But I want to correct the impression that I do not know what is happening within the ministry. As I had said earlier, we are appointed for different portfolios, I am a Minister of State for Transport; road development is a different portfolio. It is the substantive minister –(Interruption)

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to spare my colleague. I have communicated to the minister and the minister is on his way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, last week we asked the Minister of Defence to update us on disarmament. Unfortunately, when the Order Paper was being made we had not ascertained whether the statement was ready. But we will adjust the Order Paper to include the statement of Minister of State for Defence on disarmament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3:25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mrs Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Members. Last week on 18th May hon. Wabudeya, the Minister for Presidency gave a statement on the utterances of one RDC called Ecweru. There was debate and the Ministry of Defence was instructed to give a statement in terms of an update on Karamoja disarmament. Madam Speaker, I am here to give that statement.

Honourable Members, the Karamoja disarmament exercise is one of the priority programmes in the President’s Manifesto, and indeed the whole government. A number of ministries with a bearing to the disarmament have been putting all their efforts together to ensure the success of this exercise. 

As you are aware, the first disarmaments stalled in the year 2001 and 2002 due to the increased operations in Northern Uganda. Most of the forces were diverted to handle the Lord’s Resistance Army terrorists who had intensified atrocities in Northern Uganda. The re-launch of the exercise by His Excellency the President in September 2004 in the three districts of Moroto, Kotido and Nakapiripirit, therefore, saw more combined forces by all the stakeholders. The operation has currently gained momentum with improved security in the whole region.

Madam speaker, on the concept of the operation, the disarmament exercise has been handled in joint effort with the military, civil and political leadership as well as Non-Governmental Organizations. A programme of action was drawn giving an option of voluntary hand-over of guns and use of force only where a crime was committed. The plan of action took into account the concerns of the people of Karamoja. Let me mention some of them, Madam Speaker. 

(a) Fear of external raids. There was fear that once the guns are handed over, the people would be left without protection and would thus be prone to raids from the neighbouring countries of Kenya and Sudan.

(b) There was fear of revenge from the neighbouring districts, which had been terrorised by the Karimojong for a long time. 

(c) The fear that if some clans were disarmed before the others there would be inter-clan raids. 

(d) The fear that some warriors would bury or hide their guns. 

The operational phases:

Phase one was voluntary disarmament. This involved mobilization, sensitisation, opening of the security roads, deployment of forces, and intelligence gathering. This was to stretch from 1st to 30th November 2004. This was, however, periodically extended due to the good response. Voluntary hand over of guns would be recognized by issuance of laminated certificates. 

Phase two involved both voluntary and forceful collection of arms, intelligence gathering, colleting, cordons, search and prosecution of those found with guns.

Phase three was on peace building, re-integration and development. With the first two phases in progress, phase three would be embarked on. This is a phase that is premised on peace, re-integration and initiation of development programmes.

The current status: 

In order to have a coordinated disarmament exercise, the Karamoja region has been divided into four sectors. The first sector is Kabong sector. In this area there is gun trafficking from Sudan into Kabong. This has been a problem for a long time. Special forces have been however deployed and gun trafficking has now reduced. Turkana raiders who are usually invited by their relatives threaten this same area. 

The second is Kotido sector. This is in Labwor County. The Bokora warriors constantly raid this area.

The third sector is Moroto sector. This sector has been sub-divided into Bokora and Moroto counties. In the last three weeks there were about three raids by the Bokora. The Jie also have been raiding the Bokora. The political and civic leaders in the Kotido and Moroto sector have been asked to address this problem by creating an environment where elders come together, discuss and see how to solve this problem. 

The fourth is Nakapiripirit sector. This is also divided into three counties: Piang County, Cekwi and Pokot County.

The following disarmament committees have been formed mainly for purposes of streamlining tasks and ensuring grass-root sensitisation and coordination:

1. The regional disarmament committee, which is chaired by the 3rd Division Commander, Col. Kayemba. 

2. The three district disarmament committees chaired by the respective RDCs.

3. 41 sub-county disarmament committees and the committees go on to the parish.

Members of Parliament from this region are members of these committees; sensitisation workshops were held between November and December for all the districts of Karamoja.

Achievements: 

Madam Speaker, there is law and order and warriors no longer move with their guns as it was in the past. 

There is respect for elders unlike in the previous years. 

Local councils can now collect tax, which is called matany in our language there in Karamoja.

 There is increased movement of people on bicycles, which is an indication that people now have confidence that there is security. Criminals in Kotido are reported without fear of reprisal and Government officials can now exercise their duties without threats.  

There is reduction in arms trafficking and open arms markets are closing.  Guns used to be sold in open markets and it was like normal business for people to go in markets and purchase these guns.  This is no more now.  

Road thuggery and ambushes are no more. Nine thousand guns have been recovered through voluntary disarmament. In the first phase of the disarmament, we recovered about 10,000 guns, and the 900 have been recovered in this second phase of the disarmament. 

Sixty people have been tried and 45 are awaiting trial; and there are no more causality from bullet wounds in hospitals. Initially, 90 percent of those receiving treatment in hospitals and health centres would be with bullet wounds; no guns can now be seen in public. When you go to Karamoja now, you will not see people moving with guns coming to attend meetings, holding their guns in their hands.  

The problem of disarmament cuts across borders and this is exacerbated by small arms trafficking across, the porous borders and the instability in the neighbouring areas; the Uganda Government has always discussed joint disarmament with Kenya since some of the incursions are across the common border.  

Madam Speaker, I had the occasion to discuss this matter with my colleague from Kenya, the minister of state for Provincial Administration and National security, hon. John Michuki. This was on 11th April 2005 in Addis Ababa during the meeting of the Eastern Standby Brigade, (ESB) which is part of the African Standby Force. After that, he wrote to me requesting for a meeting to be held here in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, in preparation for the joint meeting, I have therefore, held several inter ministerial meetings with concerned ministers. Members of Parliament for Karamoja region, the neighbouring districts and other stakeholders aimed at securing and harmonising Uganda’s disarmament strategies. The honourable minister of Local Government, Prof. Kabwegyere has also held a meeting with RDCs, LC V Chairpersons and the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) of the concerned districts, with the view of utilising capacity building funds for the peace effort in those districts.

Madam Speaker, Local Governments have been having monies in their Budgets for capacity building.  We thought that in areas like Karamoja and the North, this could be targeted to capacity building in terms of peace. That means we can use this money to facilitate the established district and disarmament committees so that the disarmament exercise becomes a success story. So, hon. Kabwegyere came in to meet with his people from the districts so that they accept and issue this money to the committees.

Challenges:

One is obviously lack of adequate funding. The committees put in place at all levels have not been well funded, hence rendering them ineffective in mobilisation and sensitisation.

Two, it is difficult to communicate to the people over radio whose airtime is very expensive. The chairperson of the Regional Disarmament Committee, Col. Kayemba has been using only 30 minutes to sensitise the people. But this is proving to be very expensive. I think airtime for 30 minutes goes for over Shs. 100,000; it is very expensive. 

Third, there is lack of mobility for Disarmament Committees.

Four, lack of Electricity and generators. Electrical power supply is only in Moroto and yet there is need for power for laminating the cards, which we give to people who surrendered their guns.  

Five, lack of infrastructure; this has hampered the smooth carrying out of the disarmament exercise.  To travel to Amodat, one has to first go to Kenya and come back to Uganda.  There is therefore, need to grade Moroto and Nakapiripirit roads. Even on the Kenyan side, there is where they have to first come to Uganda and then go to their side; so, this problem of lack of infrastructure is faced by both countries, hence the need to carry out joint disarmament – may be we will find out solutions to these common problems.

Lack of manpower:

There is need for deployment of more manpower so as to ensure that the troops are thick on the ground and that their presence is felt. 

There is an acute lack of water in the region, which affects both the troops and the people.

Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to inform the House that during these meetings in preparation for the meeting with the Kenyan delegation, the Minister of State in Charge of Water requested me to present the areas where I urgently need bore holes so that I can effectively deploy the two companies which I am supposed to deploy at various places along the border. I have already submitted them and 11 boreholes and 10 dams are supposed to be dug. I hope it will be worked on so that we can embark on the joint disarmament when my troops are already on the ground. 

Sabotage:

Some politicians who failed to go through during the previous elections at various levels are attributing disarmament to their political opponents, thus de-campaigning the operation. 

Lack of civil military centres:

There is need to establish such centres at sub-county level. Already 140 Political Commissars have been trained to manage these centres.

Criminal spill-overs:

There are incidents of Ugandan Pokots who have committed crime but run to Kenya and cannot be followed into Kenya without joint disarmament. There is still poor coordination of security institutions along the international borders.

Lack of branding of cattle in the region:

Madam Speaker, when we launched the first phase of the disarmament, the President directed that the cattle be branded and the exercise started, but it stalled and I am sure the Ministry of Agriculture is looking into that so that when cattle is raided, it will be followed up, it will be clearly identified that it has come from such and such an area.

The way forward Madam Speaker: government is continuing to mobilize all the stakeholders to undertake the Karamoja disarmament exercise in a coordinated manner.  All the stakeholders; government ministers, local authorities and the civic society, are putting their efforts together to ensure that the exercise is carried out expeditiously.  Government is engaging neighbouring countries to embark on joint disarmament.

In conclusion Madam Speaker, Government is committed to pacify the Karamoja region so that people can enjoy peace and development like the rest of the country.  This is evidenced by the prioritization His Excellency the President accords to it.  He has not only included it in his manifesto, but he physically spear headed the launching and the re-launching of the exercise.  A Karamoja Integrated Disarmament Programme 2005/08 under the Office of the Prime Minister has been finalized.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank my honourable Colleagues especially those who come from Karamoja and the neighbouring districts for their cooperation. We have been interacting in meetings in the lobby, and with that cooperation I am sure that the disarmament will be concluded and the people of Karamoja will lead a normal life like people in other parts of the country. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we partially touched this matter last week, but we needed to know how far the disarmament has gone and now you have got the information.  So I will give this matter twenty minutes.  So, if you are making any contribution it will be only two minutes and let us not have people accusing one another.  Just contribute.

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA CHARLES (Kibale County, Kamwenge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Committee on Public Service and Local Government visited Karamoja region last September, the ambushes were still there, I hope they have now ended, because at least we rescued one of the priests who had been ambushed along the KotiDo-Moroto road and transported him to Moroto. 

Madam Speaker, on the voluntary handover of the guns, I think the exercise was partly failed by the officials who were handling the exercise.  Because Madam Speaker, there was a programme of using ox-ploughs to exchange them for the guns they were getting from the warriors.  But in first situation the ox-ploughs got finished, there was no replenishment.  The time the committee visited the area, is when the President was also visiting the area and immediately they knew the President was going to visit the area, they delivered more ox-ploughs. But accidentally they had not been used, because they were still at Moroto District Headquarters.  So we found fresh delivery after a period of time- until the President went there.  I am giving the information to the Minister to explain why they stopped until the President’s visit.

Number two, Madam Speaker, is on the issue of lack of water.  To the assessment of the committee - and we shall make recommendations in our report which we shall table, government has invested a lot of money in the provision of water in Karamoja, but there is no water. Money has ended up in the pockets of officials.  

We visited around four sites, some sites allegedly constructed by Zzimwe Construction Enterprise, and another one by a certain company from South Africa called Terafam.  There was no scratch on the ground and yet they say that there was a dam that cost Government 600 million. We were just looking in a place where Terafam is alleged to have constructed the dam.  We were guided on our tour around the bush in Kotido, until we were told that we were now in the middle of the dam. But we were in the bush and it cost 600 million? 

And Madam Speaker, these dams that were constructed in Karamoja were actually launched by the Minister of State for Water. She visited one dam and used it to launch all the other dams, which did not exist. So we are going to present the report as a committee for discussion and we are making recommendations for investigations.

MRS MARY MUGYENYI:  Point of order.  Madam Speaker, I thank the colleague for giving way.  I just want to make one clarification.  An allegation has been made against the Minister of State for Water that there was only one dam constructed and yet she launched so many dams.  It so happened that I had been visiting Karamoja with her at that time. Honourable Lokeris was one of us- Atim – Members of Parliament from Karamoja were with us.  

Yes, it is true that some dams were not successful.  Some constructors of the dams did a job that needed to be re-done and indeed the Minister in charge of water did recommend that those that had not been completed be completed and that the contractors would not be paid until the dams have been completed.  Therefore, it was not only one dam, there were a number of dams in Karamoja that were constructed, properly finished and launched by the minister.  

Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the honourable member to allege that the Minister only got one dam finished and used it to allege or to claim that a number of dams had been constructed in Karamoja? Is it in order to actually misinform the august House?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I do not think that is what the member said, I think he said the Minister launched all the dams using one dam. Meaning that she did not actually visit all the other dams.  I think that is what he was talking about.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, let me give the names of the areas, which the Minister does not know; but I visited the:  One –(interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI:  But Madam Speaker, we visited many dams, it was not only one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But you see, honourable Ministers, you visited the dams, I was not there.  I have not seen your reports from those visits- I have not.  I do not have the reports of your visits. 

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, the Minister used Komosing dam in Kotido District and the dam they used to launch those dams was itself faulty, because the windmill could not pump the water even in the presence of these ministers and now it has silted.

MRS MUKWAYA:  Point of order.  Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague is trying to pre-empt a report that is due to come to the House.  I heard him say that he was going to report, yet now he is pre-empting it by making a piecemeal presentation to the House; and it will be very difficult for Government not to come in to defend itself. So, is it in order for somebody who has not officially submitted a report to partially present it, making it difficult for Government to respond or not to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I also have some difficulty because I have not seen your report. I do not know where you went, I do not know what you saw, and you are also putting me at a disadvantage.  You can say there are areas, which are not well worked upon and when the report comes, you can give us the details.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, let me not give the details but the issue of shortage or lack of water is because the money, which has been injected there, has not worked in Matheniko. The MP for Matheniko is around; there is no water- it is scratch, Lodou dam in Bokoro - the MP is around he can testify. Kongosim dam is silting, the other dam in Nakapiripirit is silting, and the dam was constructed in 1962. So the shortage of water is just lack of commitment. I thank you Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable what has been noted is that the money has not been well utilized.

3.54
MR WANDERA MARTIN (Workers Representative): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Minister for this up date and I wish to address the point that she communicated to us on page 4. She has informed us that disarmament committees have been formed mainly for the purpose of streamlining tasks and ensuring grass-root sensitisation and coordination. I take it that these responsibilities are largely civil responsibilities that may need military support.  

I listened to the Minister say that Col. Kayemba is Chairperson of the Regional Committee yet I know that under our Constitution, the military is supposed to be subject to civilian authority. This, Madam Speaker, brings me to the general distortion of protocol in this country.  

I can hear the Minister laughing but this is a serious matter. Part of Uganda’s problems stem from letting the military to take over work that is supposed to be done by civil servants. Former district commissioners are here; one of the RDCs should be the Chairperson. In the report, she says that even MP’s are members of this committee and they go there to sit in a meeting chaired by the colonel who is supposed to be saluting them.  

Madam Speaker, this is a serious problem, this happens even at national functions. You invite Members of Parliament, and then the seats they are supposed to be seated on are taken over by other people. I do not want to mention names, but I think this is a serious concern, and I am disappointed that that can come in a report of this kind – (Mrs Mukwaya rose_) I can take your information.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, let me start with the protocol.  For everybody, whenever you are invited on a national function you are given a time of arrival. It is even indiscipline for a minister to arrive after the Premier or the Vice-President. The best one could do is to go back. Definitely, if you arrive late, you do not expect people to keep your chairs waiting because there are other protocols, which would have already been done. This is a matter of culture and discipline.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would not expect a Member of Parliament to arrive on a national function when the Deputy Speaker or the Speaker has already sat. That is definitely matter of courtesy and etiquette.  

Now, to go to the point on which I wanted to give information, I think we should also separate professionalism from –because if I am a Member of Parliament invited on a committee because I represent that area, that does not make me technically competent to disarm, I should be courteous to accept the leadership of the person who is technically knowledgeable in that field- to be my chairperson. This Colonel cannot come to Parliament and say, “I am the Boss”; there is a Speaker and there are Members of Parliament. But this is a regional disarmament committee, a technically professional person should chair it; I am just pleading with my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this question of cattle rustling is a very serious matter; I really think we should not be talking of who chairs which meeting. To me that is not important. Let us solve the problem of rustling in this country, forget the protocol, and the years; let us solve the problem of rustling.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I take your guidance and nothing can be wiser than that.  But the Minister has told us that this committee is about mobilization of the grassroots and the most technically competent people to do this in our structure now are the RDCs.  I know they have their own incompetences but if we want to run Government professionally, that is what is supposed to be done. But if we want to run it otherwise, we can continue the way we are doing, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that a normal situation in other parts of the country where you can have that administration? Please let us speak in contest, is that an orderly situation?

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, this situation is not new. Karamoja has been that way since independence and never has its administration or management – if we politicians, Government and the civil administration surrender everything to the military, then there is a component that will not be properly addressed and that is the point that I am making as one who is familiar with Public administration.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I must confirm to you that the situation prevailing in these regions is abnormal. I can confirm this by the number of people living in camps in Teso. It is painful to discuss this issue of Karamoja every year and nothing is done. I say nothing has been done because when I joined this Parliament, 88,000 people were living in camps; today the number is more than that.  So, when the government comes up and says these are the achievements we have made, it is with pain that we accept such statements. If these achievements were true, the number of people living in camps as a result of cattle rustling in Teso and Katakwi districts would have reduced. 

A few weeks ago, the Minister for Presidency did make a statement here that came as a result of the statements that were made by the Resident District Commissioner Soroti, Mr Musa Echweru that the Iteso are losing patience. Why are they losing patience if these achievements have been made, they are losing patience because the situation has not improved.

I am surprised that in this statement, nothing has been talked about the people who have suffered, the people of Katakwi, the people of Teso, the people of Kapchorwa, the people of Sironko, Lango and Acholi; it is not mentioned here. We are only talking about the inter-clan rustling in Karamoja, which of course is also a problem, but we expected this statement to cover the neighbouring districts because it is from this that this report emanated.  It is responding to the issues that were emotionally raised by the Minister for Presidency –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, if Government is not given clear questions, they do not expect Parliament - because I was here yesterday, the instruction that was given to the Minister to which she is responding, is a progress report on disarmament in Karamoja and that is where we are focusing. If my colleague wants to know how this achievement that the Minister has recorded does affect the neighbouring districts, then she would come back and report that in Atuke we have resettled so many people.  The question was specific, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the question was on the status of disarmament of the Karimojong cattle rustlers.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when you called the Minister to make a statement you did say that part of this statement was to cover what the Minister for the Presidency had brought to the House and that is where that issue of the neighbouring districts came in.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Okupa for giving way. I think when the Minister gives examples or evidence of the improved security situation in Karamoja then that evidence should include the neighbouring districts. What effect has it got to do with cattle rustling in Teso, Acholi, Lango and the neighbouring districts; If today, they are walking without guns in their hands and so on?  I think that is where my Colleague was asking for clarification.  Thank you.

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I think sometimes we have very short memories in this House, I would like to remind this House, on a very serious note that, – I think the problem is with the microphone – that when the Minister of Defense, hon. Amama Mbabazi made a statement on the 14th of February this year, on page 6, which I have here, he had half a page on cattle rustling and he was supposed to make a statement to Parliament on the security situation in the country.  

The debate, which followed the Minister’s statement was very critical on the inadequacies in tackling this very serious issue of cattle rustling.  

Madam Speaker, you were not in the Chair at that time, the minister actually was requested to come with a separate statement specifically dealing with the disarmament situation in Karamoja.  

As you know, there is a way of dilly-dallying in this House, people travelling abroad, giving excuses and from February up to today this is the statement, which is coming.  In fact, Musa Echweru’s statement simply provoked or reminded us of what the Minister of Defence should have done. 

I am going to give my contribution later - I hope within 20 minutes and I am going to inquire on how to handle it. In fact, I am going to ask for guidance from the House on this very serious topic of disarmament for which the Minister has come with a very short statement, which I think we cannot handle within 20 minutes. I am going to ask for a way forward based on that. I hope you will give me time. This was information to my colleague who says that it was not a result of Echweru’s statement alone; it came from the Minister of Defense himself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned this statement arose out of the debate of 18th May when there were accusations and counter-accusations among the Members of Parliament about who is rustling and who is not rustling and I said the Government should tell us what they are doing about disarmament and this is what the Minister is saying.  But I take note of those proceedings.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do share the same concerns that you raised earlier, that this issue of cattle rustling has continued every year; when shall it end?  Will it end or not?  We are pained to see people in this country stay in the camps for as long as 20 years! It pains us; the poverty level that get reflected by the people staying in the camps, the people who are killed! 

On March 19, for instance, people were killed in Katakwi because some people wanted cows.  They could not even take the cows and leave their lives! So, it saddens us as leaders of Teso, as leaders of this country; it is a shame to me to keep talking for five years now about this and the people are not getting out of the camps –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, from my long memory I remember that when this issue came up last year, the honourable members from Karamoja and those of Teso in conjunction with the Minister of Defence formulated a joint policy team. I want to find out from my Colleague whether this arrangement has not worked. 

Cultures die, it is not easy for a single Minister without the support – because some of these issues are cultural, if the Members from Teso were coming into this forum with the elders from Teso and so on, probably they would have advised Government on how best; because we have tried.  You cannot say that –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the Leader of Government Business, the Minister of Agriculture, and I have heard her say that this is about cultures.  Madam Speaker, the culture of carrying a gun, a culture where the law applies selectively, a culture of raping and killing of one day old children in Teso and neighbouring districts! A culture that condemned over 100 or close to 100 people to the camps for the last 18 years! And such a culture is acceptable when we have a government in place? 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether it is in order for the minister who is leader of Government business and a senior Member of the Cabinet as such to expect the neighbouring Members of Parliament from Teso, Kapchorwa and wherever to be the ones able to deal with this culture? 

Is she admitting that government has persistently failed to address this problem because it is cultural? Is she admitting that it is the lack of commitment, which only manifests towards election time because, we hear about disarmament every time we get close to a Presidential election?  Madam Speaker, if it is not an admission of that nature, is she in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whereas the Constitution permits to practice our cultures, the same Constitution dictates that cultures, which are violent and backward and so on are, prohibited in this country.  So rustling cannot be a culture, it cannot be acceptable in this country not at all. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, thank you for the wise ruling. To me Madam Speaker, I do not blame the people of Karamoja wholesale; I blame those rustlers and the government that is supposed to keep law and order. If robbery broke up in Kampala, you cannot blame the tribe where those robbers come from.  We had robbers in Kampala here, and Wembley was formed. Very fast people were picked even those who tried to run to Mbale, Soroti and Mbarara were picked.  We want that type of commitment, if we had that type of commitment in dealing with the cattle rustlers this problem would be solved; all that culture would have been solved.  

In the year 2000, in Kumi we thought the President had made a very clear commitment to solve the cattle-rustling problem when he did state, “people of Teso take my word from today, if the cattle rustlers come back to Teso, look at my bald head, the hair will grow on it. But cattle rustlers have continued, and the hair has not grown. We thought that it was a serious commitment from the leader of this country. We were so happy! But we clapped for nothing. We want commitment, a serious commitment like how we have handled Kony, and the robbers. Creating this anti-riot group “Wembley,” is the only way government can be able to handle this.  

If you cannot, do you want to ask for your guns like we did under the Arrow to deal with Kony? If that is what you want us to do tell us; we are ready to take up arms and deal with undisciplined people.  But you come and make statements here that these are achievements that we have made and yet the number of people in the camps has continued to increase. It is painful! We are disappointed; we have run out of patience, Madam Speaker, because people are continuing to die.

Can I finally hear from the minister? Given that these are the achievements, when will the people of Teso get back to their homes? Is it after 2008? Because you said 2005-2008, when exactly are we dealing with these matters? I want to hear from her whether we can get back home after this achievement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have overshot our target by more than 10 minutes. Let me hear from hon. Omara and hon. Sabiiti. Yes, honourable members are undisciplined; we agreed on the time, but they speak and speak and consequently –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am raising the same issue. Initially you said, we would spend 20 minutes debating this and that every Member would be given two minutes. It becomes unfair when you give a Member 20 minutes, and then you tell us that the time has been finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What should I do with the Members? Members are undisciplined and I cannot cane them.

4.15
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, I am going to make my procedural contribution within two minutes.  First, I thank the Minister of State for Defence for coming out with this statement. After a long time, government has decided to come out with this statement, separate from the global statement it always makes on the security situation in the country, and I think this is a step in the right direction.

I am proposing that because of the statement of the minister, which to me lays a foundation for more analysis and debate, because as you have pointed out, Madam Speaker, this issue of cattle rustling and disarmament in Karamoja affects close to one third of the country. Therefore, it cannot be treated in 20 minutes. I know the constraint of time. 

I am therefore proposing that because of the issues raised in this report, the report be referred to the relevant Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in the next session. They should examine it together with the minister, and if need be, and they are interested, they may visit Karamoja and the neighbouring districts and then report back to Parliament for a more serious and intensive debate.  

The issue raised here of constraints and the way forward are very important because if it is a question of money, we want to know from the minister, what are the things.  For example, I know very well that the government came out with a plan. The plan failed partly, as hon. Byaruhanga was saying, because the government was supposed to use the very Karimojong in every sub-county, these people were recruited as ASTU, that is, Anti Stock Safety Unit and as Local Defence Unit. Afterwards they were abandoned without being paid. They were also supposed to be given settlement packages in form of hoes, ploughs, corrugated iron sheets and so on. 

Then the people, who are now abandoning cattle rustling, were supposed to have an alternative method of living because this cattle rustling is also business. So when you disarm somebody, you have to give him something to survive on; all these are government commitments. But then, according to the minister’s, statement the priority is to fight Lords Resistance army (LRA), not disarmament. It is here in the statement, in her words on the first page. 

So to me, it is not a question of priority, it is a question of allocation of resources, to look at the two fundamental issues of government- to protect life and property. You are not going to tell me that you will abandon the people of Kapchorwa and Sironko where Kony is, and you concentrate on this? It cannot be because government is abandoning its fundamental responsibility.  

So, Madam Speaker, I want to end by saying that let this report be given to the relevant committee. We shall handle it appropriately and then come back to the House with more details. Then we shall debate it.

4.19
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Minister for the report and I am happy that you have been very prompt every time you are requested to give a report. But I request that he tries to up grade the quality of reports of this nature.

Secondly, if you look at Article 99(3) of the Constitution, the President, who is in charge of the Executive Authority, because the entire authority is vested in him, under Clause 3, is empowered to safe guard the Constitution with the laws of Uganda, to promote the welfare of the citizens and protect the territorial integrity of Uganda.  Now, given this function of the President, I get concerned when I look at challenges, which are highlighted in this report on page 6.  

The honourable Minister says, that there are no adequate funds granted. But look at the amount of money we release to the Ministry of Defence every year, Shs.300,000 billion every year. In addition, there are many re-allocations every year that go to this ministry.  

Two, She is saying, there is no water in Karamoja.  Surely, if you take up arms to struggle, and you want to take over government and lead, there are specific priorities you look at. In my opinion, one of the priorities of this country should be Karamoja, because it has been the major problem of this country. But tell us today, after 19 years, that no electricity, there is no water, the infrastructure is poor, manpower to do the work is dismal, and they have no proper coordination on the border to cub insecurity! I find it very strange.

DR NABWISO: I want to give information, which honourable Jack Sabiiti knows, that as early as 1984, when we were trying to formulate the manifesto of the NRM, we specifically said in the Ten Point Programme, that providing water to Karamoja Region would be priority No.1. It is now 21 years and we are still lamenting about water for Karamoja.  That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform honourable Jack Sabiiti that on page 7 of the ministerial report, No. 5, lack of manpower- the Government of Uganda has enough manpower and more in the military. That is why we are able to send troops to the Somalia for peace keeping. This should be corrected therefore, Madam Speaker.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for that information. As I conclude Madam Speaker, I am still in pains because when people take over power, they promise that they will do the following.  These are some of the things that make us very miserable in this country. You have heard that even the President promised that the problem would be sorted out and that if he it failed, his hair would grow again. But I can see the hair getting lesser and lesser.  

Maybe there is a problem; he could be overworked, because I cannot see how we can fail to disarm Karamoja, where we have a few people and cows. We have tanks here in Kampala around the State House. You cannot take even some of this manpower to the North to help our brothers and sisters, and yet you continue governing the country! 

Madam Speaker, I am sorry, but I have to quote the Constitution; that is why we say, that however good you are at dancing, time comes when you must leave the floor.  Because I see that we must have some people to come and put in something to see whether they can also do better. (Applause) All these years, MPs from Karamoja have continued to say that the problems in Karamoja are not yet solved. 

Now the Minister of Defence has clearly stated in the challenges, that government has failed.  With this, Madam Speaker, I appeal to the government to clearly shoulder its responsibilities as per the Constitution.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Members, there has been a proposal that there is no sufficient time to deal with the matters which the Minister has raised and that it is better to give you sufficient time in your sessional committee to deal with this matter; and maybe to hold public hearings and get some ideas beyond Parliament and beyond the usual group of people. So if you do not mind, we shall proceed, but let us ask Mr Lokeris and the Minister to give the information they have.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to comment on a few issues here. First of all, disarmament is on course. We have made a very detailed plan, which is to take care of any abnormalities, which might arise, so when you are making a plan, do it systematically. We agree that certain things are happening, but the plan is being made and that is why even the Minister is saying, that we have gone a long way to involve Kenya and convince them to come and join us; so that some of these gun holders do not escape to Kenya and disarm. We want a holistic approach to this matter.

Madam Speaker, -(Interruptions)

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from the honourable Minister for Karamoja Affairs. I have failed to understand the role of the Minister for Karamoja Affairs; if he is not part of the weaknesses we are experiencing in Karamoja. Can he explain to us as a minister what he does?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the pains our people in Lango, Teso, and Kapchorwa are going through because of this issue. But I think we as Members of Parliament, should respect each other. There is no evidence that hon. Lokeris is part of the problem as stated by the honourable colleague, and if she does not substantiate she should withdraw. Is she in order to insinuate –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Minister, I was listening. The honourable member is asking, what is the impact of the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, not the Minister; she was asking about the relevance of the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I was also in this House. She also added, “If he is not part of the weakness.”

MR OTTO:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Apart from protesting the Minister’s attempt to challenge your ruling, I rise on the manner in which the minister, who happens to be the Leader of Government Business today, is handling the entire contributions from Members of Parliament. Apart from not being of help, she is unnecessarily obstructing Members who are seeking redress from her.  Is she in order to behave as if she is not the Leader of Government Business today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the shoes of the Leader of Government Business are sometimes a bit heavy, but the Minister is doing quite well.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I know very well that my sister, hon. Kulany, is as old as myself and we found raiding there. So I cannot be part of the problem, which was there before I was born.

The work of a Minister for Karamoja Affairs is stipulated in the policy statement, and if one cares to read it, he will see and learn that we do even more than that. 

When we are holding these meetings, which the honourable Minister of Defence talked about, the Military and ministers are together. The ministers are the ones who are chairpersons, not the military commander. But when he is chairing a meeting of his Commanders alone, we are not there; he is effectively the Chairman. So we share our roles. One is civil-military, meaning civilians are there and the army is there. This is a modern state where people have to cooperate; you do not do things by yourself and destroy them. 

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Lokeris for giving way.  The information I want to give is: it is so painful and a pity the way we debate this issue of insecurity, which claims a lot of lives. 

Madam Speaker, when the disarmament programme was launched here, it was designed in a way that it would go systematically to a certain period.  It is very unfortunate that the LRA invaded Teso when the Forces were already on the ground and captured 10,000 girls.  When they came, the programme flopped. Government has partly fulfilled their part, but the implementation part of it was on and off.  

It is true the neighbouring people of Karamoja used to suffer from so many armies of warriors, but today, it has reduced. Sincerely it has reduced unless we are talking of what happened from 1986 to 1999. But currently in the camp where the displaced people were, about 21 warriors went there and we followed them with the order, “You either compensate the people you killed in the camp or round up these people.” That shows how the rate of raiding has reduced. It is now about five or six warriors coming. If you go to Kapchorwa, you find about five cows have been taken by two people.

If only the Government is assisting Karamoja – I am thankful for the money they released – if that money was tendered to a foreign constructor to build those dams, not people of –(Interruption)

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, honourable members, I have listened attentively to the lamentations given by my colleagues from Karamoja.  But, now that there is a proposal already in Parliament that we are getting regional governments, I would expect Karamoja to capture this opportunity first because it seems the problems of Karamoja are rotating around marginalisation and resource allocation.  So if they capture this chance, they get the resources themselves, they work on their own problems, I think these problems will end.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order on hon. Sitenda-Sebalu, Coordinator of Kalangala Action Plan in Parliament, that the regional tier does not talk of giving powers of money and securities to regional governments. So is he in order to express ignorance as if security can be given to the regional tier of Karamoja to combat cattle rustling?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not trivialise this issue of the cattle rustling; it is a very serious matter. People in Katakwi have not been in their homes for a long time in Kapchorwa, one-third of their district is not inhabited-I have been there many times; in Sironko – let us not trivialise this matter, honourable members, please.  

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Madam Speaker, I was –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave the regional tier.

MR ABURA PIRIR: On the issue of the Minister of Karamoja Affairs, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, if it was possible as we proposed to facilitate the Minister for Karamoja Affairs because as we talk, for hon. Lokeris, to go home, he sometimes begs for 20 litres of fuel. Let hon. Lokeris be a resident in Karamoja like hon. Akello Grace is, so that we see him on the base and what his plans are. (Applause) So, I want to apologise, brothers and sisters, honourable colleagues who come from the neighbouring districts. The warriors, as you say, are neither friendly to us.  

I have personally lost three brothers in this confusion and it is worse in Karamoja than even in the neighbouring districts. There are ethnic clashes every now and then.  So, the disarmament programme has now started among the clans to resettle people, which to me is a sign that they are beginning to cool down.  

I would like to thank the Member who asked the honourable minister what happened to that committee which was proposed for Teso/Karamoja? Hon. Omaria and hon. Lokeris were the two persons chosen to head the committee, but unfortunately whenever we met, it turned into a personal exchange of accusations between them.  

This committee should be under the chairmanship of a “little somebody” and when we come together during a meeting, please, contribute.

Suppose you are a member of Karamoja representing warriors, what would you do? I accept the blame because you cannot see a warrior. You blame me, but give me the ideas and the way forward; how should we work towards solving the problem? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think the ideas of the honourable Member for Matheniko are very good. They should be built into the – Where is the chair of Defence and Internal Affairs he has some very good suggestions, I think he should take them on.  Please, wind up.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think you appreciate the disruptions, which have been there, which were not our own creation. Kony comes and intensifies somewhere, we have to relocate soldiers but we are now deploying.

Karamoja is one tenth of this country when she was saying we were seen on the ground it is true, there are very many in roads into Karamoja from the neighbouring countries with people who are holding guns and also raiding Karamoja.  We are trying to attend to that, we are also deploying along our common borders within the country so that at one time we are able to round up these people. We also do not like guns; they have destroyed the lives of people in Karamoja. The only thing they are saying is: “Are you sufficiently present to protect us?” 

For me, I would like to move to Karamoja, I have submitted my request to the Ministry of Finance; if they do that, I will move to Karamoja; I am used to staying there.  So, now that Parliament is saying move to Karamoja and give a clear enabling environment, I will move there.

Madam Speaker, the ploughs were not taken the day the President went there, but are being manufactured by a reputable firm called SAMIKO in Soroti. It makes them in bits and whenever some are ready; we pay and take them to Karamoja. We have already taken over 5,000 ploughs to give the people who gave us the guns in the first place so that these ploughs are used to produce food in order to create food security and stop giving them relief all the time. I would like to end by saying that disarmament is on course and Government is determined. One day Karamoja will be at peace with its neighbours.  Thank you.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank honourable colleagues for their contributions. I accept to appear before the committee and discuss internally the problem of Karamoja. I only appeal to Members of Parliament from all the constituencies to be present so that we discuss internally. When we come here and Members raise issues that have been dealt with we end up wasting a lot of time let; us spare time and be present.

I will bring my team with maps to show the improvement and achievements on the ground. I had come with deployments in Teso; first defence line, second defence line, third defence line; in various places of Teso which I did not go into detail because I thought I was required to produce what I have produced. 

“How far have you gone with the disarmament in Karamoja region?” is what I have responded to.  But I will appear before the committee. I will show the troops on the ground that were not there three years ago, that is an improvement. These troops are there, and I have a list here, I can lay this on Table Madam Speaker, to show Members of Parliament the – Can I be protected from the shadow minister of defence of FDC honourable Kibazanga from Kasese?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not harass the Minister.

MS NANKABIRWA: Internal deployments in Kapchorwa, Kaproron, Sekita, Kyepsukunya, Sironko, Kumi District, Lira with a map of Katakwi. This is coming from the ground, it has just landed from Karamoja region. In Omodoi sector, Olilimu sector, Ngaliyamu sector, Ogongonya sector and Usuku sector. In Katakwi District, Kapelebyong sector, Omotomu sector, Agoga sector and Obalang sector. I would like to request Members of Parliament from those areas to get in touch with me in order to verify whether these are true so that I can benefit. You will be acting as my informers. 

Madam Speaker, briefly let me inform Capt. Byaruhanga, the first contributor, who said that they visited the area in September and there were ambushes.  It is 8 months ago that they visited that area. The report I am giving is an update for them. They went to the ground in September. So, he is not in order to doubt that there are no ambushes, because he said when he went there, there was an ambush. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the issue of water was touched by hon. Mary Amajo; and I mentioned that I need boreholes for the deployment of troops in these areas where the Commander - in- Chief directed that we must deploy two companies to safeguard the incursions from Kenya; that is where I focused. 

 Hon. Martin Wandera was worked up when I mentioned that soldiers are part of the committees of disarmament. More so that Col. Kayemba, the Third Division Commander chairs one of the committees. He was wondering about the protocol.  I wonder whether Members of Parliament attend LC1 meetings where they are not chairpersons and members.  

Secondly –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Minister, I think you know that I do not think those issues of chairing are important. What we want is an end to this cattle rustling.  So, let us agree that we are going to the committee; have the hearing. We invite all the stakeholders and find the solution. You leave this business of chairing meetings; it is not important.  

MS NANKABIRWA: I request that when I call a meeting where even senior members of Government are, to be given the opportunity to chair as I have been. Madam Chair, I should clear it because it was in the Hansard. I call meetings and Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere attends when a mere Nankabirwa, Minister of State for Defence is chairing. 

Hon. Okupa, I thank you for your contribution. This is a written report where I have outlined achievements that I expected colleagues to mention on page 5, to challenge the achievements. All these bullets 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12; if you mentioned that any of these are not true, it would have given me an opportunity to go and crosscheck.

Are guns publicly sold in Karamoja now? Isn’t there some law and order in Karamoja compared to what it used to be before? Rather than brushing this report, that it is narrow, it is what, the achievements are here, challenge them so that I can go and crosscheck. 

Isn’t there respect for elders now? The Karacunas who used to terrorise everybody! Aren’t the elders meeting? Different clans sit together, there are even alliances between different clans, is this not true? Madam Speaker, these achievements are for real on the ground. 

As for when the people of Katakwi will move out of the camps, I am greatly concerned. But before we succeed on the mental disarmament of the people in Karamoja, we cannot sacrifice the people of Teso to go when that uncertainty is still there. 

We must carry out both mental disarmament- there are guns that are buried in Karamoja. We must make sure that we retrieve all those guns, then we shall talk of telling everybody to move out of the camps. We need to protect these people, we need to improve their welfare in the camps to provide what they want. Nobody wants to be in the camp but we should not move unstrategically. You might end up donating the people to insurgence.

Madam Speaker, hon. Omara Atubo made some allegation that we abandoned Asitu and when LRA attacked Teso, we abandoned everything. It is not true, because the 3rd Division stayed there under the command of Col. Guti and now Col.Kayemba. We just removed some of the troops to go and beef up the deployments to handle the LRA and when we started getting achievements on that side, we started redeployment. This is what I have laid on the Table to correct and fill the gaps that we had created when we were confronted with that problem of the LRA in the Teso Region. So, it is not true that we abandoned everything. 

Hon. Jack Sabiiti centred on the challenges. These are the challenges faced by me and you. Government is me and you. Madam Speaker, he said that the Ministry of Defence is given a lot of money, Shs 300 billion. First of all, it is not only Shs 300 billion; it is Shs 349 billion, which is inadequate. He is aware that if I am to embark on the transformation and implementation of the outcome of the Defence review where we have to establish new structures in the UPDF Act, which was passed here in Parliament, that money is not enough. 

Madam Speaker, I know we have a lot to do to make sure that we use the meagre resources we have profitably. I know that that is a challenge, to use the meagre resources, profitably to see that we achieve, to show results using a small budget. This is why hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere went and held a meeting with the LC.Vs and said,” You have in the budget, capacity building, what other capacity building do you do that is not a concern of peace? Why don’t you use this money to facilitate the committees and you move on the ground?” 

Madam Speaker, hon. Anang-Odur said we do not lack personnel because we have deployed in Somalia. We have not yet deployed in Somalia because of lack of resources. We have prepared a battalion of about 400 troops. We have been looking to the African Union to facilitate these troops to go to Somalia.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I have difficulty in following the minister. She is saying she does not have enough personnel to fight in Karamoja. Now she is saying she has prepared 400 soldiers waiting for money from the African Union to send to Somalia. Can she explain if these 400 soldiers are extra or part of the soldiers coming from our troops, which are not enough? What is the minister talking about? 

Ms NANKABIRWA: I am ready to sensitise you hon. colleague. To give information –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Minister, I think what the people of Uganda want to understand is; you have told this House that you had to abandon disarmament to beef up the areas being attacked by LRA. You moved soldiers from one area to another place to battle with LRA and you are saying you do not have enough! It is in your statement, you do not have enough manpower. Then you are saying you have prepared 400 to go to Somalia. So, the people are asking where are your priorities? That is what they are asking. (Applause)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, when the President went to Karamoja to do the first launching, he sat with the elders and we agreed to recruit the sons and daughters of Karamoja. The troops that hon. Anang-Odur was talking about are not the sons and daughters needed in Karamoja. Why did we need those in Karamoja? It is because they understand the language, they know who has more than one gun. (Interjection) Allow me to finish –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR ANANG-ODUR:  Madam Speaker, Karamoja is part of Uganda. Some of the soldiers, who have been employed by the Government of Uganda and paid by the taxpayers of Uganda, come from Karamoja. They are the ones you are talking about. The people of Karamoja are entitled to proper protection by the Constitution of this country and any required assistance on the part of the troops must be provided as long as the troops are there. And now I understand that the troops are there. Is the minister in order to imply that some troops are not meant to fight in Karamoja, that those who are supposed to fight in Karamoja are supposed to be the children of Karamoja?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Do they know the Somali language, these people who are going there, because they say they do not know the language. Are these UPDF soldiers now speaking the Somali language that is why they are going to Somali?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable members, in this country called Uganda everybody is entitled to protection by the state. So I think, honourable minister, instead of meandering into those things, let us deal with Karamoja and solve the problem, please.

Ms NANKABIRWA:  Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your ruling.  I am specifically on Karamoja.  We agreed with the people of Karamoja to recruit their sons to be deployed in their area, because they know who owns –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI:  Madam Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda is very clear that the Uganda army called a national army shall have a national character.  Is it in order for the honourable minister now to be telling this House that she is recruiting a section of the army, which will be only Karimojong and not reflecting the national character that is required by the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable Minister, I have already asked you not to get into unnecessary controversies, please. Can you address the question of Karamoja? Treat the Karamoja problem as a national problem and do not talk about recruiting local people, please. (Applause)

MS NANKABIRWA: I beg your indulgence Madam Speaker, I have Amuka, this is a regional force, specifically for that region; I have Arrow, and I am also establishing a force to help me with Karamoja disarmament.  That is what I was explaining, I am not discriminating, and I am just giving information that we have these auxiliary forces called Arrow, Amuka and that of Karamoja. 

 This is where I need money to recruit more of those to help UPDF to carry out disarmament.  They will tell me that although Nankabirwa handed in one gun, she actually has three, the two are hidden somewhere else.  These very sons and daughters there know better than me, that is why we want to recruit them into an auxiliary force to help us like the Arrow Boys and Amuka help us with Kony.

Finally, I thank the honourable colleagues who have contributed. This Karamoja question is very complex, we need to sit down and internalise it so that we can forge a way forward. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA:  Madam Speaker, I want to make some correction on what she has just said.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, but she has finished.

MR NSUBUGA:  There is no problem. Madam Speaker, when the honourable Minister was laying the papers on the Table, she actually said that she was laying them on Table for the Members of Parliament from the region to act as informers.  I did not get the time to correct that. We know that Members of Parliament do not act as informers, they do the oversight role. So we should correct it in the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable members, she said it; it is in the Hansard - finished.  Those documents are my documents.  Okay?  They are the property of this House and I will direct where they go. They will go to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs; you can see them there.

MR ATUBO: Would you formally refer the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am going to.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Oh, because he was calling me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So honourable members, hon. Omara made a proposal that we hand over this statement of the minister and we ask our committee, the forthcoming committee to handle this matter and report back to us.  I would like to ask them to really consult widely. I think this time consult beyond Parliament and Cabinet so that we can maybe get solutions from other stakeholders. If you could report back quickly so that we put this matter to rest, including giving hon. Lokeris money to live in Karamoja, rather than have him commute here.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BILL, 2004

Clause 33

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, sorry, I forgot to introduce our visitors. In the gallery, we have students from Kyobe Laboratory Technology School in Mukono North, Rev. Bakaluba’s Constituency.  You are welcome. (Applause)

Attorney General, I think we are waiting for your opinion on clause 33.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  I thank you Madam Speaker. I was requested to provide Parliament with a legal opinion on the proposed amendment to clause 33(3) of the National Agricultural Research Bill, 2004. 

 Madam Speaker, honourable members, Clause 33(3) of the Bill now provides that each Public Agricultural Research Institute may enter into contract in its own name and may sue and be sued in its own name. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members; capacity to contract or to sue and be sued is conferred by law either on natural person or on corporate entities. In this particular case, since each public agricultural research institute is not a natural person, it is not legally correct to provide in the present Clause 33 of the Bill that the public agricultural research institute may enter into contracts in its own name and may sue and be sued in its own name without first conferring corporate legal status on the name of public agricultural research institute corporate legal status.  

Clause 33, should therefore, be substituted with the following sub clause: “Each public agricultural research institute should be a body corporate with perpetual succession on a common seal and may sue or be sued in its own name and do things as a body corporate may lawfully do.”

Although Clause 5 of the Bill as amended establishes the apex body namely, National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) as a body corporate, the establishment of each subsidiary body namely, each agricultural research institute as a body corporate is not novel. For instance, the same principal is provided for under the Local Government Act, Chapter 2 (43) of the laws of Uganda, 2000 where both the District Council and Sub-County Council are each separately a body corporate. 

The advantages of establishing public agricultural research institutes as body corporate are among others: to enable institutes to have a legal basis; to among others enter into contracts with the apex body namely, NARO for competitive grants with their suppliers, their own support staff and any other organisation, to enable them perform their functions effectively and efficiently.

Madam Speaker, I was asked for a legal opinion, I have given it. For God and my country. May I lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable Attorney General, having given the opinion, what do you now advise? 

DR MAKUBUYA: What I advise, Madam Speaker, is that let us go away from the legal language.  The point is that you cannot confer capacity to contract and so on in the air. First confer corporate status on these institutes and then give them the capacity to contract and so on and so forth.  Therefore, delete the present 33(3) and replace it with this draft here.  Thank you.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson.  This is a very unfortunate development but the Attorney General’s position cannot be challenged yet we see a serious complication.  We have two competing bodies within the same organisation.  The best would have been to totally dissolve NARO and its Council and create all these 15 legal entities so that we do not have problems. 

Only yesterday, we were trying to salvage some of the PARI’s which had already been subdued and today, we are saying, that even those which are already disadvantaged, which are in the process of being rated can be able to form body corporate to compete when they still have no capacity.  

Two, source of funding, if you see from the law, is supposed to come from Government. These are public resources and there is one accounting officer with sub – accountants. Who of these sub-accountants should report to the accounting officer?

Three, one of the main reasons why this review has to take place is to separate funding from research. Now these legal bodies corporate are being recognised and established to compete for funding and they will be directly accessing the money. What objective would you really have achieved by undertaking this reform?  So, perhaps, we should be able to understand what the existing agricultural research institutes have been doing in the present arrangement in terms of accessing funding and we had never heard problems in terms of accountability and research activities have gone on very well.

I do not know whether Government has got a number of ministries, which are body corporate, and yet they access funding from the consolidated account and even from donors. They account for these funds and more so, that some of these small entities would even be looking for money outside the country. 

I think, one option therefore, would be to dissolve the apex body and have a new law establishing these seven or so public agricultural research institutes in their own right and then the zonal agricultural research institutes, which were DFIs in their own rights. This is what the NARO Statute of 1992 had gone a long way to address because earlier on these research institutes were established in their own localities and belonging to different ministries.

But now the law, which was well supported by Government, even by donors, brought under one umbrella, supervision and also the synergies that had been developed from various organisations under one standard. So, I really have no position except to regret what is happening this afternoon.  I thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, for the record, as you see, we moved so many amendments and this was because Government conceded to the wisdom of the committee to retain the corporate status of NARO and the trade name.  I abandoned the council that I was proposing in the law that caused reconfiguration of the whole structure of the new law and what we agreed in the meeting is that I shall concede to take all the sentiments on board without losing sight of the policy that Government passed.  

That being the case, Madam Chairperson, the committee raised a number of issues - I took my technical committee and this is the document that we went through with the committee on all the issues that the committee raised.  I want to lay it on the Table.  

Two, Madam Chairperson, I presented the issue of competitive grant scheme, to the committee with the experience of Serere as a pilot trial of competitive grants, which was envisaged in this law. Anybody can read this document, Madam Chairperson, for himself or herself.  

Madam Chairperson, I had 10 meetings in order to agree with the committee on what was reasonable.  On the corporate status, Madam Chairperson, I went back with my technical team and we produced this document.  

Madam Chairperson, finally, the committee requested that all these are good. We want to show you the functional linkage between the National Organisation – the Bill, hon. colleagues is talking about a system, and part of the system is public agricultural research through our many institutions that I have established.  This system also takes care of any individual farmer.  

Madam Chairperson, all of us here from honourable – there was an hon. Member here from West Nile who gave us very useful information about indigenous knowledge that has been helpful in West Nile which has not been captured by our researchers in the research institutes. This law, once passed, those farmers in West Nile can compete to improve their knowledge for general application.  

In my own area, we have a lot of indigenous knowledge; we shall compete, even the private sector. Madam Chairperson – yesterday, hon. Dora Byamukama agreed that, tea was privatised; but why don’t you fund public research for tea?  In here, the private sector will compete for money for research on tea and the scientists in the institutions will give a backup.

Madam Chairperson, I went back on the 10th time to explain to the members, and we went through with them. We had a very cordial meeting and we said in order for the scientists to rotate, let there be central – (Interjection) – Can you allow me to make my case, please?  Let me make my case because it is the House now to decide. I will clear the air; allow me to make my submission.

Madam Chairperson, we cleared out who should appoint who, how should the PARIs relate to the Director General, how will the management committee who are policy makers link up with the apex body and this is the document which we went through with my committee.  

Madam Chairperson, I reported here that the problem I have, when you look at your Bill, part 7, on page 37, “…because of the principle of separating research from funding, we have created an agricultural research trust fund.”  In there, Madam Chairperson, you see all the monies, one, voted by Parliament, loans obtained by Government, grants from donors, any surplus, etcetera.  

You go Clause 46, “Utilisation of the agricultural research trust fund, the funds will be for funding of core activities of research of national strategic interest.”  

In that functional linkage, Madam Chairperson, we said these core monies should go straight from the secretariat to the research institutes direct for recurrent expenditure according to programmes and activities designed by individual institutes. When you go to (b), you see: “For funding of national and zonal competitive agricultural research contracts.” 

So, Madam Chairperson, the question I posed                                                                                                                   to the committee, because remember they are proposing that we delete 33(3), and there when you look at: “Operation of public agricultural research institute” we have said we have given them functions and so on. In to (3) Government had submitted: “A Public Agricultural Research Institute may enter into contracts in its own name and may sue and be sued in its own name.”  

The members raised a concern of how these people would contract. I said, okay, this was good. You are a lawyer Madam Chairperson. While this also confers corporate status, the Attorney General now is coming to say it is neater because here it is not seen. I do not want to be held responsible after, or Government.

That is why he is saying we have decentralised appointment.  All the scientists are going to be appointed by the council centrally but each individual institute is going to appoint their support staff, they are going to have contracts committees, this is the order of the day, they are going to enter into contracts with other suppliers and so on. 

So, the question I was posing is; how will they do it, because they are not people, as the Attorney General has said? They should have a legal status to do this; that is the dilemma. So I do not know, what is going to happen because my chairman has submitted that institutes are marginalised.  

Madam Chairperson, I want to submit to this House, and I have been firm on this. I have also visited institutes, I have stated to this House that let us not sacrifice institutes because of personalities.  If I am a bad manager in agriculture, agriculture should not be sacrificed. The best thing is to replace me with a good manager and agriculture will move forward. That is my humble submission. 

But let these independent agricultural institutes be mandated to be semi-autonomous to manage their resources on a day-to-day basis in order to do the work that we are assigning them efficiently. We are not here, Madam Chairperson, to emphasise control. 

New public management demands that coordination is important. If you are a coordinator you monitor, there are checks and balances, as I have exhibited in the functional linkages of this structure. I see no problem in supporting the Attorney General and I plead with the House to support the amendment as proposed by the Attorney General.

DR EPETAIT: I have with me here a document entitled proposed amendments to the National Agricultural Research Bill 2004 by the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Yesterday afternoon when we finally took a decision to stand over this particular amendment, the Attorney General had submitted that it was very unusual to have a body corporate within a body corporate taking into consideration the fact that the public agriculture research institutes are part of NARO as amended in clause 5.  

The Attorney General having made such a submission yesterday has come to read verbatim exactly what the amendment of the Minister of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries was. Now the question is, I have not yet seen the proposal of the Attorney General because this is the very amendment he said was very unusual, and it could happen, but he has come to read it verbatim. This is your own amendment not the one of the Attorney General. For the sake of the record, I would like to inform the House that this is an area where the committee again endeavoured for long hours with the ministry and we actually ended up not agreeing on it at all and we referred it to the plenary. 

I would like to express my fears that should such an amendment pass, we will have rendered the National Agricultural Research Organisation less powerless.  It will be powerless in my opinion, because will now each of the public agricultural research institutes have its own powers? I think even the issue of referring to the director of an agricultural research institute as a sub - accountant should now have to be re-visited.

If this amendment is passed, I think other amendments that this House had already passed may all have to be revisited. Doesn’t that tantamount to referring the whole bill back?  That is the fear I have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Now hon. Epetait and Members of your committee, do you really envisage that the director general of NARO will take off two months to go from institution to institution, sit down, write contracts with the workers and sign them. Write contracts for supply of food then move to another zone and to another place, what sort of management is that? There must be a legal status for this situation. There must have been a legal status.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI:  Madam Chairperson, the minister has put her case very, very clearly, and I had thought that the committee had also put its case very clearly.  What is the mischief that we are trying to cure, because these institutes are not new creations, they have been there all along and they have operated without hindrance or debt. What we know is that being made body corporate will not in itself create efficiency.  We have given the example; the Government of Uganda has not made all ministries body corporate.  But every ministry is entering into agreements with other parties. The matter we are labouring upon is actually an administrative one -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No.

MR WAGONDA: Yes because we have already set up NARO as a legal entity and these are parts of NARO. It is our considered opinion that you do not need to make these institutes body corporate in order to operate. The provision creating NARO an apex body as a body corporate is sufficient. 

I realise now that the committee made an error, we should have rejected this Bill outright because it contained a lot of inconsistencies and you could see our chairman was labouring with all the numerous amendments because the drafting was bad. I think the Bill had a problem of perception; the construct was faulty. 

We have tried to cure all those inconsistencies in the Bill and indeed if we have now to go by the proposal of the minister and the Learned Attorney General, then I can see that we have again to go through a series of amendments which will be consequent to that act of making these parries body corporate.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Honourable Member, I thank you for giving way.  When you look at clause 33 (1), it states that a public agricultural research institute shall be autonomous in its operations relating to the implementation of its programmes etc.  Now, if you are going to take away clause 33(3) won’t you be impeaching on its autonomy? 

My understanding and what the minister has been saying is that most of these public agricultural research institutes such the one known as Rwebitaba in Kyenjojo are being graded and being revamped in order for them to be privatised. So if they remain under the yoke of NARO the privatisation process may be a little bit complicated. 

I also believe that if this particular entity was autonomous and had capacity to enter into contracts, we would have had partners from any other part of the world like India. We would be continuing to operate and may be exporting our different tea varieties.  But because of the kind of structure and red tape, it did not enable such research institutes to be proactive and therefore be viable.  So my problem here is, if you have 33(1) and you want to do away with (3), then you are curtailing 33(1) and it will not make sense.  So I would like to get clarification on this.

MS OLIVER WONEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  One time, when I was in charge of Kyagalanyi Coffee, I went to Buginyanya and found it with all its gardens with ripe coffee simply dropping off the trees.  As a manager with enough funds from a private company, I wanted to buy all of that coffee and pay Buginyanya whose gardens were very dirty, whose officers and personnel had not been paid in a long time.  If Buginyanya was body corporate, was able to go into contracts, they would have taken this money from this Swiss Company, but they could not because their power lay with the head office of NARO.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the contributions of my colleagues, but we already have provisions.  Even the provision in 33(1) is a qualified provision because they will still operate under the general purview of the apex body.  All programmes will be approved by the council. 

The issue that my colleagues are raising is a question of financing.  You can still make these institutes body corporate.  But as long as the government does not avail them funding, they will not be able to generate money on their own.  The powers to borrow which you are referring to are still subject to the control of the Government.  So let us not imagine that we are now getting rid of all the problems of the research institutes, no.

MR OTTO: Thank you so much. I happen to be in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for my first year in Parliament, and hon. Muguli, I came to learn that making government institutions body corporate is more paying than not from a practical point of view, and if you read through our POA, we have even gone ahead to make political parties body corporate, just to give them some elements of responsibilities to the legal world.  Because you can have unnecessary inefficiencies at the grassroot level and they claim they are not body corporate.  So all your administrative spirits you are commenting on can still be catered for.  But I want you to build the idea of body corporate legally and not administratively.  So I would advise you to reconsider your opinion and inform me accordingly.  Thank you.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: I quite appreciate my colleague’s enthusiasm to display that he has learnt a bit of law.  But the issue we are raising is not purely academic; it is a practical situation where you get egos of individuals involved.  Ultimately, what will determine whether these structures operate the way we expect them to operate or not will also largely involve the perception that the scientist will have about these structures. 

I would therefore, like to appeal to the honourable Minister to consider going by the arrangement we have made, we get over this clause, and complete the Bill.  I know the honourable Minister wants this bill passed, very quickly because it is holding up a lot of things.  So I do not think it would be in her interest to have this Bill stood over up to the next session. If it is found that the provision we have made is not operative, she can still bring up an amendment to cure whatever ills may surface in the course of operationalising the law.  I thank you.

MR JOHN KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I think we are running into a problem for nothing. It appears government and the committee are not agreed on the policy to follow under statutory, that is why there disagreement.  Otherwise, if they had been agreed on the policy, at this stage it would be just a drafting matter. 

I can see why the Attorney General has given the opinion; he has followed the instruction of the ministry.  But the question is, do you want, as a matter of policy, these institutes to be bodies corporate? You have to make up your mind and agree with that together with the committee that actually it will work.  Because if that is to be the case, then if the institutes are to be bodies corporate, there are certain things, which will follow; do you just say they will be bodies corporate?  You have to say, who will operate as the body corporate within that institution, which should also be included in this Bill? 

As you talk now, as 33 is currently, you will just say it is a body corporate, fine.  Who is going to run it?  Is it the director?  Will he be the one within the board of that?  Because that will be a problem.  Schools are bodies corporate because they have been deemed to be bodies corporate.  

Then you say, the management committee or the board of that institute or the director will be the secretary and then you constitute a body corporate that necessitates amending the whole of 33.  So this kind of thing should be clarified.  If the policy is agreed, then it will be very easy to make the point.  But the problem is that I think you are not agreed on the policy and therefore we are wasting a lot of time talking about policy rather than going to do the drafting aspect of the matter and complete this.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, we have gone a long way improving this Bill.  The Bill, which is in the hands of the Members, is the Bill we handled. Members could look at clause 5, and clause 5(2) (c) and then you will also have a look at clause 28(2), that will help hon. John Kawanga to advise.  That was the original position of Government.

Clause 5, (2)(c) says, “The council to be established is a National Agricultural Research Council, which will be body corporate.”  Then you go 28(2); it was creating NARO as a body corporate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we deleted that?

MR ODIT: Yes, we deleted it.  Having deleted it, there is a new position.  This body corporate has been shifted down the ladder. It has now gone down to the institute so this is the situation, which is worrying us. But this was the initial position and I thought the Attorney General would have advised on the basis of the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what original Bill, he was here when we were deleting all these clauses, so how could he now use them to advise?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, you can see that because of the concessions you cannot take me back to the Bill as it was, why?  We have deleted a whole part of the Bill to restructure according to what the committee requested.  Originally in the Bill we had a council, a board, and two secretariats, one for the council and another for the Board of NARO.  

We saw wisdom in the submission of the committee and we said, “Okay, let us retain only one apex body for the system, have a thinner secretariat for that apex body, let us create autonomous corporate bodies of the institutes. I want to remind the House that research is not done at the board level. It is done in the institutes themselves.

The Board or the Council is mandated to do policy in liaison with the Minister, and the secretariat facilitates the board. Because of that configuration, the Bill recommends that each institute for day-to-day interaction should have a management committee, which is to carry out policy guidance as given to it by the Council.  

So, Madam Chairperson, it is also not true – this policy, which was approved by Cabinet and on the basis on which the law is. We are going to have competitive grants because we are creating an entire system of research.  Some money for core funding of routine matters for institutes will go straight to the institutes.  But there is money, which is going to be given by anybody who wants to donate to research; this money will be competed for.  This is what hon. Wagonda Muguli does not tell this House. 

So the issue is, Madam Chairperson, if you do not pass this amendment as submitted by the Attorney General - and yesterday you saw me crossing to the Attorney General because he is sick, but the office never falls sick. The Attorney General is confirming the legal opinion that they gave me to move that amendment, which is why it could not contradict what they gave me earlier. 

 I have to correct the record also. Deputy Chairperson, if you do not move that amendment, you are condemning the institutes to rely only on monies that will be availed by Government; that is the situation that you are going to create.  So while other individual researchers can benefit from the competitive grants, the research institutes, will not because they have no legal status to compete.

DR ESELE: Madam Chairperson, as I said yesterday, when it reached a level where the committee agreed to disagree with the Minister and referred the matter to the plenary, I went out on my own to do consultations; and I consulted nationally and also with those who worked in international agricultural research institutes.

Madam Chairperson, this Bill is seeking to improve agricultural research services in Uganda. One of the ways of improving agricultural research services is to enable institutes to enter into contracts, and there are contracts in several ways; there are contracts to do research.  Indeed, when the committee was consulting with the Private Sector, it came out clearly and that they do not want to engage themselves in routine agricultural research.  What they would prefer to do, when it becomes necessary, they would rather contract a research institute to do research for them.

Secondly, research institutes often enter into agreements or collaborations with international research institutions.  At the moment what we are doing is simply to sign a memorandum of understanding with an international research institute.  That is not benefiting enough; it benefits the international research institute more than a national research institute.  Had these institutes had a capacity to enter into a legal contract, they would benefit much better.

The other side of contracting is that of supply of goods and services.  There are two things here; one is that an institute in order to raise funds for itself could enter into a contract with a body, say an NGO, for the institute to supply some seed, for example, millet seed.  It would be better if such an institute had a legal status.  There is also supply of goods and services, which the institute requires.  It is much better if the institute had a legal status to enter into a contract with an individual firm to supply goods and services.

Deputy Chairperson, as I said yesterday, research is extremely expensive and Government alone cannot raise enough money for research, it is impossible, except for the case of India.  It is necessary for an institute to raise some resources by itself in any way that it can. 

We have a problem of coffee wilt and banana wilt yet as a country we cannot raise enough resources to undertake research to combat these problems.  But the Bill provides for an institute to borrow funds from wherever it can. It is not possible for an institute to borrow resources unless it is corporate.  So I would like to appeal to my colleagues on the committee to change their minds and let these institutes become corporate.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think I would like to put the question.  We have heard arguments for and against, today and yesterday –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal to the Chairperson, and thank you for your indulgence.  It seems the concern of the members and the Minister, especially the members, is that if we legislate clause 33 as proposed and we give it autonomy and legal persona, it may not be linked to the National Agricultural Research Council. 

So I think what we may need to provide for, although it might be a little bit complicated, is to find a way, maybe hon. Kawanga would help me, and say that, it has to be subjected to this particular apex body such that whatever is done, whatever money is acquired, the communication would be relayed to the main entity.  I think it is the coordination that – (interruption)- that is for my interpretation. 

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have been trying to follow the debate to see really where there is a problem, I do not see any. I do not see any because both people have agreed that there is need for public agricultural research institute.  They have agreed on this, the Minister and the committee have agreed, what is the worry of the committee? 

The committee is worried that if you give Public Agricultural Research Institute; I can give the case of Nyeeta or Sesere for example if you give them legal status the combination of all of them will undermine NARO. No, that is not a genuine fear in my opinion, I will give you the case of Local Governments, LC3 are body corporate, LC3 enter into contracts, some LC3 actually sign even road contracts.  

So, I do not see the fear of saying that if you give the PARIs (Public Agricultural Research Institute) legal status being bodies corporate that it can contract, sue, be sued; that would interfere with the operations of NARO. Otherwise, the districts will not operate, districts are bodies cooperate, LC 3 are bodies corporate and they too have functional independence and they have continued to operate in that way. 

What you are trying to do here is to facilitate the research institute like Serere, let them have the autonomy, let them be able to take decisions, let them be able to source funds because sometimes the kind of things that they do, do not have to be done by NARO.  So, I do not see a problem really and if the committee could budge on this and just harmonise what should be done in terms of its implementation, what should be done in terms of defining the functional relationship between the two organs, really, I do not see a problem with it at all. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to make an observation that the example used of local governments is not a very good example. One, the Minister of Local Government at the moment is having a lot of problems with districts because districts have a corporate status and that is why we are pushing to have Chief Administrative Officers centralized.  

Secondly, when you go to sub-counties, LC3 are body corporate, but in terms of implementation we have had situations where we post sub-county chiefs to sub-counties and sub-counties reject them.  Now, as Accounting Officer at the district, what do you do? The LC3 is corporate; they have rejected the staff you have posted there.  

Then thirdly, districts are corporate bodies, we can borrow money, we can sign contracts, but there is also a big – any Accounting Officer who incurs a lot of costs without clearing the centre is sanctioned.  You cannot borrow money exceeding 50 million unless you have the approval of the Minister of Local Government.  So, the corporate situation being reflected is not what is on the ground. 

In this approach here, you are going to have those public institutions that a privileged located will be at an advantage they will have more resources to mobilize and therefore, they will perform better. Buginyanya in Sironko, will not perform, as well as the one in Mukono, so the poor institutes will remain poor.  

Lastly, how are you going to handle the deployment of staff because we have had problems where people have remained in the districts for a long time and are not moving people do not want you there, you cannot move to another place.  Now if this is allowed people will be able to work in these institute, you get experience; you do research there then you move out.  So, my view is that it is better we create linkages but the example of the Local Government, Madam Speaker, is not a very good one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable member, are you also saying that if the small ones have no capacity to compete they should even be made completely impotent, they should even have no opportunity to do anything?

MR WOPUWA: They should be nurtured to come up to a level of competition inset from the beginning.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, if you are saying they should not have a status, they should remain in the village, how will they come up?  Now, honourable members, I think the –(Interruption)-

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, the problem I find is that Members are reading the Bill without remembering that we have done many amendments to it. Let me draw your attention to the fact the honourable colleague who was saying that the national body would not be linked to the research institutes. 

You remember yesterday, Madam Speaker, I objected to the amendment of the committee, when you read that amendment on page 2; while we talked of the amendment; while we are trying to talk about the organisation the committee in their wisdom and I conceded here yesterday that you should not only have the organisation as the council, the secretariat with its specialized committee but also have the national and zonal institutes as part of this. But in the law itself, Madam Speaker, there is a clause, which says that no agricultural research institute can borrow without endorsement by the council. 

Yesterday we passed an amendment; even the council cannot borrow without reference to the immediate Minister and clearance with the Minister of Finance. That is what we have done Madam Speaker.  So –(Interjection)- let me find it in the Bill – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, -(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, the purpose of the whole of this Bill, the major purpose of creating this Bill is to build a research system that will deliver and  bring both the public and private sector on board so that we improve on the delivery of the research services in this country. But this amendment is dwelling on one tiny issue; the competitive grant, which is a tiny source of funding for the research and that one to me should not kill the system.  

I am looking at a situation like that of Makerere University. It is made up of the different faculties, halls of residence and so on.  But if you come and say, “You Vice Chancellor, Nkrumah Hall is a body corporate in which you have no hand, faculty of Agriculture is a body corporate”, it will cease to be part of the system, the system will not run properly. 

So, let us go beyond this competitive grant. After all, there is machinery in place. There will be management committees on these PARI’s; they will liase with the council and deliver the service. Let us not run away from the object of this Bill, the major object is how are we delivering the research, how are we improving the delivery of research in this country? This is to create a system, not dwelling on the individual institutes. We have a mechanism, and I am sure with a competitive grant, the council is there; the management committees will be there. I think a system will be put in place but it should not bog us down to kill a well-intentioned law for the delivery of research, which we really need in this country. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have not proposed anything. What is it you are proposing? Propose do not just –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I am proposing that we go with the position of the committee not to create PARIs as bodies corporate, because that is going to distort the system, which this Bill is trying to put in place to improve on the research in this country. 

MR JOHN KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, we are in Committee Stage. At this stage we should have been just really doing the drafting work because everything is agreed upon. The way we are debating now it looks like we are not even agreed on the policy to put in the Bill. So, if we continue this discussion, we shall not be able to finish the last aspect, which we are supposed to be doing. I am asking the committee and the Minister to reconcile their position and tell us what they want as a policy framework, which we can then put into the law. Otherwise we are now engaged in a general debate, which we shall not be able to resolve one way or the other. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, when the minister reported here she said on that one they had failed to agree. I think there is no opportunity for them to come to an agreement, at least at the time when they came to this Plenary. 

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Chairperson, we do not want a stalemate on this Bill. We want this matter resolved. And I know that the Attorney General is here to help us resolve this matter. Hon. Dora Byamukama floated an idea, which I think will be useful for us to hear so that the Attorney General can advise, then we resolve this matter. That would be the simplest thing because in our opinion this was a small matter, just a sub-clause that should not bog down the whole exercise; but it is very important. So, perhaps instead of suffocating our proposal, which sounded more appealing, it could be useful for her to float it, then the legal minds that are here can help us to improve on it and resolve the matter. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Dora Byamukama can you restate your proposal? You were talking about creating some linkages. 

MR KAPKWOMU: Just a caution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A what?

MR KAPKWOMU: Caution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Caution? You want to caution us?

MR KAPKWOMU: No, I want to predict something –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes hon. Kapkwomu.

MR KAPKWOMU: Madam Chairperson, I have got two fears. The first one is that the end result, the product of the research to the farmer may end up being very expensive; at this rate of the corporate bodies doing their research at a cost so as to get a gain. Let us take an example, veterinary department used to provide drugs at a subsidized price. And when government pulled out, it now went private. So, a Vet can decide whatever cost to charge a farmer when he delivers a service. So, really what I am predicting in this research is something, which needs a lot of patience. Research can take as long as ten years. What if it is frustrated on the seventh year, when shall we get the product out of that?

Hon. Wopuwa cited what is happening in the sub-counties. Are we happy about the way the sub-counties are operating at the moment? Are we really genuinely happy so that the researcher on lacking this money - because it is now a corporate body - is frustrated after the seven years? We know of researchers who have committed suicide because their product has not come out due to many complications along the way. So, I really predict that the farmer is the one going to suffer in the end. The cost of this service may not be what it is at the moment. I thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: All of us in this House know that under the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. One of the issues that government is going to address in the next budget is that researchers have produced research, our farmers have appreciated the research, but they have no capacity to buy the technologies. Definitely this is a fact. Everybody knows it. So, now government by availing of credit will enable those farmers under the National Agricultural Advisory Services to access money to purchase technologies, Madam Speaker. 

Research alone cannot improve if we do not address the status of the soil in the country. That is why we are saying technologies yes, but also inputs in terms of fertilizers. Madam Speaker, look at page 2 of the committee’s report. Yesterday I conceded to the amendment of the Committee that the organisation will not only be the council with its specialised committees, with a secretariat, but will also be research institutes. So, that is a well-coordinated structure. 

But also Madam Speaker, yesterday the committee agreed with the House and me that clause 54 as it is, is better than what the committee has proposed. But when we also go to the regulation in clause 61, we even improved that and said that these other issues that were not envisaged in this reconfiguration, we have amended clause 61 to take care of all those. That all the gaps that have been recognized will be addressed in the regulations. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move the House to support the Attorney General. Many times we have stood over issues waiting for the legal opinion of the Attorney General. I fear that this is the only time when we are going to vote against the opinion of the Attorney General in the history of this Parliament. I am just drawing the attention of the House to that.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. If I were to persuade all the people in this House, I would have said that Mr Oulanyah gave a very good explanation of the situation. The question of the things you know of is the Local Council and that is LC 3 and LC 5.  LC 5 can still go to the government and ask permission or security to borrow money. And in research somebody gives money to a particular thing upon which you want the research to be done. But if you leave it in a collective manner, it means that money awarded may go to a different matter for which the donor did not intend. 

I believe when the minister persuades you to have corporate bodies within a corporate, she is really right. It will ease the administration and the question of collecting money.  Even knowing whether the money has been applied will be easily understood. The question is just to understand what is being done. It is not a business trend or something of that nature.  Even inspecting where things have gone wrong is very easy to trace.  

So, I would persuade the House to accept what the minister is saying as something, which will assist the country, rather than being a competition of ideas. This is not a question of ideas, but a formula, which is used in most departments.  Thank you very much.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I just want to add something to what hon. Nsambu has said. There is a forum where all these bodies will meet and discuss their programmes and I think the whole body will know what this small thing is doing. Hon. Byamukama, have you got a formulation?

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  Madam Chairperson, with the assistance of the Attorney General, when you look at clause 33(1), it states: “a public agricultural research institute shall be autonomous in its operations relating to the implementation of its programmes, allocation and management of its resources in accordance with its approved annual programmes and budget.” 

We thought if we could add at the end, after the word “budget”, “subject to the general direction as provided under clause 7,” which would become a section, then we would have the kind of linkage which we need. This is because clause 7 elaborately discusses the functions of the council and it talks about strategic direction, to coordinate and oversee, set national priorities, advise and coordinate, provide guidelines in collaboration. 

 So, our proposal would be that whatever is done by the public agricultural research institute would be in conformity with and subject to that general direction, So that when they meet, as you said - because this meeting is provided for under clause 7(2). It talks about a meeting of stakeholders.  When they meet, then they will be able to ascertain whether the strategic objectives provided for under clause 7 will have been adhered to. So our proposal is that we add to Clause 33(1), ”subject to the general direction as provided for under clause 7.” I thank you. (Applause)

MR ODIT:  Madam Chairperson, it has always been my prayer that we get a solution.  This is now a much more acceptable one and I think we should support that amendment so that we can move forward.  Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, hon. Byamukama, you are saying that at the end of the minister’s amendment, you add that clause you have formulated?

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, if it is agreeable.

MRS MUKWAYA:  What she is saying Madam Chairperson, is that we amend sub clause (1) but I think that will be at re-committal, because we had passed it.  She is saying that one should add after the word budget “subject to the general direction of the council as it is in section (7)”, then we can now introduce my amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Why can’t we create a new section? We have not completed (33); we can introduce her amendment as a new section, and then they will flow properly.  I now put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed by hon. Byamukama.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The draftsmen will find where to place it within 33.  I now put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed by the Attorney General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33 as amended, agreed to.

The Third Schedule

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Mukwaya):  I want to congratulate the chair for that negotiation.  Madam Chairperson, yesterday there was a debate as to where we should add those two institutions.  So, in Part II, after we have removed Serere upwards, I want to add Buginyanya Research Station of the Elgon area and Lwetuba Tea Research Station of Toro. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, I thought it was Bulegani, Buginyanya and Lwetuba?

MRS MUKWAYA: In the negotiations, Madam Chairperson, these two institutions are in Sironko but the people of the Elgon area want that one to be included.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  They want Buginyanya?

MRS MUKWAYA: The people of Elgon want Buginyanya.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So honourable minister, are we putting it in Part 1 or Part II? Okay yesterday the chairperson had moved an amendment to Part I to introduce Serere as number 6.  So, I now put the question that part 1 of the Third Schedule be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that Part II of The Third Schedule be amended as proposed by the honourable minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule

MR ODIT:  Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that the Fourth Schedule should be deleted, because it is redundant following the deletion of clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable members, I think it is a consequential amendment because we no longer have an advisory committee.  I now put the question that the Fourth Schedule be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fifth schedule agreed to.

The Title

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, before we go to the Title, the committee requested me and our lawyers to introduce a new Schedule because they wanted to know who will appoint who and who will do what.  So, I am moving to insert a new schedule to this effect.

“(a) The appointment of the Director and Scientist of the Public Agricultural Research Institute. Actually the issue that was raised was; how will the scientists be moved around?  The appointment of the Director and Scientist of the Public Agricultural Research Institute shall be by the Council with the full participation of the management committees.

(b) The following persons shall constitute the panel for the selection process of the Directors and Scientist of the Public Agricultural Research Institutes.

(c) A representative of the respective Public Agricultural Research Institute, a representative from the Public Service Commission, a representative from the Ministry responsible for agricultural research, a representative from the Scientific Committee of the Council.

(d) The selection process shall be through an open and transparent process, free of external influence.”

Justification: Madam Speaker, we do not want to get into the problem of people appointing their own children. So this committee will be independent; it will interview and recommend.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I am a bit perturbed because we do not normally legislate for things like the process will be transparent, as if you are implying that there are occasions when it cannot be transparent. So, that kind of provision is awkward, and I request that we remove it. It cannot go on the Statute books it sounds very awkward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I do not know whether I was looking at your amendments, I did not see it among your – (Interruption) - Honourable minister, you are talking about the Council here but I think we do not have a council anymore, do we?  I thought we have an organisation- (Interjection)- But this part, which says, “it shall be through an open and transparent process”; you delete that one.  Please, present it again including the amendment.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I was an obedient servant of the committee but I delete because the chairperson does not want it, I delete  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Also “council” is deleted and substituted with “organisation”. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, the appointment of the Director and Scientist of the Public Agricultural Research Institute shall be by the organisation but with the full participation of the management committee of the Public Agricultural Research Institutes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new Schedule be introduced as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that the long Title be deleted and the following new long Title be inserted.  “An Act to provide for the development of an agricultural research system for Uganda for the purpose of improving agricultural research services delivery, financing and management; establishment of National agricultural Research Organisation with its governing council and as body corporate to serve as the apex body for guidance and coordination of all agricultural research system; to repeal the National Agricultural Research Organisation Act Cap 205, and to provide for other related and incidental matters.  This has been amended to accommodate the various amendments proposed in the Bill, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, you have no objection?

MRS MUKWAYA: No objection, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the Minister has no objection. I put the question that the long Title of this Bill be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The long Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.29
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The National Agricultural Research Bill, 2004” and passed it with many amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BILL, 2004

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Agricultural Research Bill, 2004” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Bill entitled the National Agricultural Research Bill 2004 be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ACT, 2004”

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee and all the members who have supported me through this process. I thank the chairperson and I pledge that with this law, research is going to deliver to all of you. Thank you very much. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
 (AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL 2005

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I have been considering item No. 10 on the Order paper and I have just heard that we have gone to No. 11, skipping No. 10. When you consider that question, now that we are going on recess, you need to get an answer.  The people actually have been patient enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us proceed, we shall come to that; let us receive this report.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 be read a second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that I had earlier introduced in this House the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 for reasons, which are already in the Hansard. The Government decided to withdraw this Bill from the House and instead introduced two Bills combining the provisions in the original Constitution Amendment Bill, 2005.  

The Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005, which we are debating today, is therefore the second of the two Bills into which the original Bill has been divided.  This new Bill deals with the amendments to the Constitution to be effected in accordance with the requirements of Article 261 of the Constitution.  For the proposed amendments to become part of the Constitution, they must be passed by this Parliament, supported at second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.

The Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005, takes account of the following:

a) The report and recommendations of the Constitutional Review Commission submitted by the commission to the government on the 10th December 2003 and the Government decisions on the report and their recommendations. 

b) So much of the Government proposals for amendment of the Constitution submitted to the Constitutional Review Commission in September 2003, which were not addressed by the commission in its report and recommendations.

c) Other Government decisions taken since the submission to the Commission of the Government proposals.

d) The Government White Paper on the report of the Commission of Inquiry on Constitutional Review issued in September 2004, and 

e) The report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Government White Paper on the Constitution Review and the political transition of 20th December 2004. 

Part 1 of the Bill provides for preliminary matters, 

Part 2 of the Bill makes amendments to the national objectives and directive principles of State Policy. 

Part 4 of the Bill talks about the republic. This part amends Article 5 of the Constitution relating to the Republic of Uganda to provide for the delineation of the boundary of the City of Kampala and enjoins Parliament to provide for its administration. 

Clause 5 proposes Swahili as the second official language in Uganda in addition to English.  This is to promote communication in the East African Region. 

Part 5 is on citizenship and among other things it provides for dual citizenship.

Part 6 addresses the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.

Clause 10 proposes to amend Article 23 of the Constitution to reduce substantially the period for which a court can remand an accused person without trial.

Clause 11 proposes to amend Article 31 of the Constitution to emphasise equality of parties to a marriage and to prohibit same sex marriages. 

• Clause 16 replaces Article 56 of the Constitution relating to the Uganda Human Rights Commission to provide for procedure for dignified removal from office of the members of the Commission. 

• Part 7 addresses representation of the people.  This part proposes to amend Article 61 to enable presidential, parliamentary and local government elections to be held at the same time. 

• Part 7 further replaces Article 63 of the Constitution on the constituencies to rationalise the creation and demarcation of constituencies for parliamentary and presidential elections and other public elections. 

Part 8 addresses the legislature and among other things proposes to provide for the time when a person seeking to establish possession of advanced level education or its equivalent must do so for the purpose of an election. 

b) provides for disqualification from election of a person convicted of certain crimes within a period of 7 years before an election.

 c) creates the office of the leader of the opposition which will obtain only during the multiparty political system.  At the moment there is no office of a leader of the opposition.

d) loss of a seat in Parliament if one is expelled by one’s party.

 e) the recall of Members of Parliament by half of the registered voters of the Constituency and not by two thirds.

f) clarification that recall can only exist when the Movement System is in operation.

• g) determination of the quorum of Parliament.
h) procedure of voting in Parliament 
 
i) appointment of committees of Parliament, and 

j) resolution of disputes between the President and Parliament by referendum.

Part 9 of the Bill addresses the Executive and proposes to amend Article 103 of the Constitution to provide for the time for holding presidential elections and to make clear that where at the end of nominations only one candidate is nominated, he or she should be declared elected President.  

Clause 37 proposes to amend Article 105 of the Constitution to make it clear that a person elected President under the Constitution may hold office for one or more terms.  The reason is to enable a person who is favoured by the population to hold office for more than two terms. Clause 38 proposes to amend Article 108 of the Constitution to provide for the emoluments and retirement benefits of the Vice President.  

Clause 39 proposes to introduce a new Article 108(a) to formally create the office of the Prime Minister. 

 Clause 42 proposes to replace Article 118 on vote of censure taking into account of the report of the Constitutional Review Commission. 

Clause 43 proposes to insert a new Article 119(a), which creates the office of Deputy Attorney General to assist the Attorney General in carrying out his or her functions.  

Part 10 addresses the Judiciary and proposes various amendments to the Judiciary including minimum qualifications for High Court judges, composition of the Judicial Service Commission, and the appointment of certain support staff. 

 Part 11 of the Bill addresses finances and among other things deals with 

(a) appointment of persons to the board of Bank of Uganda and the removal of members, which will be similar to the manner of the removal of members of other constitutional office holders, and 

b), provision of greater independence for the office of the Auditor General. 

Part 12 addresses the Public Service and proposes to amend various Articles in Chapter 10 of the Constitution to provide for the delegation of functions of service commissions and the removal of members of service commissions.  

Part 13 addresses local government, and the part proposes a change in the term of local government councils from five years to four years, the appointment of the Chief Administrative Officer by the Public Service Commission, and proposes to rationalise the status, appointment, and functions of the Resident District Commissioners. 

Part 14 addresses defence and national security, and it seeks to rationalise the provisions relating to the Police Force and Prisons Service in order to provide for the appointment of Police and Prison officers by authorities more relevant to those institutions.  It also proposes to amend Article 218 of the Constitution to require intelligence services to be non-partisan. 

In clause 77, we propose to insert a new article 222(a) to empower Parliament to create special courts to try terrorism and similar offences.  This is to ensure expeditious trial for such offences.  

Part 15 addresses the Inspectorate of Government and contains provisions for rationalising the status and functions of the Inspectorate of Government.  

Part 16 addresses the Leadership Code Tribunal. This part proposes to provide for setting up a Leadership Code Tribunal, the composition and functions of which are to be prescribed by Parliament by law. 

 Part 17 addresses land and environment, and proposes to deal with the composition of the Uganda Land Commission, and to provide for the manner of the removal of members of the Commission. 

 Article 244 of the Constitution will be replaced with a new provision on minerals and petroleum, which among others vests minerals, which are found in Uganda under the state, as is the practice in most modern states. 

 Part 18 of the Bill addresses general and miscellaneous provisions and introduces the new articles relating to the composition and functions of the Uganda Law Reform Commission.  

Part 19 of the Bill addresses transitional provisions and it proposes to repeal various Articles in the Constitution, which are spent, and also to make provision for certain transitional provisions having regard to other amendments being made to the Constitution by the Bill. 

Part 20 of the Bill addresses amendment of schedules to the Constitution and it proposes amendments to the Second, Third and Fourth Schedules of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, the process of amending the Constitution interests and involves many stakeholders.  The second reading of the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005 is not intended to foreclose receipt of ideas on the subject matter of the Bill. The government will continue to welcome ideas and proposals from honourable Members of Parliament during the anticipated debate.  Government will also continue to be receptive to proposals for addition to, or deletion from the Bill subject to the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. Proposals intended to improve this Bill are welcome and Government will take serious note of them.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005” be read a second time. (Applause)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have a procedure by which we work in this House. Can the chairperson of the committee present his report?        

6.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Jacob Oulanyah): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005.  

The committee considered the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 in accordance with rule 124 of our Rules of Procedure. The Learned Attorney General has properly articulated the object of the Bill, and I have no intention of restating them.

Methodology: 

The committee examined the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005, and came to the conclusion that the provisions of this Bill are very similar to those of the Constitution Amendment Bill, 2005, hereafter called “The withdrawn Bill” on which the committee had carried out extensive consultations under Rules 103(6) of our Rules of Procedure. There are, however, three differences.  

Firstly, the proposed amendments to Articles 1, 28, 50, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 105(1), 137 and the proposals for the establishment of the Salaries and Remunerations’ Board, which propose the introduction of new clauses 247(a) and 247(b) have been dropped.  

Secondly, proposed amendments to Articles 5(2), 176, 178 and 189 have now been moved into a separate bill, the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005.  

Thirdly, the withdrawn Bill had proposed the deletion of clause 2 of Article 105, while the Bill now proposes a repeal and replacement of the clause.  With these exceptions, the Bill incorporates all the proposals previously contained in the withdrawn bill.

Sub-rule (6) of Rule 103 of our Rules of Procedure mandates the committee to examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers necessary and report to the House within two months from the date the bill is referred to the committee. The committee, therefore, in addition to the Bills received, adopted submissions previously received on the matters in this Bill. 

 The committee discussed the Bill and received written memoranda from the 12 groups and individuals outlined on page 2 of the report.

The committee had previously discussed the withdrawn bill and had received written memoranda from 57 groups and individuals including 22 Members of Parliament, as outlined on page 3 of the report.  

Madam Speaker, as a supplement, the committee also held a workshop in Entebbe, which examined the structure of the Bill and was privileged to have the submission of the honourable Wandera Ogalo and also Mr Jotham Tumwesigye. 

General Observations and Recommendations:

The first one is on the Bill that amends several provisions of the Constitution.  The committee wishes to reiterate its earlier submission when it presented the report on the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill that when we come to the Committee Stage, the spirit of the Constitution should be observed, much as Parliament declined to amend its Rules of Procedure to introduce two-thirds vote at Committee Stage.  

The principle of brevity; A Constitution is understood to be a declaration of principles.  Is it therefore necessary to include details in the Constitution or should the details of principles declared by the Constitution be elaborated in the Acts of Parliament?  Is it necessary to elaborate functions of commissions in the Constitution or could the Acts of Parliament deal with this? Is it necessary to make similar provisions relating to institutions in different articles, or would it be better to have one provision dealing with all of them? For instance, the provisions relating to appointment and removal of commissioners should not be spread through several articles of the Constitution.  

The expansion of the provisions related to the Uganda Law Reform Commission: Is it necessary incorporating all those matters, which are already contained in an Act of Parliament?  

The committee recommends as follows:

Standardise in one article the procedure of an appointment and removal of persons in the constitutional organs for uniformity, consistence and clarity.  

All articles creating functions for all these institutions should be removed from the Constitution and powers be given to Parliament to enact laws for defining the functions of the constitutional organs.

Avoid unnecessary details and remove them wherever they appear in the Constitution.  They complicate the document and make it unnecessarily bulky.

The committee recommends that owing to the time constraint that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendment is unnecessary at this time and can be handled in future by another Parliament. This is in relation to the proposal relating to the Uganda Law Reform Commission.

Three, Madam Speaker, is the focus of the Bill. The Bill contains 98 clauses, and each clause has to be voted on by a roll call and tally as provided for in the new rule 76(a) of the amended Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

The last vote taken on the Second Reading of Bill No. 2, took one hour, 27 minutes.  The time frame for effecting the amendments to the Constitution is very tight, and to deal with all the 98 clauses would make it very difficult to complete the amendments in such a time that would facilitate the political transition.  

To have a smooth, transparent and legitimate transition, the proposed amendments must be completed by Parliament by the 31st   July this year.  This is to allow Parliament to have sufficient time to deal with the laws that would have been affected by the constitutional change in time for the next general elections slated for March 2006. 

 The committee has reviewed the bill with the above facts in mind and recommends that the amendments should now focus on clauses, which have direct bearing on the transition, and clauses that carry major political considerations at this time.  The rest of the clauses, Madam Speaker, we propose should be deleted at the Committee Stage and deferred for future Parliament to consider.

The committee recommends that 60 clauses be deleted from the bill at the Committee Stage leaving 38 clauses, out of the 98 clauses to be dealt with by this Parliament.  The clauses that we propose for deletion and amendments at the Committee Stage are listed there.

Four, the subject matter of rule 92 of our Rules of Procedure.  Hon. Augustine Ruzindana and Hon. Jack Sabiiti raised strong objections to the lumping of matters that are not related in the same Bill. They argued that this offends Rule 92(1) of our Rules of Procedure.  Several witnesses presented the same objections at the time of public hearings on both this Bill and the withdrawn bill.  

The committee received submissions that splitting the omnibus Bill would not cure the defect under Rule 92(1).  That this bill therefore was still Omnibus and violates rule 92(1) of the Rules of the House.  Rule 92(1) provides that matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be contained in the same Bill.  

The committee examined these objections and came to the conclusion that the matters that the Bill is dealing with relate to constitutional amendment, and the Constitution is one single document relating all matters contained in it as constitutional provisions.  So where a Bill is for amending the Constitution, and to the extent that the proposed amendment do not offend any other principles, the subject matters are related to the extent that the object is to amend the Constitution. The objections are therefore not sustainable and are accordingly overruled by the committee.

Private members, and other proposals for amendment outside the Bill:  Madam Speaker, following the advice of the Rt hon. Speaker on the 15th of February 2005 on the withdrawn Bill that the honourable Members of Parliament should present their proposals for amendment to the committee first to expedite the process, 22 Members of Parliament made presentations before the committee.  

The Committee has adopted some proposals while others have not find favour with the committee.  It is however within the rights of the affected Members to reintroduce the matter at the Committee Stage, and the committee will give its reasons for rejecting such proposals. This is of course subject to the subject matter rule of our Rules of Procedure and rule 92(2).  

The guiding consideration the committee used is that the Bill as it is, is already too big given the time frame within which we are working. There is need to reduce the size of the Bill in the sense that the remaining provisions have to be considered to be vitally important. The committee applied this consideration to the new proposals made for amendment.  

The committee also examined the Acts of Parliament Act and precedents on amendments proposed by private members outside the scope of the present Bill. Whether such amendments are authorised by the Acts of Parliament Act, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; whether any amendment can be made to the Constitution using the Bill even when the proposed new amendment falls outside the objects and principles of the Bill.  

The answer is to be found in Rule 104 of our Rules of Procedure.  That rule requires that during the Second Reading, debate shall be confined to the merits and principles of the Bill on the basis of the explanatory by memoranda and the report from the committee.  After the debate a question is put on the principles of the Bill, and if carried, Parliament proceeds to the Committee Stage to deal with clauses of the Bill.  

When the Attorney General moves a motion, like he has just done, that the Bill be read a second time, what principles will be debated?  It is submitted that the principles would be those in the explanatory memoranda and these are: 

1. That presidential and parliamentary elections should be held on the same day,

2. That the current term of Parliament should be reduced to coincide with the current term of the President,

3. That Article 105(2) be repealed and replaced in order to lift the two five-year term provided for the term of a President; and

4. That a special status be granted for the city of Kampala as the Capital of Uganda, and, Madam Speaker, of course what is also contained in the long Title of the Bill.

These then are the four areas, which according to the rules of the House, Members will debate during the second reading. The report of the committee addresses these areas.  It is these areas on which the Members will therefore vote.  It is questionable whether a vote at the second reading can expand to subjects beyond these specified areas.  

If the question is put and Members vote, how can it be said that Members have approved the general principle on, for example, personal graduated tax, which does not form part of the debate?  How can the committee of the whole House proceed to debate amendments to Article 191 on personal graduated tax, which is not part of the debate? The Committee used this as a basis for assessing the propriety and admissibility of proposed amendments that fall outside the scope of this Bill. 

They include the following:

a)	Hon. Dr Okulo Epak made several proposals but the committee adopted only part of these on the Office of the Auditor General and his proposals for the deletion of the words “personal graduated tax” appearing in Article 192 of the Constitution.  I will give the decision of the committee on this later. 
 
b) Hon. Martin Wandera proposed amendments to Articles 166, 172, 198, 199 and 200. Hon. James Kubeketerya proposed amendments to Article 79(2), and Hon. Yeri Ofwono made proposals that the appointment of Town Clerks be done by the Central Government. Generally these proposals were on the appointment of Public Officers in central and local governments, and sought to clarify on the delegation of the appointment and removal functions.  

The committee agreed with the principles of these amendments with modifications but recommends that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill, they cannot be handled with this Bill.

c)  Hon. Margaret Zziwa Nantongo made a case for the amendment of Article 78 of the Constitution to further the implementation of affirmative action by providing that one-third of all the constituencies in a district shall be represented by women. Hon. Idah Mehangye made a case for increasing women representation to 40 per cent from the existing one-third provided for in the Local Government Act. This position was also strongly supported by UWOPA. 

The committee recommends that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill, they cannot be handled with this Bill; they should be handled in future.

d) Hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi and the hon. Sebuliba Mutumba articulated the introduction of the principles contained in the Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. The committee found that even if the Protocol is subject to review in 2012, the principles articulated by the Protocol are everlasting and their importance cannot be undermined even if State’s party later abandoned the Protocol. 

The committee agreed with the principles of the proposed amendment, but recommends that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill they cannot be handled with this Bill.

e) Hon.Kiwanuka’s proposal to amend Article 93 to remove the restriction on private members moving motions or bills, which have a charge on the Consolidated Fund, was rejected as unjustifiable.

f) Hon. Kityo Mutebi’s proposal to amend Article 105(2) of the Constitution by introducing a provision that the two-term limit starts running afresh upon the country adopting another political system was rejected by vote.

g) Equally, the proposal by hon. Norbert Mao that the next government be constituted as a transition government of national unity with the opposition being given 40 percent of all political appointments was rejected by vote.

h) Hon. Sarah Kyama Kiyingi, on behalf of the Parliamentary Select Committee on Pornography, proposed an amendment to Article 29 to qualify the right to freedom of speech, expression and press to exclude engaging in any behaviour or publishing, broadcasting or presenting in any manner or for any reason whatsoever any matter of obscene or pornographic nature. 

The committee agreed with the principles of the proposed amendment, but recommended that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill, they cannot be handled with this Bill.  

i) The committee found that the proposal by hon. James Kakooza, making a strong case for the extension of the current government to be greatly undesirable in the sense that even if it had any merit at all, is premature, pre-emptive and unnecessary at this time.

j) The committee heard hon. Twarebireho Tungwako on the recognition of the Banyaruguru as an indigenous community in Uganda. The committee referred the matter to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for verification of the fact allayed by the honourable member.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs has since verified the Banyaruguru as such, and the committee recommends that they should be included in the Third Schedule of the Constituion.

k) The committee received proposals for the amendment of Article 40 of the Constitution to establish a Social Security Commission. The case was made to the committee that such a commission exists in Singapore and other countries.  The Committee recommends that the matter be studied further to establish whether the functions could not be given to an existing Commission.  

The Committee agreed with the principles of the proposed amendment, but recommended that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill they cannot be handled with this Bill.

The hon. Dan Fred Kidega made a case for the amendment of Article 183 to lower the age requirement for a person to be elected District Chairperson from 30 years to 25 years.(Laughter). While the proposal may be desirable, the committee decided that the proposed amendment does not fall within the scope of the Bill. 

Hon. Joseph Mugambe presented the case for the amendment of Article 105(1) to change the term of presidency from five years to seven years as the case in Rwanda. The committee rejected this proposal as unjustifiable. 

Hon. Proscovia Salaamu Musumba, proposed amendments to Article 23(6b) by deleting the phrase “f that person has been remanded in custody in respect of the offence before trial for 160 days.” Also to amend article 23(6c) by deleting the phrase “if that person has been remanded in custody for 360 days before the case is committed to the High Court.”

The committee did not find favour with these proposals as they attempts to remove the automatic bail that is provided for in the Constitution. Madam Speaker, honourable members, I go to specific observations and recommendations, on the matters that have been very ably outlined by the learned Attorney General; I will just give the recommendation of the committee on each of them.  

Citizenship:

The Bill proposed that the Constitution should allow for dual citizenship and grant Parliament the power to make laws dealing with details of how this should work and revisiting the citizenship board.  

The committee recommended that owing to time constraints that this Parliament faced, the proposed amendments to Article 14 and 15 should be adopted. But the proposed amendments to Article 16 and 17 are unnecessary at this time and can be handled by another Parliament. 

Human Rights Issues:

This relates to the rights of the detained persons, the right to fair hearing, the right to found a family and the promotion of equal opportunity to marginalized groups.  There is a strong concern that the equal Opportunities Commission has not been established in the last 10 years.  Instead there were attempts by Government to relegate the functions of the Equal Opportunities Commission to the Uganda Human Rights Commission.  Now that it has changed, deadlines have to be put in the constitution for the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission; these should be done now. 

There are proposals relating to Human Rights Commission. The concern is that the number of the commissioners is not fixed in the Bill and there should be an amendment to limit the term of the commission to one term to avoid the commissioners adopting strategic manoeuvres to secure reappointment, which could be detrimental to the effectiveness of the commissioners.  

The Committee recommends as follows: 

1. On the Equal Opportunities Commission, the Committee recommends that the Equal Opportunity Commission should be established directly by the Constitution and powers be given to Parliament to provide for the powers, composition, and functions.

2. On the proposed amendment relating to the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the committee recommends that owing to time constraints that Parliament faces, it is unnecessary at this time and can be handled by the next Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the committee adopts the proposal in the Bill on the rights of the detained persons. This reduces the period for remand.

On Parliament, the Bill proposes to review the provisions relating to quorum, voting, the committee of Parliament and the procedure for the recall of a Member of Parliament. The Bill seeks to expressly subject Article 85 on the power of Parliament to determine its own emoluments to Article 93 of the Constitution. The withdrawn Bill had proposed the introduction of the Salaries and Remunerations’ Board to determine all the salaries and emoluments of public officers in Uganda. 

The Bill further seeks to provide for the resolution of deadlocks that may develop between Parliament and the president.  There is need to improve the drafting of the provision to reflect the true position. 

The committee recommends as follows:

That the independence of Parliament in determining its internal procedure must be preserved and promoted. But on the powers of the committees of Parliament, the committee recommends that Article 90(4)(c) on the committees having powers of High Court should be retained in the new formulation. 

On the determination of salaries of Members of parliament, the committee acknowledges that the fear of the Executive has been taken care of by subjecting Article 85 to Article 93. The fear being that Parliament may all of a sudden increase its salaries. The proposal for amendment is redundant and, therefore, unnecessary as Parliament cannot set its pay oblivious of Article 93; it has never happened and can never happen. 

On the resolution of deadlocks between the President and Parliament, the principle is accepted and will be resolved by people in the referendum whose reserve shall be binding on both parties in the deadlock.

On the Executive, the Bill proposes to create the office of the Prime Minister and that of the Deputy of Attorney General as constitutional officers. This provides for factors that should be considered in vote of censure and a proposal to replace Article 105 (2) to provide for indefinite eligibility for the president.

Of all these proposals in the Bill, just like it was in the White Paper, by far this is the most controversial. It has been the most widely debated issue in this transition process. However, the debate has concentrated on procedural matters and the centrality of the incumbent president rather than the merits and demerits of the principle, but the debate will not go back to the merits and demerits of term limits.  

In December when the committee presented its report on the Government White Paper, the committee had come to the conclusion that the two broad perceptions for and against lifting presidential term limits are irreconcilable and can be only resolved through a vote in Parliament.  The committee refers the honourable members to the reasons captured in the committee’s report on the Government White Paper both in support and against the lifting of presidential term limits.  

The committee had occasion to examine all the possibilities when it considered the withdrawn Bill and in the opinion of the committee, the two broad perceptions are still irreconcilable and must be decided by vote. The committee itself took a decision by vote; there were three issues framed for the decision of the members. one, whether Article 105(2) should be retained as it is in the constitution. Two, whether to delete Article 105(2) and (3), whether to adopt honourable Kityo Mutebi’s proposal, which I read earlier.

By a majority vote, the committee decided that Article 105(2) should be amended to provide for indefinite eligibility for persons to vie and be elected to the office of presidency.  The committee had yet another opportunity to examine the issue of indefinite elegibility for the presidency when it considered this Bill.  The proposal in the Bill is no longer for the deletion of clause 2 of Article 105 but for a repeal and replacement of the said Article.

Hon.Sam Lyomoki introduced an amendment to Article 105 introducing a new clause after clause 2 that is 2(a) to the effect that the new clause 2 of the Article should be subjected to a review after a period of 20 years.  This generated a lot of debate and a vote was taken to resolve this matter by a majority of nine votes against; one vote for; and two abstentions. The committee did not accept the proposed amendment by the honourable member.

On the proposed amendment in the bill, the committee also decided by a majority vote of 11 votes for the amendment as proposed by the bill and one vote against the retention of Article 105(2) without amendment. By majority decision, therefore, the committee decided that Article 105(2) should be amended in the terms proposed by the bill in Clause 37. 

The Judiciary: The bill has proposed amendments, Madam Speaker, honourable members, on the Judiciary and the Judicial Service Commission -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Order, honourable members. 

MR OULANYAH: The bill has proposed to amend Article 130(b) of the Supreme Court of Uganda and Article 134(b) the Court of Appeal and Article 138(1(b) the High Court; to provide that Parliament may by resolution prescribe a number of Judges of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal and the High Court. 

The committee recommends as follows: 

(a) On the prescription by Parliament of the number of Justices of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal and Judges of the High Court, the committee is concerned that the provision does not, however, maintain the minimum number originally provided. Accordingly, the formulation in the Constitution should be retained.

(b) On the qualification for the appointment of Judicial officers, the committee observes that there is no compelling reasons to justify the changes proposed by the Government to lower the qualification for appointment to the courts and recommends that Article 143 should not be amended in the terms proposed by the Government.

On the appointment of court clerks and interpreters by the Judicial Service Commission, the committee welcomes this but observes that the bill does not provide for the delinking of Judicial Support Staff from the Ministry of Public Service. The committee has on several occasions during the budget debates made these recommendations to the Government but they have never been implemented.

The Judiciary has just embarked on a review exercise that could lead to more comprehensive proposals for amendment of the Constitution in future. The committee recommends that the proposed amendments can be handled in future.

Public Finance and Accountability: The bill seeks to repeal Article 155(2) and (3) and to provide a new definition of “financial year” in Article 257. The bill touches on Bank of Uganda, creates a dual reporting procedure, and makes reference to highly qualified people without defining this. 

The provisions relating to the office of the Auditor- General are not sufficient to take care of the committee’s recommendations in the report on the White Paper and the position presented by the office of the Auditor-General. The amendment should be aimed at preserving the independence and integrity of the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General should be given autonomy to employ and discipline his or her own staff and should be expressly empowered to hire private firms of auditors to assist him or her. These are catered for already in the bill and should be carried. 

Article 163(1), the phrase “shall be a public office”, should be deleted. This undermines the independence and autonomy of the office of the Auditor-General as it puts the staff under the control of Public Service. The office should be similar to the IGG in terms of functional independence –(Applause)

The proper home for the office of the Auditor-General should be with Parliament. The office is set up to help Parliament perform its oversight functions over the use of public funds appropriated by Parliament. Presently, the office of the Auditor-General is under finance and yet it is supposed to investigate finance. The proper domicile should be with Parliament. (Applause)

The bill further seeks to streamline the appointment of all accounting officers including for districts. The committee recommends as follows: On the financial estimate of self-accounting departments, commissions and organisations set up by the Constitution, the only change that should be made in Article 155 is to provide for the effect of the MTEF. (Mid Term Expenditure Framework) generally called “Ceilings” already contained in Article 155(5b). These ceilings should provide a binding framework for this self-accounting audit. 

On the definition of “Financial Year”, the formulation in the Constitution should be retained. 

On the office of the Auditor-General, the office should be given more financial, functional and institutional independence in line with the Lima Declaration of the International Organizations of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) declaring the independence criteria for Auditors General. The reference to the offices as a public office should be promptly removed.

Public Service: The bill proposes to review Articles 165, 166, 167, 168, 169 and 170. It proposes to introduce Article 173A, establishment of the office the Head of Public Service; and Article 174 for the mode of appointment for the Permanent Secretary. The committee recommends that owing to the time constraint that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendments are unnecessary at this time and can be handled by future Parliaments.

Local Government: The bill proposes amendment to Article 181 to 188 on the Chief Administrative Office, Article 194 on the Local Government Finance, Article 198 on District Service Commission and Article 203 on the Resident District Commission. 

Recommendations: 

1. The committee recommends that Article 188(2) on the appointment of Chief Administrative Officer should be amended in the terms proposed by the bill.

2. The committee recommends that Article 203(2a) that is on the Resident District Commission should be amended but not in the full terms proposed by the Government. While it may be justified for RDCs to oversee Central Government Services, the committee, however, notes that adding an oversight function over Local Government is a recipe for increased unnecessary conflict. Local Government should be left out. (Applause) 

The Local Government Finance Commission should be retained as in the Constitution; there is no need for an amendment at this time. 

Defence and National Security: The bill proposes to review the article relating to the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service, establishing the office of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Prisons; Article 218 on intelligence service and to create a new Article 222A establishing special courts relating to terrorism. 

The committee recommends that owing to the time constraints that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendments are unnecessary at this time and can be handled by future Parliaments. 

On the Inspectorate of Government: there is need to guarantee the independence of the IGG and to strengthen the security of tenure of the IGG and the Deputy IGG. The Constitution Article 224 should be amended so that procedure for the removal of the Judicial Officers under Article 144 applies to the IGG. 

The Inspectorate is an ombudsman of Uganda and the rights of ombudsman mandate from Article 225(1)(a) and (c) of the Constitution: These same functions of the ombudsman date far back from when the institution of ombudsman was first developed in Sweden in 1809. 

The proposed Article 225 substantially erodes this core role of Inspectorate of Government. Removing the above function would, therefore, be to remove the very essence of an ombudsman office, which the Inspectorate of Government has been.

The bill proposes to require Parliament by law to establish a special court charged with the handling of corruption cases. The bill now proposes a mixed reporting system for the IGG which is confusing. It further proposes the creation of a leadership court tribunal.

Recommendations:

On the independence of the IGG, the committee proposes that owing to the time constraint that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendment is unnecessary at this time and can be handled by the next Parliament.  

On the special courts on corruption, the committee recommends that it is unnecessary. The Judiciary can create special divisions in the courts by not necessarily amending the Constitution. 

On the establishment of the Leadership Code Tribunal, Article 234 already empowers Parliament to create authorities such as this to handle the enforcement of the Leadership Code.  Therefore, it is not necessary.

Land and Environment: The bill proposes to amend Article 238 on the Uganda Land Commission and make provision for the procedure for removal of commissioners.  It also proposes to amend Article 244 to create a new definition of minerals as excluding petroleum.

Recommendations:

On the amendment of Article 238, the committee recommends that owing to the time constraint that this Parliament faces, the proposed amendment is unnecessary at this time and can be handled by the future Parliament.

On the amendment of Article 244, the committee finds that this amendment is unnecessary and should be dropped.

Referenda generally: Amend Article 255 to give Parliament the powers to by law make provisions for the right of citizens to demand the holding of referenda by the Electoral Commission whether national or in any particular part of Uganda and to provide for the binding effect of the result of a referendum. 

The committee recommends that Parliament by an Act of Parliament should prescribe for the binding effect of referenda under Article 255 without derogating from the fundamental and human rights and freedoms guaranteed under Chapter IV of the Constitution, or the powers of the court to question the validity of the referenda once held.

Transitional Provisions. The bill makes a proposal to make miscellaneous repeals of spent provisions. These amendments are necessary to the Constitution.

Honourable members, there is an aspect of transition that is not reflected in the report, that is the transitional provisions proposed in the bill.  The committee did not find favour in the proposed article under Clause 95 and Article 288. There are sub sections there that try to elaborate the effect of the reduction on the term of Parliament.  

The committee thinks that it is not necessary to establish the detail of, if you die, you will be compensated, that should be left to administration action of the Executive and Parliament to deal with the details.  The Constitution should just provide that the terms will be reduced and consequence of the reduction should be handled administratively. 

Conclusion:

The committee has made several recommendations:

On voting at Committee Stage. We restate our recommendations that voting at Committee Stage should carry the spirit of the Constitution. 

The principle of brevity to remove unnecessary details from the Constitution should be adopted.  

The focus of the bill to take into account the time constraint faced by Parliament and deal with the most necessary amendments to facilitate the transition.  

The bill is consistent with the Subject Matter of Rule 92. 

The Private Members’ and another proposal for amendment outside the bill, should not be allowed at this stage as they may offend the Acts of Parliaments Act, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the precedent set by the House in the previous constitutional amendment.

The committee has also proposed several amendments to the bill, among others, the deletion of some clauses of the bill that can be deferred to future Parliament. 

It also recommends that the House do pass the proposed amendment to the bill, which will cater for the concerns raised in the observation.

Madam Speaker, this report has attached to it two minority reports: one from hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki on his position which he had stated earlier in the report; and the second one is from the hon. Isa Kikungwe and hon. Odonga Otto. The report also contains the name of hon. Mao, but he has not signed the minority report.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Chairperson.  Now, honourable members, I did receive notice that some members were going to present minority reports.  So, I just want confirmation, because I have noted that their names are also on the main report. 

I just want confirmation that they agree with parts of the main report and they are only presenting a minority report on some aspects.  If that is position, then I have no problem.  Is that the position?
7.34
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, honourable members.  I beg to present this minority report arising out of the committee consideration of the Constitution (Amendment) (No.3) Bill. 

Madam Speaker, while considering Clause 37 of the bill, the following amendment was moved:  Clause 37 is amended by inserting immediately after Clause (2) the following new Clause 2(a): “Upon the expiration of a period of 20 years after the coming into force of Clause 2 of this article, Parliament shall review the provisions under the clause for purposes of retaining or abolishing indefinite eligibility for persons vying to hold the office of the President”.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the committee rejected the proposal. It is my considered view that the provisions contained in the proposal tremendously improve and guide the transition process envisaged by the constitution (Amendment)(No.3). Over and above the qualitative values as a result of the split of the proposal, the provision creates several benefits.  

Clearly, it is no longer debateable that the intentions of the amendment to delete term limits from the Constitution are noble, because it is a contradiction to claim to have a democratic system where the citizens enjoy the freedom of electing leaders of their choice while at the same time legislating for legal impediments like terms limits.  It is for this reason that I have consistently supported and voted for the deletion of terms from the Constitution. 

However, Madam Speaker and honourable members, there have been several fears that this well intended provision could be abused in future. The two sides on the matter continue to threaten turmoil in the event that their respective positions are defeated.  

I find a problem with this standoff and with those apparently orchestrating it. Given our past dark history, given the fact that we are not gods to determine the behaviour of our future leaders and to control the trend of events in future, it is only prudent that, we do not become fixated and merely dismiss these fears, legitimate or otherwise. Our country has had a bad electoral history and this status is just improving.  So opening term limits without any checks and balance turn out to be a recipe for disaster. There is definitely a threat of future dictators, who in the process of attempting to rule for life, may sow mayhem, abuse the constitutional provisions and plunge the country into anarchy. 

The Constitutional Review Commission in its report reported: “Our finding as indicated earlier in this chapter is that the electoral process is not free from flaws. The people have pointed to intimidation by the Army, reports of violence against voters leading to a parliamentary probe into the matter; there have been several cases of electoral malpractices brought before the courts, the stifling of party participation in the electoral processes and use of the power of incumbency to influence the outcome. The administrative and legal constraints under which the Electoral Commission operates needs to be addressed”. 

With removal of term limits, it is the electoral process to entirely guarantee changes in the presidency and political succession, an area that has been a key determinant of the problems of our country.  Will electoral system measure to this task and stand the test of time?  Consequently we must put into place checks and balances, safeguards, safety exits and fallback positions to balkanize the open term ended system from abuse.  

My proposal, therefore, offers this Constitution the moral safeguard against dictatorial tendencies as Parliament can evoke the provision in case of future dictators with power of the incumbency who might suppress those who want to become leaders of the country and consistently rig themselves into office.  This proposal could as the Bible says, in 1 Peter 2:7 and Psalms 118: 22, turn out to be the stone the builders rejected that turned out to be the cornerstone. 

Madam Speaker, I am aware that even if there was no compelling provision for Parliament to effect a constitution amendment, Parliament has the power to do so if it became politically necessary.  But, clearly no amendment can successfully be moved without the participation and consent of the Executive. Removing term limit on a president’s term benefits the incumbent. So, it is easy to achieve an overwhelming endorsement from the executive in the case of removing term limit. But abolishing definite eligibility and introducing term limit has a diverse implication and it will be foolhardy to expect a tyrannical incumbent at manipulating electoral process in order to cling to power to legislate himself or herself out of Government.  

In the absence of a provision for an automatic review, any attempt by anyone to introduce term limits can most likely be interpreted as a direct confrontation with the regime of the day.  

But on the other hand, as it has been argued that the fears of those opposed to lifting terms are unfounded, then any future review shall be the last nail in the process of consolidating democracy in our nation.  

The provision to lifting term limits has had strong sentiments from both sides. And there is no constituency that has been spared of this dichotomy.  Why then can’t we provide for a situation that brings all on board?  The question that has been consistently generated in the debate is whether there is any magic to reconcile these diametrically opposite positions.  

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, the proposal attempts to balance and harmonise the interests of the various opposition groups whose ideas should not be totally disregarded by the mere fact that they are on the opposition side. This gives hope and a conducive environment to engage the productive force of the various stakeholders.  History has proved that extremism cannot deliver as many people are disfranchised and therefore, cannot meaningfully and willingly participate in the development of the country. 

Supporting this proposal reflects flexibility and a spirit of accommodation. I see on both sides a mixed multitude of support. Some supporting for merely opportunistic and selfish motives while others also opposing for merely opportunistic tendencies. When given time we will be able to offload all this shade of multitudes from both sides.  Let us offer our colleagues who have strongly dissented the benefit of doubt by providing another opportunity for them to put their case in future.

Madam Speaker, the provision offers a timeframe within which to monitor and undertake a mandatory evaluation of the performance of the open term presidency without soliciting for approval from anyone.  It allows more time and opportunity to reflect on the issues and refine them to avoid committing mistakes.  Page 4 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it may have been left out because I also do not have it.  But, please, listen, because I am sure you have the other parts.

DR LYOMOKI:  Madam Speaker, what I am reading is on page 4.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not have page 4.

DR LYOMOKI:  Madam Speaker, there are many decisions that the Constituent Assembly deferred and this created a situation of two bodies of persons working in synergy to deliver an excellent product.  Let us give room to another group of persons 20 years from now to compliment us by pronouncing themselves on a matter that has become the most contentious in the transition.  By doing this we shall benefit from the subsequent wisdom and the liability of the outcome of the decision shall be a shared one.  And if time judges us in the negative, the Parliament then can act to remedy the situation. 

Madam Speaker, what trouble has this question generated in history and how have other nations moved to resolve it?  The case of the United State offers a valuable lesson in this direction. 

I just want to quote from the book entitled, “The Constitution of the United States of America. Analysis and Interpretation: The prevailing sentiment of the Philadelphia Convention favoured the indefinite eligibility of the President. It was Jefferson who raised the objection that indefinite eligibility would in fact be for life and degenerate into an inheritance. Prior to 1940 the idea that no President should hold for more than two terms was generally thought to be a fixed tradition, although some quibbles had been raised as to the meaning of the word “term”. President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s, violation of the tradition led to the proposal by Congress on 24 March 1947 of an amendment to the Constitution to rescue the tradition by embodying it in the constitutional document.  The proposal became a part of the Constitution on 27 February 1951”.  

One fundamental distortion in the debate has been the failure by the people to consider the propriety of the principle of indefinite eligibility at this point in history separate from the person of President Museveni.  The Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in this report has clearly stated this case.  

I have seen an argument in my native village in Kachabali among the peasants whose conclusion was a resounding omusaiza tumwongere. (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, honourable members! 

DR LYOMOKI:  Meaning, “Let us give the man an extension” in apparent reference to His Excellency the President, Museveni.  I presume that the no change has been a reverberating echo of peasants throughout the country.  But what has been the missing link in these echoes? The fact that President Museveni is mortal and, therefore, another personality with a completely different disposition from this leader will definitely descend on the scene.  

While legislating this House, we have the duty to personify the aspirations of the people.  At this point in time, the people want us to lift the presidential term limits clearly because they want no hindrance from continuing to enjoy the good leadership of His Excellency, President Museveni.  They are not merely interested in extending similar considerations to other unknown personality in the future.  What do we then do to resolve this contradiction?  Review after a time frame and determine what direction will be popular then? 

So as leaders, and by God’s grace ministering in the governance of the affairs of our nation, we must be able to articulate this truth without concealment.

2 Corinthians 4:1-2, reads: “Therefore, through God’s mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart. Rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of God. On the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God”.

The good leadership of President Museveni has breed the debate. The only cure to this effect is to provide for a scenario to review the matter years down the road when Museveni shall no longer be President.

Perhaps the most disturbing, most frustrating, most unfortunate and disappointing misrepresentation by those opposed to the lifting of term limits is that the move is a plot to entrench Museveni and his successors into an eternal monarchy.

We do not agree with this position, but anyone who has been following the debate, there are Ugandans out there who strongly believe so. Be it wrong as it definitely is, what can Parliament do to give confidence to people with such derailed thinking if not to provide for hope and future review of the contention of a period of time longer than the current situation of two terms but good enough to have analysed the behaviour of at least one Museveni successor.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is God who has a final say on everything and man is not expected to be perfect.  Accordingly, it shall be a mistake for this Parliament to try to conclude a matter that has created contention as evidenced by the various reports.  

It is also prudent to respect wisdom of predecessors and successors. Definitely the Constituent Assembly had wisdom, which we should not just wash away; and in fact this assembly handled the Constitution making process over a long period of time having been created specifically for that purpose.  

In all the various presentations of this matter, from the report of the Constitutional Review Commission through the Government position, no in-depth analysis has been documented of the proceedings and the subsequent reasons that prompted the Constituent Assembly to adapt the term limits. But this Constituent Assembly was noble although at that time one of the most popular and fundamental issues of the day was to constitutionalise the Movement System. 

This same assembly provided a possible review or change from the noble system to that that has been demonised as the multi-party system.  It is along these lines that we are to undertake a referendum. Supposing the Constituent Assembly had not provided for that possibility? We could have worked a way out but the situation could have proved to be more complicated.  

In taking a decision in this proposal, Parliament shall do well to borrow a leaf from this experience.

 The Constitutional Review Commission had difficulties to decide on whether it should be Parliament or the people to determine the question of lifting term limits through a referendum and concluded that the question was fundamental and of a volatile nature.  

Honourable members, I am ending, but let me just quote this- from the Constitutional Review Report. “The question of lifting the term limits has, more than any issue considered by the commission, generated intense debate. It has become a consideration with key stakeholders in our society taking sides for the retention or abolition of the limits.  It has become a matter of importance that cannot be simply be brushed aside. Already there are clear indications of people who are campaigning for or against limits. The controversy is gaining momentum. The stability of the country should not be taken lightly and peaceful resolution of the issues that will satisfy all the parties has to be found….  Providing a national solution for this question does not come easy. We note that the Executive arm of Government through cabinet has taken a stand on the matter. So have the political structures of the Movement. Parliament, which under the Constitution is to determine this question, is part of the National Conference of the Movement.  

We are aware that Parliament has powers under Article 261 to determine this question. However, under Article 104 of the Constitution, the ultimate authority lies with the people to determine who and how they should be governed.  The referendum would give those for and against term limits the platform to campaign among the people. It would determine the issue. 

In view of the importance of the question and the implication for the country, we recommend that Government refers the question of lifting the term limit under Article 105 (2) of the Constitution for the people to determine through a referendum”.  

However, Government through its wisdom decided that the matter be resolved by Parliament and it is only prudent that we, honourable Members of Parliament, move consciously to avoid history judging us harshly.  I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Lyomoki. Can I now invite hon. Kikungwe to present the minority report on behalf of two other members? By the way, hon. Kikungwe, I see two texts. There is a text attached to the report and I see a text, which has just come.

7.50
MR KIKUNGWE ISSA (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, yesterday afternoon we submitted the one that is attached to the report. Overnight we had to read several other things and we have included some more examples. I am giving you that copy to be able to follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the report we have here is the report you should use.  

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I thought what we are looking out for is to generate consensus. Whatever little information is added to this report is for the good of everybody. I only request that you let me present it and from the basis of my presentation members should be able to-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your page 1 is completely different from this page. Now, how will I know what you want to present? This is completely different from this.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, the contents of this report have not changed. I am not doing this for my own benefit but for all of us. 

I am presenting a minority report on Clause 37 of the Constitutional Amendment Bill No.3, 2005. I am presenting this report on behalf of other members, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Norbert Mao and myself. 

The 1995 Constitution is a departure from the past in many respects, some of which is that the Constitution derived its legitimacy directly from the people’s views. 

The draft constitution was debated and passed by the people’s elected representatives, and one of the most critical things in this Constitution is that it provided for term limits.  

The Government of Uganda constituted a Constitutional Review Commission – you will excuse me, members, I am not going to read exactly from the text –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the reason why the rules require you to attach this report to the report of the main committee is, for you to be consistent.  Read the report, which is attached to the report of the Chairperson.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, if there is anything that can be put to the credit of this Government, this Government has struggled always to collect views of the people on various things.  

Allow me to present the views of the people of Uganda on lifting or non-lifting of terms as collected by the Constitutional Review Commission.  

The views collected comprised of public hearings and submission of memoranda.  There are people who felt that we must only have two terms and these made 45.8 percent by public hearing and 36.9 percent by memoranda.  Those who suggested that we should not have term limits at all were 38.4 percent by public hearings and 37.7 percent by memoranda; only one term 3.5 percent by public hearing and 3.6 percent by memoranda.  

There were those who felt that we should only extend for only one man, His Excellency, the President and these made 10.2 percent by public hearings and 6.6 percent by memoranda; Others by public hearings 12.7 percent and then 15.1 percent.  Total public hearings on this were 5,341 while memoranda submitted were 10,029.  

In essence, Madam Speaker, those who favoured two terms, one term and that other category which wanted an extension only for President Museveni all of them were for retaining term limits.  Therefore, 60 percent were for retention of term limits.

This, Madam Speaker, is well above the required 51 percent for anyone to become the President of this Republic. For that matter, for Members of Parliament to sit here and reverse - it is critical that we take the views of the people very seriously just like Government is busy organizing a referendum to seek people’s views on something critical.

A lot has been said in favour of lifting term limits and we wish to differ from the majority view of our committee. Allow me to handle the matter systematically.  

One issue is why don’t you open the terms and then leave the vote to eliminate bad leaders.  It is important to note, honourable members, that where our elections are still characterised by rigging, it is very difficult to rely on the vote without any other checking mechanisms

Honourable members will recall that even those who resorted to the might of the gun in 1981 to change leadership in this country were convinced beyond reasonable doubt that a vote can never change leadership in Africa later on in Uganda. Little wonder that the fall of Obote II Government was just months away from an election in 1985.  

Who can convince me that people with such beliefs- I am talking about those who believe in the might of the gun - why do we have to do the same thing over and over again yet expect different results each time we do it?  Honourable members, let us be realistic to ourselves, our children and grandchildren.  

The power of incumbency is so great in Africa that African leaders can never opt out of power.  Allow me quote from the words of a great man, His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, from his first speech as a President of this country. He said, “The problem of Africa is African leaders who do not want to leave. We are here for four years and we shall hand over power to a properly elected civilian Government”.  

The level of manipulation of elections in Africa by incumbent Presidents, has kept many in power. Africa has been saved by the introduction of term limits and this has seen leaders leave the centre stage, for example, in Kenya, Ghana, Malawi and Tanzania.  

There is an argument, why do we have to have term limits only for the office of the President, why not for MPs and other offices.  Madam Speaker, from the CRC report, it was established that the turnover of MPs is about 70 percent.  All it means is as we are seated here, 70 percent of us may not be here in the 8th Parliament.  The same is true or even higher with the local leaders. So, there is no justification for putting term limits on offices, which are checked perfectly through elections.  

The President is the only person who lives on taxpayer’s money 100 percent. It does no harm, therefore, if there is a culture of shifting such benefits from a son of a particular region to a daughter maybe of another region.  

The President is the only person in this republic who is above the law; and if he continues as President, we might be creating ground for dictators.  

The President controls all the resources and opportunities in this Republic. Such control could be to his advantage, to the advantage of the country or to its disadvantage, or to the advantage of his area of origin.  So, it has no harm really if it kept switching from one place to another.  

The President is the only designated officer to appoint ministers, judges, commissioners and other officers. He is the Commander in Chief of the UPDF and Military Intelligence.  This, honourable members, we must agree, it is a big responsibility that needs to change with time lest we find members of the same family manning top jobs in a particular Ministry or department.  

The President is the only one who exercises the prerogative of mercy. He, therefore, has the right to kill or save someone. This, honourable members, is too much power that needs to be changing hands from time to time.  

Honourable members, the problems of this country have always revolved around the presidency until recently in 1995 when the promulgated Constitution put in place term limits for the Presidency. To just remove term limits at a time when we are supposed to be testing them, it is too early to forget our history.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, to be objective on this matter, let us get a gentleman by the names of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni out of our minds because he got us from a deep pit.  Some of you who dislike Obote, let us assume that Obote is currently occupying Museveni’s seat, how many of you would go for lifting the terms?  

We do not hate President Museveni but we are only conscious of a possible mad President who might come after him.  

It is important to note that term limits create orderly succession and deter political groups interested in power from resorting to extra legal means.  Accessibility to highest leadership offices is broadened where limits exist.  

Furthermore, Presidential term limits are necessary safety mechanisms for good governance taking into account Uganda’s history. 

A meaningful debate on this issue would be handled by the 8th Parliament after President Museveni has finished his tenure. (Applause)  

The Constitution review exercise would be a wonderful exercise for this country if only we strive to build consensus rather than glorifying numbers.  This is why our leaders have made mistakes before, by telling people of Uganda that parties are bad and today they are being told we have no choice but to move to the parties.  This is clear manifestation that they make mistakes.  Therefore, honourable members, I call on you not to take wholesale without caution whatever is put to us.  

I would like to end my submission by quoting yet another quotation from none other than President Museveni. When he was presenting- this was on 13 June 1995 during a joint Session of NRC and CA. He said- I am sure he must be somewhere watching-  “The making of a good and a durable Constitution should be your greatest achievement and legacy. In your constitution making, you should strive to conduct your business as statesmen rather than politicians.  

You are making a Constitution for your children and grandchildren and generations of Ugandans yet unborn.  This is a very weighty responsibility which cannot be successfully executed by those whose focus is on the achievement of the immediate political advantage. 

Your work in the Constituent Assembly requires you to be brave and firm.  Above all, it requires you to have a vision of the future of this country, a vision of stability and progress.  

The legislation, which emanated from this council, has fuelled all the developments in the Constituent Assembly and you, the architects of the Constitution, must add your voice of sanity to the Constitution making exercise.  Be vigilant for even at this late hour, the exercise can be derailed by those who were more committed to attaining power rather than the making a Constitution that will stand a test of time and the planting of constitutionalism in our country”.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I would like to thank the Chairperson and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for presenting this report. I also would like to thank hon. Dr Lyomoki and hon. Kikungwe for their minority reports, which I commend to you for consideration.  

Honourable members, you are aware Parliament and the entire nation has been anxiously waiting for this report, which is the key to the process of handling political transition for this country.  So, let me congratulate all those who have been involved in this work. 

Honourable members, as you have noted, there are very, very many weighty issues in these reports, which we would require you to go and reflect on before we commence the debate.  So, debate on this matter is deferred to a date to be communicated to you in the new Session. So, please go and take time and peruse, consult and internalise on this particular report.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We had asked for a statement on Jinja- Bugiri road. I have seen a one-page statement.  Minister of Works, can you-

8.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have a one-page report, as you have mentioned. 

On the current status on the Jinja- Bugiri road project, whilst the legal procedures to pursue Government’s rights under the contract with the original contractor, Basil Read Bouygues Joint Venture are going on; efforts have also been made to procure any emergency contract to address the deteriorating situation of the road. This emergency contract is meant for emergency traffic management and preservation of the existing road base in order to enhance road safety and riding quality for travellers.

Last week the contracting authority reached an agreement with the EU on the award of the above emergency contract to H. Young & Company.  H. Young & Company are already mobilised on site having been sub-contractors for Basil Read Bouygues Joint Venture.  

The commencement for the above works is 26 May 2005, which is today. The contractor’s equipment has left his compound where it has been since termination of the contract with Basil Read Bouygues Joint Venture and has started work.

The cost of the above measures is about Ugshs 1.2b and is expected to take four months.  Within this period, it is expected that the new main contractor will be in place.  

Government regrets the inconvenience this has caused to the public, but we would like to assure you that all is being done to normalise the situation.  

I would like to thank hon. Lumumba for trying to give this information although it was said that she was not the Minister for Works.  But you can see that she was actually giving up todate information.   Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now on board on that issue.  We can monitor in the usual way through our committees; and hon. Lumumba will keep telling us what is happening on that road.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 25/05 
TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

8.15
MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
“a) Whether cage farming has been adopted as a policy of Government and if so,
b)Has an environmental impact assessment been done on cage farming?
c) Who mandated the investors to collect signatures from the fishermen in fishing as a way of support for the investors to take over the fishing landing sites for case farming?”

8.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, when I read the Hansard of yesterday, you had directed that I should make two statements on the question which the Speaker had deferred.  One of them was on mango disease in northern Uganda and banana bacteria wilt disease. 

 With your permission, I will start with the question that is there- should I read the other statements as you directed yesterday or I only confine myself to the question on the Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with the question

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Madam Speaker, I have not received the answer and the rules actually dictate that I should have the answer before.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, as I have said, by the closure of yesterday the instructions I had were for the mango disease and bacterial banana wilt.  I got the Order Paper as I was moving from the Attorney General’s office to come here.  So I have only my copy of the answer, but I will avail the answer to my colleague.  You should appreciate the way I have been managing.  I came prepared and these answers of mango diseases and bacterial wilt were circulated earlier.  So, if he can listen- if he wants a copy earlier, then I can respond later when I have circulated the answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one who is making us sit here.  So, listen; if you do not want to listen, it will be answered some other time. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member may recall that the National Fisheries Policy was circulated to all members of this House last year in 2004.  Copies are available if he wants another copy.  I am saying that the question he is raising was part of the policy that was distributed last year. 

Concerning wither cage farming, it has been adopted as a policy of Government. I wish to draw the attention of the member that cage farming is just one of the many technologies or ways of culturing fish in confinement. When we culture fish in confinement and exercise control/ownership over the confined stock, then we are doing fish farming usually referred to as agriculture, to cover culture in confinement of any agriculture life.

The policy strategy encourages diversification and the development of new technologies to reduce production costs and exploit new areas or opportunities for agriculture production, including confining fish and feeding them in our waters.

Madam Speaker, the policy is available but we have not licensed anybody to do this because we do not have the law yet. 

 The policy on agriculture or culturing of fish in water recognizes that Government will continue to guarantee environmental and socially desirable industry that is economically viable.  It is a requirement for all persons to conduct an environmental impact assessment for any development that is out of character with environment.  

All proposed agriculture development including cage culture requires an E.I.A.  This is specific and covering all aspects of the enterprise being planned and not only the general methods of fishing, but farming such as cage culture.  

In conducting an E.I.A, NEMA regulations emphasise the need for the developer to dialogue with the community affected and get their consent.  After which, a public hearing on the proposed venture must be held before the lead agencies. The department of fisheries recommends to NEMA whether the planned venture should be permitted.   

It is my submission to this House, therefore, that whoever was soliciting signatures from the fishing community was seeking evidence of dialogue and acceptance of whatever he or she was planning to do in those communities, which is only the initial step of the E.I.A.  

The E.I.A also has to follow through the technical evaluation for the possible ecological chemical and physical impact of the planned venture together with suggested mitigation measures for any body to go on Lake Victoria. We must protect the breeding grounds, which are national assets; we must protect waterways of the steamer and our transportation on the lake.  We must protect the small fishermen who are there and pollution; how will the cages clear, all this, so that we do not pollute the lake.

Which side of the lake should cages be?  An investor or local entrepreneur intending to undertake a project for cage culture in particular areas must follow the NEMA guidelines and regulations as well as the technical requirement put forward in the Fish Aquiculture Rules, 2003.  We believe that these requirements are sufficient to meet with the national fisheries policy objectives to protect fisheries and agriculture echo systems from adverse environmental impacts.

On the second question, no investor to-date has been permitted to do cage farming though the interest has been growing for both local and foreign investors to adopt this technology.  

According to the Fish Aquiculture Rules 2003, which provides for approval of all intensive and semi-intensive fish production establishment, a plan of the establishment and the list of the activities to be carried out by the establishment is required by the competent authority, which is the fisheries department before consideration of any submission for approval.  

I should, therefore, assure this House that fishing landing sites will not be taken over for cage farming as my Ministry regulates the sector players to ensure harmony and minimize or avoid conflicts among common resource users.  

I must add, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that members read The New Vision, I cannot remember the date, where the National Aquiculture Institute, Kajjansi, conducted a pilot study to test the feelings of the people around Lake Kyoga, Lake Victoria and it was published. Honourable members, it is not until those concerns have been effectively addressed that we shall license anybody to do cage farming on the lake.  I want to thank you very much.

8.20
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for trying to answer the question. I want to be advised or guided because the Minister actually has informed this House that as a policy, cage farming was adopted and the report was given to Parliament. 

I have been in constant interaction with the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, and I can remember vividly that this issue was actually brought by the former Minister of Agriculture, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa and it was actually rejected.  

Madam Speaker, why do I raise all this?  About two months ago there was a Briton who came to Kiyindi and hired a Police boat and visited all landing sites. He sensitised the people; he told them the advantages of cage farming and advised them to register that they are willing.  But at the end of the day they are actually willing to give way for him to actually take up the area. 

Madam Speaker, when the Minister tells us that actually the policy was passed, I think it is supposed to be that when a policy is passed, it comes to the relevant committee of Parliament before it becomes law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the supplementary question you are asking?

MR NSUBUGA: The supplementary question I am raising is: When was cage farming developed as a law? As far as this Parliament is concerned we do not have that policy; it was rejected.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Minister said there is no law, so as far as she is concerned it is not operational; that is what she said.

MR NSUBUGA: But, Madam Speaker, the Minister has confirmed that it is actually true the investors move around to get consent from the people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you should ask her, is she aware that there are people masquerading as investors and talk to the people?  That is what you should be asking, that is your supplementary question.

MR NSUBUGA: She has confirmed.  

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, let me clarify one thing very briefly. I think in the last Session we had hon. Badda Fred in our committee; and one time he heard a rumour from Kalangala that Government was leasing Lake Victoria to some private dealers in the fish industry. His voters expressed the concern; they raised two or three questions.  

One, is Government giving away Lake Victoria or it is giving something different from the lake; and two, if that is the case, what about us the human beings, the citizens of Uganda who live on Lake Victoria?  

Three, our source of livelihood is fish; we wanted Government to clarify on this. He led a delegation of his citizens from Kalangala to seek clarification on this subject.  We invited the Minister of Agriculture, who was in South Africa, we expected a clear explanation on what he meant by leasing the Lake Victoria to investors who are interested in fishing.
  
The Minister said Government was not interested in leasing the entire lake.  But we were told that one minister who did not only know how to explain the cage farming, was quoted in a local vernacular newspaper in Masaka and the people who listened had limited ways of interpreting, and so they expressed that fear that if cage farming is introduced on Lake Victoria and the lake is owned by investors, then it is the same as the lake has already been given out to foreigners; and that is the reason they came to seek clarification.  

But the Minister of Agriculture explained in short that what Government was contemplating was introducing cage farming.  But we discouraged the Minister because even the cage farming itself on Lake Victoria needed a clear explanation and a good debate. Cage farming on Lake Victoria would mean giving some parts of the lake to these investors, and some of these areas are breeding sources for this fish.

Our other concern is that most of our fishermen use these small canoes, and small canoes cannot go into the deep waters.  Now, getting into the deep waters will require going through an area, which has already been caged; and this private investor would not allow any encroachment on his area.  

So, those were the reasons and the fears expressed.  The last fear was that these investors would be able to start introducing artificial feeding on Lake Victoria, and this would have some environmental impact on the lake; and from that time when we restrained the Minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I do not really know where we are going.  You are now explaining to us why you rejected cage farming. The Minister has said she has no law on cage farming and there is no cage farming.  What is it you want?  Honourable Minister, the Member wants to know whether you know about these people who are running around saying that they are cage farmers.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I will get him a copy of the National Fisheries Policy. It was distributed. That policy address the nomadic way of getting fish, we call them catches department.  

The second department and which we must encourage is growing fish, because the stocks in the lakes have depleted and that farming of fish is called aquariums. You can do aquariums in a cage farming in a river. What you need: You need a container, you sink it after doing an environmental impact assessment to know where the waves are going, how will you clean the fish, what will you feed and what will be the effect. 

So, Madam Speaker, I have submitted here that in principle cage farming is a known method of growing fish and we accept. But we shall not introduce cage farming on any of our lakes without piloting. We have secured funding to go through our National Fisheries Research in Jinja, to do a pilot study to answer all the concerns of everybody and to educate ourselves on how best to do the farming.  

But I have also added, Madam Speaker, that enthusiastic investors –(Interruption)- yes, I acknowledged because he thought I did not know. I am aware and I have said that if you have to do an environment impact assessment, you start there.  You go to the community and say, “I am coming, I want to grow here a forest, will you allow me, what will be the benefits”, but that is not the end of the story; you go through a process. I have laboured to put this on the Table. 

He asked, have you allowed cage farming?  The answer is no -(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I will take the answer, but if you can take the last statement, the Minister said enthusiastic investors could go ahead. It has an impact on the people of the islands because they cannot really invest when they know that actually their staying on that landing site is at stake.  

Secondly, I represent islands, some of the islands are very small but the investors want to take the whole of it. So, where will the people pass? There is a lot to be analysed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, how did those enthusiastic investors get there when we do not have policy; we do not have a law; how are they governed?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, my colleague from Mukono should appreciate that even the many landing sites, which he knows that we are going to rehabilitate, the technicians must go and investigate on the landing sites which we are going to improve.  I have got money to improve landing sites in Buvuma from the Japanese. I do not know these people; do they look like Japanese? I have money to rehabilitate, money from EU. So, I do not know every EU nationality who has given me the money.  

So, I want to plead with him. Let him help me to find whether these are people who are going to rehabilitate the many landing sites in Buvuma, which is in his interest in order to export his fish to the EU, or not, or these are other investors. But to ask a supplementary question when I have admitted- (Interruption)- yes, I know these people are there, some of them are studying how they are going to improve the landing sites.  Others are in those areas not only his, because I represent a sub-county called Kkome where we are improving beach management -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I would like to ask hon. Nsubuga to make a follow-up.  You know in 2001, here in this house, we approved a loan or a grant to rehabilitate those landing sites and we have been inquiring what has happened to that money.  So, please, help us if they are the ones, we want to know whether they are really doing our things or they are pretenders.

8.35
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the statement by the Minister, she acknowledges that enthusiastic investors can go ahead. While she is saying that, she also acknowledges that there is no law that streamlines on how aqua farming and cage farming can be conducted in the country. 

Is it prudent for the Government to allow enthusiastic investors to proceed in the absence of the law?  How will the natural resources be protected and the interest of the country in the absence of the law if we just allow them to move in an enthusiastic manner?

MRS MUKWAYA: Let me answer one by one taking into consideration that the sugar levels are down.  Hon. Nsubuga has not submitted evidence that those people who were soliciting signatures are actually investors in cage farming. He saw Bazungus moving round and he suspected that they were investors as result of rumour-mongering. My chairman has said that these are cage farmers. Does he have evidence that these people –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I respect the senior minister.  Hon. Mukwaya actually has islands like Kkome islands; and it is actually very bad for me to raise a point of order. 

I am actually getting the answers from what she has said.  She said, “enthusiastic investors could go”. It is true, Madam Speaker, the investors move with the Commissioner for Fisheries, Mr Nyeko. They use the Police boat, but you know Internal Affairs does not have fuel so the boat is always available for this investor to hire. This investor moves around Buvuma registering people. 

Is she in order to insinuate that they want to develop landing sites? If Kiyingi on the mainland has not been developed, can they develop the Buvuma landing sites? Is she in order to say that I am actually rumour-mongering when she also has islands, which are undeveloped?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter is a bit intricate. You see, I do not know much about this fishing business.  I do not even know those people who work on the fishing; I do not know anything about fishing. So, I cannot say that the people are not technicians or they are investors because I do not know them. But let us find the solution to this matter.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg the indulgence of my colleagues in the House. First of all, I would like my colleague to really read this policy by the Government. If you read it, you would see how maximally we involve the local communities in any business we do to the extent- I am speaking with the authority, Madam Speaker because I was once Minister of Animal Industry and Fisheries- to the extent that we do not even allow commercial prowling on our lakes. 

The central people on our lakes are the people who derive their livelihood from these lakes and Government policy has not shifted from that. Therefore, the honourable member needs to be assured that: one, Government’s policy is to involve the local communities maximally in management of our fisheries. 

Two, we shall never allow anybody to do anything on our waters to the detriment of the people of Uganda who derive their livelihood from our waters. So, I would, first of all, ask him to read this policy before really he goes around with all these allegations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would rather ask our committee on Agriculture to continue delving into this matter. Because one, we are interested in knowing whether the money we passed here is actually being applied to improve our landing sites. We want that information. 

But we also want to know whether there are people who are registering others and investing in that sector which the Government has not piloted. Because if they have not piloted, how is that fellow doing his things? So, please follow it up for us. 

8.40
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for sending this issue to the committee. As the honourable chairperson told you, I raised this issue about a year ago and this issue should be handled carefully because we know how sensitive this industry is. Many people are worried and this report should come very fast because you know the dangers that can happen if these people are worried and they stay for a long time before they know the truth about this. 

You remember the problems, which affected our lake and our economy; you remember what happened. I do not like to talk about it. But we do not like that thing to repeat. So, I request the committee through you, Madam Speaker, that they handle this matter expeditiously and carefully because the industry is very sensitive. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to those who have spoken about this fisheries issue is that we have a problem with fisheries, those who are really involved in fisheries issue. 

I want to report to you that if there is a sector that is more irresponsible and a sector that has disorganised the livelihood of those who stay in the Islands and those who stay along the lakeshores is the fisheries. The only problem that we have is that up to now we do not have a substantive minister for this sector. 

We have suffered, the boats have been broken, there are about 10, 11 operatives - I can name them - all armed. Most of them do not even know the local languages; they come to our areas, they talk and demolish people’s boats; they have sent away people on landing sites and the issue is being taken lightly like the Minister is trying to say.

MRS MUKWAYA: I just avoided order. Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to colleagues because I represent 25 Islands in the sub-county of Kkome. But I am not sentimental about the people who give me votes. 

All of us should be aware that the people who vote us in this Parliament, the fishermen, must be guided on how to utilize the lake. People are catching immature fish and when my officers go to arrest them- he gave me an issue to follow up. I followed up this issue, Madam Speaker and I narrated the story. I will submit a report. 

Recently we were in Entebbe and the lake is depleted; Lake Kyoga is depleted, Lake Edward is depleted, unless we support the fisheries department to arrest illegal fishing, all these factories dealing with fish are going to collapse and our economy is going to be affected. So, I do not want any sentiments in this development. 

I will continue to arrest people who engage in illegal fishing. That is notice.  I am a Member of Parliament, but I have educated my people not to engage in illegal fishing because the lake is depleted. For purposes of the economy, let us not be sentimental about our constituencies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this debate can be continued during the budget session, which is also about to come. So, you can continue interacting with the Minister and the communities. But we have asked our committee to urgently look at the matter raised by hon. Nsubuga. 

Now, honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work you have done throughout this Session. This morning, a number of committees reported on where they are standing. So the work remains ongoing and it can continue to the next Session. We have been here quite long today, so I would like to prorogue this Session and I want now to read the proclamation. 

Proclamation by Rebecca A. Kadaga, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that the Speaker may after consultation with the President prorogue Parliament by proclamation; 

AND WHEREAS necessary consultation with His Excellency, the President, has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from this day 26 May 2005. Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this day, 26 May 2005. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Deputy Speaker, Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)  
 
(The House was adjourned sine die at 8.45 p.m.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

