Thursday, 26 May 2011 

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I have some five pieces of information for you. The first one is that we have configurated the sitting arrangement in the House. On the extreme left is the joint Opposition; the Independents, that block over there; and from hon. Adolf Mwesige to this side are the Members of the ruling party. So, I hope that everybody is now satisfied.

Secondly, yesterday one of the Members forgot a mobile phone in this chamber. Anybody who believes that they are the owners of the phone should go and see the Sergeant-at-Arms to retrieve it.

Thirdly, tomorrow starting at 10.00 a.m. there will be guided tours of the precincts of Parliament to be conducted for about 45 minutes. You will be required to register for the hour in which you want to be guided; for example, one group can tour from 9.00 a.m. to 9.45 a.m. and then the other groups follow. So, please register and use the whole of tomorrow to acclimatise yourselves with the facilities in this Parliament. There will be a registration desk in the lobby for you to indicate what time you want to be conducted.

Fourthly, there will be continuous in-house induction. When we close today’s orientation there will be others which are going to begin at a later stage. There is a major one starting from the 20th to the 24th June, which I would want you to note in your diaries. It will be conducted outside the House, at the Imperial Royale Hotel. So, 20th to 24th June is the external induction.

I also want to inform you that Martyrs Day is on the 3rd June. It has been our practice, for those who practice the Christian religions and their friends, to go to Namugongo for the prayers. 

I have also instructed the Clerk to issue the Order Paper for next week. I think you will receive it tomorrow.

I would like to thank the whips for complying with our request and I would like to announce the proposals for the Appointments Committee:

1. 	Hon. Mathias Kasamba	NRM
2.	Hon. Rose Najjemba	NRM
3.	Hon. Patrick Nakabale	NRM
4.	Hon. Safia Nalule	NRM
5. 	Hon. Milton Muwuma	NRM
6. 	Hon. Saleh Kamba	NRM
7. 	Hon. Christine Aporu	NRM
8. 	Hon. Peter S. Aleper	NRM
9. 	Hon. Hood Katuramu	NRM
10. Hon. Fred Omach	NRM
11. Hon. Rebecca Amuge Otengo	NRM
12. Hon. Elly Tumwine	UPDF
13. Hon. Victoria Rusoke	NRM
14. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki	NRM
15. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo	NRM
16. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi  Leader of the Opposition/FDC
17. Hon. Aol Ochan	FDC
18. Hon. Amongi Ongom, UPC/ Whip of the UPC
19. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, DP/Whip of DP
20. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga	Independent (Masaka Municipality)
21. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro	Independent (Sheema).

The other two members of the committee will be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. So, you will be invited when there is business.

MS AMONGIN APORU: Madam Speaker, I just want to find out whether you mentioned Christine Aporu, NRM.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, after hon. Saleh Kamba I mentioned Christine Aporu.

MS APORU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

ORIENTATION OF THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT ON THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

(Continuation)

THE SPEAKER: We had taken a series of questions and clarifications and I want to invite hon. Asuman Kiyingi to respond to the Members’ issues.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I did talk to hon. Asuman Kiyingi before I came here and he assured me that he was coming. I do not know what has happened, but he told me he was coming because he had a list of the queries and questions that had been raised.

THE SPEAKER: I thought I saw him when we were praying.

2.52
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologise for coming late. There were a number of questions which were raised and you were kind enough to answer many of them. I will, therefore, not dwell on those we have covered or responded to. I will just cover those we did not respond to. My very able colleague, hon. Nyombi, who is the immediate outgoing chairman of the rules committee, will also help me answer some of the questions which I may not be able to cover. 

Hon. Timbigamba Lyndah wanted clarification on rule 35; on questions that can be asked without notice. Rule 35 states: “A question shall not be asked without notice unless it is of an urgent nature, relating either to a matter of public importance or the arrangement of business; and questions without notice shall only be asked with prior leave of the Speaker.” 

So, it is clear from the rule that it is only matters of an urgent nature. Otherwise, you are required to give adequate notice to the Speaker. And even if it is a matter of urgency, you need to seek leave of the Speaker.

Hon. Wadada raised a question under rule 91 and wanted to know why Parliament is mandated to remove a President whom they never elected in the first place. Obviously, this is a constitutional matter under Article 107, which we cannot delve into when we are just covering the rules. There is a procedure for impeachment of the President. But if it is the wish of the House that that power be given up by the House, there will be need for a constitutional amendment. 

A Member also wanted to know the difference between a standing and a sessional committee. A standing committee is usually for a period of two and a half years and a sessional committee is for one year – for every session. Actually, the word standing committee at the moment is some kind of anomaly because originally, the standing committees were in place for the duration of a whole Parliament - five years. A person, once appointed on the standing committee, would serve for five years. The committee would always be there to handle certain specified matters.

But in the wisdom of the House, the period was reduced to two and half years. After that, the committees are reconstituted. Sessional committees are usually oversight committees in operational matters of ministries. They consider matters which are more or less current as opposed to committees like PAC which do postmortem. They look at audited accounts; and raise questions on things in the past. Sessional committees usually cover ministries. 

Related to this, there was a question as to whether for every new ministry created, there should be a committee of Parliament. It is not necessary; committees are created on justification within Parliament’s work. There are committees which cover more than one ministry. But if there is justification for creating a new committee, appropriate proposals are made; the rules committee considers the justifications and makes recommendations to the plenary. 

Hon. Ayoo wanted to know under want circumstances the House constitutes itself into a Committee of the whole House? Well, there is only one specified situation, rule 118; when the House is considering a Bill before it, clause by clause, it constitutes itself into a Committee of the whole House.

There was a question on Appendix B, part 3, subsection (8); a Member wanted to know whether any person can object to the nomination of a Member to represent Uganda in EALA, for example, a voter or any other citizen.

The answer is yes. Under that rule, it says, “Any Member of Parliament or any other person may, during office hours for five working days from the first day of nomination, inspect and verify any nomination papers of any candidate.” So, the answer is yes; any Member from within Uganda can raise an objection.

Then a Member raised a question on rule 147 - We have not participated in the budget formulation process. How shall we ensure that our issues are taken care of? What do we do if the issues of our constituents are not taken care of? 

The budget process has began; but for intervention of Parliament as an institution, we shall have the State of the Nation Address; presentation of the Budget; then the respective committees will consider the different policy statements. At all those stages, it is possible for a Member to intervene and insert or argue the case of his or her constituents. I would also encourage Members to read the Budget Act.

Hon. Sebunya raised welfare issues and I think the Speaker adequately answered that. 

Hon. Ssimbwa wanted to argue the contradiction between rules 146(2) and 144, but I think I answered that and I said there is no contradiction. 

There was a question by hon. Kabahenda Flavia, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa. She said if our communities require information from an MP, for example, district councils or any other fora, how can we give appropriate information about the proceedings and at the same time protect rule 190(1). 

Rule 190(1) - evidence regarding parliamentary proceedings - states: “No Member or officer of the House and no person employed to take minutes of evidence before the House or its committee shall give evidence elsewhere in respect of the contents of the minutes or the contents of any evidence or the contents of any document presented to or laid before Parliament or any committee, or in respect of proceedings or examination held before Parliament or a committee without the special leave of the House being first obtained.”

My reading of this rule is that it does not prevent a Member from going and telling the electorate what has been going on in the House. What is prohibited is for a Member to appear in a formal judicial tribunal or court and testify as to what transpired within the House or tender documents of the House. That way, I think you may need a special leave of court. But go in a council and say, “We covered so many Bills, so many petitions were received,” so that people may be able to understand whether you are effectively representing them or not. That does not offend this rule.

Hon. Mulongo, once again under rule 30, you suggested that we should remove the limits on the number of Members on each committee. I think we responded to that. The Speaker and the whips of the respective parties will be working on that.

Hon. Ssemugaba Samuel; what happens if a committee goes beyond its mandate? He cited the example of PAC talking about all sorts of things under the sun, summoning everybody left, right and centre. Well, any Member who is aggrieved can move to the Speaker to call the committee to order. Otherwise, the Speaker on his or her own volition can advise the committee to restrict itself to issues that are under their mandate. It is not proper for committees to just meander into any area and investigate simply because they are committees of Parliament. They have mandates, which are specified in the law and the rules.

Hon. Kafeero wanted to know who writes to Government departments to facilitate a Member in preparation of a Private Member’s Bill. It is the Clerk’s Office. Usually, the Clerk ensures that every committee has technical staff and these committees will advise you on how to go about the matter, conduct your research, tell you the relevant ministries to contact and how the resources required can be procured or secured. 

A Member wanted assurance that the environment in the House is not intimidating to new comers. He was saying, “You know, when you are here and then the first time you speak someone rises on a point of order and says you should be stopped from talking, that can have a long-lasting impact on the self-esteem of the Member and the confidence.”

I think so far so good. The Speaker has been so kind to the new Members. Even the old Members have been very kind to the new Members. There is no intimidation. Members are coming out very freely to express themselves; but with time, like the Speaker said, some of those shortcomings will not be tolerated. You have not yet made your maiden speeches, but when you make your maiden speeches as promised by the Speaker, nobody will be allowed to interrupt you. You will speak, whether you are speaking proper English or broken English, it will be okay. You are representing your people. (Laughter)

Hon. Kalungi wanted clarification on points of order, points of procedure, clarification. This is provided for under rule 65 and I would advise Members to read that rule properly. When a Member rises on a point of order or procedure and you are holding the Floor, you must sit down so that the point of procedure which is being raised can be heard by the Speaker and until the Speaker has ruled, you do not resume. For the point of order to be raised, you need to be a bit more specific because under rule 65 (4), when you are raising a point of order, the rules say: “Where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure, the Member shall state the rule of procedure he or she deems to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor or the procedural matter he or she wishes ruled upon before subjecting the Member to the Speaker’s ruling.” So, you must be very specific about the rule and conduct which you think is violating the procedures of the House. 

Now, for clarification and information, that is entirely up to the Member holding the Floor. If it is a point of information and the Member holding the Floor does not say, “I accept the information” or “I am going to take the clarification,” then you who is raising the matter, must resume your seat. The Member may be courteous enough to say, “I am not taking any information. There is no need for clarification”. You do not have any remedy there. Usually what happens is that – which is really not proper – a person stands up on a point of information or clarification, the Member says, “I am not taking the information,” then suddenly says, “Point of order” and puts the information by way of point of order. That is not proper. Once you’ve risen on a point of order, rise on a point of order. Once it is information, give information.

Hon. Aleru made a proposal which is interesting in my view; that since we are trying to accommodate all the views in the country, including the Opposition views, why don’t we allow the runner-up presidential candidate to come and sit in Parliament so that we can accommodate all the views instead of having the other people going on the streets hooting and walking to work?

The proposal is sound, but this is a constitutional matter which cannot be addressed in rules. It can be addressed when considering constitutional amendments.

The hon. from Arua – I forget the name – cited rule 8(4) which says: “An independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit.” The Member wanted to know, can an Independent Member change sides as and when he/she wishes? Well, I guess so, since he/she is an Independent Member, but you must notify the Speaker that from now onwards, “I am not comfortable sitting here, I want to sit there.” The only people who are held to their sides permanently until the end of the House or else be sacked from the House are those who are flag-bearers; who came on party tickets. But I guess subject to the Speaker’s guidance, an Independent Member can move from one side to the other. That is in as far as sitting is concerned – that has nothing to do with whether one subscribes to the views of one party or the other; it is just a sitting arrangement. One can sit on any side he/she wishes to sit as an Independent Member. 

Then there was a proposal by hon. Katoto to the effect that when electing committee chairs we should do it under party guidance and supervision as opposed to just designation by the whips. I think this is what the practice is already. The parties meet in their own caucuses, elect people who should chair the different committees and then they come to report to the House. The internal processes within the parties are not covered here, but I think that is what usually happens. So, your fears and concerns are taken care of. 

Madam Speaker, that is all I was able to capture. If I left out any matter, Members can raise it and my distinguished senior colleagues can help me to answer. Otherwise –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, he asked that if there was anything he omitted and I felt I could raise – because when he was talking about the House sitting as a committee of the whole House, I felt I could refer him to rule 129 where the whole House sits as a committee of supply to receive the estimates of revenue and expenditure from the Minister of Finance. So, for purposes of considering the budget, the whole House may sit as the Committee of Supply in addition to when the whole House sits as a committee during the passing of bills in the second reading. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the honourable member on the Floor, I beg to give him some information. You are aware that sometime in the past, I won a gold medal in parliamentary practice –(Laughter)– and I thought there was a gap in what he said; namely, in regard to points of information and clarification. I think that there is a clear distinction between the two points. If I was holding the Floor I would be very reluctant to refuse a point of clarification because most likely there would be a gap in my presentation which could be repaired by the intervention. Two, in regard to the – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no. Hon. Lukyamuzi, hon. Kiyingi said that there are two areas where you are obliged to sit down; the point of order and the point of procedure. For those, you have to sit down if you are holding the Floor; that is what he said. The others, you may choose not to, but order and procedure are obligatory.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. In fact you have provided a cure by saying, “You may or you may not,” which hon. Kiyingi did not recognise. Secondly, in regard to a question which was put to him over the creation of new committees depending on numbers, I beg to disagree with him. In most cases, where you have a multiplicity of ministries, the criterion is separation of powers; you create committees to specifically address those areas. In the case of the new ministries anticipated, namely, petroleum, Kampala, Teso, Bunyoro, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Trade and Tourism, I cannot say that there would be no need to create new committees until I have checked with the appointing authority at Cabinet level. I do not believe hon. Kiyingi must guarantee his cabinet occupation. (Laughter)

Lastly, I need your guidance pursuant to what you said yesterday on the Rules of Procedure; knowing that the rules governing the Ninth Parliament should be owned by the Ninth Parliament Members. Is it fair for you to lead us into an assumption that we will continue going by these rules much as some of these rules demand for amendment? 

THE SPEAKER: You know that there is a rule against anticipation. I was waiting for hon. Kiyingi to conclude and I tell how we are going to move. Please, hon. Kiyingi conclude.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, but I do not think I have anything specific to add on hon. Lukyamuzi’s submission. But what I can comment is that before you amend, you should understand what is in place, but the Members here actually do not know what is in place. And yet for them to participate effectively in the deliberations on amendments they should know what is there. And we have got guidance to the effect that until amended, the rules subsist and are binding. And I am sure that we are not going to overhaul everything; it will be a few additions here and there. So, there is no contradiction for us to come here and look at the rules that exist; most of these will be retained even if we are to make amendments. Thank you.

3.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make some addition or a clarification regarding the question that was raised here about committees overstepping their mandate. I think the genesis of that question is – if I get my reflection correctly – it refers to us who have been serving in the accountability committees, specifically when we had the matters of CHOGM and Temangalo; there were some people who were uncomfortable, who felt the committee was overstepping their mandate. But I think when you look at the Constitution, which is the parent law - Article 90 - about how the committees of Parliaments operate, I think, let people who are making political statements not gag Parliament. You will face this now that you are in Parliament – the powers of the committees and how they operate, because Article 90(3) throws some light on this; “In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament: (a) may call any minister or any person holding a public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence. (b) may co-opt any Member of Parliament or employ qualified persons to assist in the discharge of their functions.” And it goes on – the other one is about committees of Parliament having the powers of the High Court. I remember that day the Member was referring to the issue of - (Interruption)

MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on that matter of people overstepping the scope of their investigations in the committee. I gave the example of PAC; like in the Eighth Parliament, we saw the committee taking a resolution concerning land matters; for example, in Kyankwanzi concerning evictions. This was not their mandate and they had not investigated because it is not within their jurisdiction to investigate such a matter. We know that PAC deals with audited accounts from the Auditor General and other financial matters. That is going out of boundary and that was my concern. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I can say about that is that we shall try to operate within the rules. That is what we can say for now. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I will invite the Member to look at the Auditor-General’s accounts, because under the Act which we passed, the Auditor-General is not only limited to the issues of money. It now also looks at environmental audits and value-for-money audits. It will look even into issues of personnel and operations. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, is also audited by the Auditor-General. So, all these issues are stated. If there was mismanagement either in procurement, purchase or sale of land, definitely it will be effected from that angle, but let us not belabour so much on it. Maybe we need some time to go through these documents to appreciate it. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wanted to add to what hon. Kiyingi said. Starting with the issue of budget estimates; the preliminary budget is normally brought in April. Of course you have missed it because we were not yet here, but if you were unable to make any changes during the budget debate, you can continue the dialogue until next April when the new cycle starts. They will have to come to Parliament with the preliminary budget estimates so that you can also inject your views there. We have missed this one, but there is still that one to come. 

On the Private Members’ Bills, I wanted to assure the House that we have 25 clerks. Every committee of the House has a clerk who will assist the Members in drafting and so on. 

We also have a research department. We don’t have enough of them for every Member of the House, but we have a team of economists, lawyers, engineers, political scientists; every thing under the sun. We have research assistants here and if you need those services, they can be availed to you. 

So, I don’t want you to worry that you will be drowned. And by tomorrow when you have your guided tours, you will visit the various departments and know where to find these facilities. But in the in-house induction, which will be continuous, the heads of department, will come and speak to you and tell you what they do in detail. So, don’t worry, you will be assisted to settle down.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I had sought clarification on rule 142(5), regarding the voting. It says, “If the votes are equal, the candidate shall be taken not to have been approved”. 

In parliamentary democracy, there is always a 50+1 to carry the day or to defeat a motion. In this particular case, the rule says that if the votes are equal – we are talking about the appointments committee where you have a tie – the decision is that the candidate is not approved. My suggestion was, notwithstanding the fact that we are not going to change these rules at this particular time, I think the chairperson should take into account the fact that in any democracy, there has to be a simple majority. You cannot have a tie to say either a motion has passed or failed. 

So, my suggestion is that either the numbers or the members in that committee be an odd number so that we have a simple majority or we amend that particular clause to reflect this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the secretariat has been recording the proposals coming from the Floor and they will all be lifted out by the Department of Clerks and handed over to the rules committee to examine them in detail. So, all your suggestions are going to be taken to the rules committee, which should be appointed soon. And I am appealing to all the parties to organise so that we set up these committees so that work can begin. (Hon. Members rose_)

Clarifications? I will start with hon. Ongom, then Lubogo and then hon. Mutyabule.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, can I take my seat so that I am able to write?

THE SPEAKER: Yes please.

MS JOY ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is on interruption when a Member is on the Floor. There are situations when a Member is on the Floor and there is a point of order, a point of information and then a point of clarification, but on many occasions - since we are here for induction, they are mentoring us – there are certain occasions when you will hear someone say, “Point of concern”. Can we know which points are there. Is it order, clarification, procedure etc. Do we have anything like point of concern? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Ongom. The main ones are four: “Point of Order”, that is when a Member is obliged to sit down. That is in a situation where, for instance, you feel that the Member has probably said something outrageous and you want him to stop that or substantiate. 

“Point of Procedure”, here a Member may be speaking and misguiding the House. You can then rise on a point of procedure and here a Member is also obliged to sit down.

You may have a situation where a Member may be talking about a landslide in Manafwa and then somebody from Adjumani says, “Point of information”. And if the Member sits down, he or she says, I want to inform the Member holding the Floor that although you have a landslide in Manafwa, last night we had a landslide in Adjumani. This is complementary. 

On point of clarification, if there is something – for example yesterday hon. Ssewungu said something which popped up my ears when he said that in Buganda, no schools have been rehabilitated at all. So, on that one, the Madam there could have stood on a point of order because she said she was a chairperson and she knows that schools were being funded. Or one of you who was as confused as I was should have said, “Point of clarification. I am seeking clarification whether it is really true that in the 30 districts of Buganda, no school has been rehabilitated.” 

There is no point of concern. It is just order, procedure, information and clarification. Even point of guidance is an invention. 

3.31
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have seen it in the rules that there shall be a seat of the President at all times in the House. One time when hon. Nyombi was making a presentation here, he gave us an example that in Britain, the Prime Minister - I think every Tuesday - comes to the House for about 30 minutes. I am now putting this for consideration, can we also adopt it such that on particular days of the month, the President shall attend the House and follow proceedings of the House. Moreover, this is a very big Parliament where it takes very long to meet the President. So, if we can have it in our procedure that on particular days of the month, the President will come and attend the House, I think it would work for us also. I am putting this forward for consideration in case of amendments. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: In the United Kingdom, the Prime Minister is a Member of Parliament and he is obliged to come and speak on Government policy every Wednesday. But here, the President comes only by invitation. We invite him for the Budget, the State of the Nation Address and when we either want him or when there are special guests. As for monthly visits, we have not been operating like that although we could think about it. But I do not think that we should invite him here to engage in our business. He only comes on special days when he is invited. 

3.33
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring to you a congratulatory message from the disability fraternity.  Since this is an orientation, I would like to know how I will be doing my work because I represent 32 districts beginning from Jinja, Kamuli and all the way to Katakwi. I am wondering whether I will not be mistaken for stepping on people’s toes when I go to those districts because I will not only deal with people with disabilities, but also get the local governments authorities, caretakers and other stakeholders. 

I am looking at a situation where I may go to one district where the area Member of Parliament has never gone back and people start putting forward their demands, and when I come back to the House, it might bring some problems. So, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance as to how we, who represent these big regions, should work, because our people really want to be attended to. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is courteous to inform the area Member because, for instance, if you are coming to Kamuli, you could inform me that you will be coming for one day and if I have time, I wait for you, but if I don’t, I let you know. Similarly, with the members of Cabinet, we have an understanding here that no minister should go to your constituency without informing you. So, it is a matter of courtesy. We think that that is how we should operate. So, you inform the Member of the area where you are going. 

3.35
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring you a congratulatory message from the people of Namutumba. They have also instructed me to inform you that they were struck by a heavy storm last night and most of the houses and crops in the parishes of Nawaikona, Nsize and Namutumba Town Council were destroyed and so they need urgent attention. 

I would like to talk about rule 13, which talks about the whips.   We have the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip whose role is to ensure due attendance, that is sub-rule (8); participation in proceedings and voting. Throughout the days we have been here, we have not had these two important people in this House. So, who has been ensuring that Members have attended, participated and voted according to what our parties like? And supposing they were here and one did not participate in the proceedings and a Member voted contrary to the party’s   position, what would happen to that person? 

In the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Article 33 - the Rights of Women; sub-section (3) talks about the state protecting women and their rights and taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society. We have the whips here who are majorly men; I would like to suggest that if the Rules of Procedure are –(Interjections)- I am not taking it –(Interjections)- am I protected, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are.  

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am suggesting that the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda should provide for the existence of a woman whip in this House. Let us have those two whips of the different sides, but also have at least a woman whip to whip the women properly.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Bahati here?  Could you please, come and explain how the whips have been working in the Eighth Parliament. But to my delight, I am happy to announce that FDC now has a lady whip, hon. Winifred Kiiza. She is there –(Applause)- “Nalongo” Kiiza is going to whip both the men and women of FDC; hon. Betty Amongi, Chief Whip of the UPC is going to whip all of them. DP has hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba and I think the NRM had some arrangement in the last Parliament. Hon. Bahati, could you please come. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I just wanted to inform my sister is that for us in the FDC, it is a practice; in the Seventh Parliament, the Deputy Chief Whip was a lady, hon. Franca Akello. When I came in the Eighth Parliament, I was made the deputy to hon. Kassiano Wadri, and now here I am, as a lady; I am the Chief Whip and I do all the roles as you heard from the Speaker. I would like to let her and the entire House know that I am a “Nalongo” - I have one year old twin girls - and in order to do that job sufficiently well, I call upon you to give me your maximum cooperation. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The point hon. Mutyabule is making is that there should be visibility of women by law. But explain how you will do it on your side.  

3.41
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First, the government has had a woman chief whip, hon. Kabakumba Masiko, who was our first Government Chief Whip. And then hon. Migereko, though not a woman, but I understand that he is a good father -(Laughter)- so he understands issues of women. But also, on our part as the NRM, we have a caucus which is headed by the Government Chief Whip by law, but also has four executive members and among the four is a woman, hon. Namabidde. So, the four actually work as assistants to the chief whip.

We take care of the issue of women; we respect the law and I think I should comfort Members of Parliament that all your issues as far as the caucus and the whipping are concerned will be taken care of. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the first day of orientation, hon. Okupa did raise something which is partially related to this one about voting. It is true we operate in caucuses and quite often we may agree in the caucus on issues that must be focused on, then vote together; but not all business in the House must be voted on as a caucus. There are so many issues where people may sit and agree or not agree or they may never appear in the caucus. 

For instance, in the last Parliament, whereas Dr Besigye was vehemently opposed to the creation of new districts and even the shadow minister for local government presented the party position on the Floor, when we came to the creation of Bukedea District, which was represented by an FDC Member, hon. Oduman stood and supported its creation irrespective of what the party had proposed, because this was an issue that was so pertinent to his people.

I want to say to Members that whereas caucusing is available, there may be issues which are not controversial, where Members can stand and safeguard the interests of their people even when there are particular positions from the party. I thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: On that point, I think it is important that I again emphasise what we said two days ago about what we are trying to do as a caucus and I even know that on the Opposition side, they are trying to do this. This is where we have a three line whipping system where there are matters that are identified and they are classified as matters that are very important for the party, for example, the budget. It would be very bad of a member of the NRM Government in our opinion to vote against your own budget which is going to implement the programme and the manifesto that you campaigned for.

There are matters that are not very important and, therefore, a Member should be given the latitude to come to the House and debate with their conscience. At the same time, it is important that Members realise that there is going to be a procedure, if a party takes a position and you want to divert from it. There should be a procedure where you inform the Government Chief Whip. We are talking about practice and what is standard in multiparty politics. I think that is very important.

THE SPEAKER: I think that these are internal issues of your parties. I believe you need to invite the Members and talk to them about the internal workings. I do not want to rule on which party is performing better than the other one. That is not my work.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the issue was, if a Member comes and opposes the position of the party in the House, and I think that concern must be addressed. Yes, it is possible you can oppose your party on the Floor of the House, but it would be wise and proper to inform your Government Chief Whip and say, “You took a decision as a party, but because of reasons 1, 2, 3, I will not support the position.” That is in cases like the good example hon. Dombo brought out. If, for example, you want a district in your constituency or in your area but the party is opposed to that and if you stand on the Floor of the House and support the position of the party, you are likely to lose at the next election. What do you do? It would be good to tell the chief whip and say, “I am not going to support this position because of this and that reason” then you can come to the Floor of the House and articulate your issues when the chief whip knows about it already. But if we take a position as a party and then you come to the Floor of the House and without any notice, you change and oppose the party, then an issue of indiscipline could be acknowledged at that stage, but the choice will be yours.

THE SPEAKER: Is there anything that we have not touched on the rules? I think we have covered the rules majorly.

3.48
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): My issue is on Appendix B, (2) and (3); there are some disparities that I beg to get clarification on. For example, the former provides that the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly are to be elected from outside the Parliament while the latter provides that the Members of the Pan-African Parliament must be from the Members of Parliament. I seek to understand why there is that disparity. 

THE SPEAKER: The treaty of East African Corporation stipulates that Members shall come from outside the House, but the one for the Pan-African Parliament requires that they should be sitting Members of the House. These are different agreements.

Hon. Members, as I said, there will be continuous induction. I have already informed you about the programmes which are forthcoming, but now I want us to talk about your new status here and how you are going to live. First, I want to say that by the end of next week, offices will have been allocated to the Members so that all of you have where to sit, and I hope that you have completed your registration. 

The status you now have will also cause you problems. You are targets for thefts and manipulation. For instance, a number of times people have come to my office in tears saying that they have lost somebody in Mulago and they need money to take the body to Kamuli. I ask them, “So, this patient was in Kampala and you did not tell me?” And they reply saying that they came hurrying. One or two times they cheated me; nobody had died. After that, I instructed my ADC, who is a very fat policeman, that whenever somebody comes, he should escort this voter of mine to the mortuary in Mulago and assist him or her to collect the body and drive them up to Kidera. Believe me, 100 percent, there are no dead bodies; they are looking for money. Once they discover that you have offices, they are going to start coming to you with those stories. So, be very careful.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a request; we are discussing what pertains to us. I wish they could put off the cameras such that we discuss our things. If the fourth arm of the state could excuse us to discuss. Of course they are watching us from the other side.

THE SPEAKER: The cameras should go off; we do not need the cameras because this is housekeeping. 

Very many people are going to come to you because they believe you have money and they will propose business schemes to you; very exciting schemes and if you are not careful, you will lose all your money. So, we want you to be aware about that. When you get to your offices, you are going to have computers and there are people who send messages almost every week saying, “I am from Ivory Coast, my husband died one year ago he left a fortune of  US$ 10 million, can you please help me to recover it so that we can share it.” If you agree, they ask you for your account number and before you know it, the money is gone.

(The Speaker moved the House into a closed sitting at 3.55 p.m.)
