Monday, 21 May 2012

(Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. When we adjourned the sitting last week, we had informed you that we shall reconvene on Tuesday afternoon. However, during the weekend, the country suffered a tragedy; we lost a very senior citizen, but more importantly one who made a contribution to the independence struggle and is very much linked with the history and development of this country, the late hon. C.J. Obwangor. That is why I have had to interrupt your other activities to request you to come and pay tribute to this great son of Uganda. Thank you very much. 

Entrance of the late Cuthbert Obwangor 

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE CUTHBERT J. OBWANGOR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite the Leader of Government Business, I want to inform you that in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery we have distinguished Ugandans. First, I want to introduce hon. Al Haji Akbar Adoko Nekyon who was a former Member of Parliament, former Minister for Information and Tourism, former Minister for Planning and Community Affairs, former Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Co-operatives, former Minister for Health and former General Manager of Uganda Airlines. He is here to witness the tribute. You are welcome. (Applause)

I am delighted to welcome hon. J. Mayanja Nkangi, former Katikiiro of Buganda, former Attorney-General, former Minister for Finance and now Chair of the Uganda Land Commission. You are welcome. (Applause)

I want to introduce Mr Anthony Butele, the former Minister for Labour, and 10 point programme – that was his name. (Laughter) Most exciting, I want to introduce one of the first women in the Parliament of Uganda, hon. Frances Akello, who was in the LEGCO between 1960 and 1962. We are happy to see her. I also want to introduce hon. Okello-Okello, former Member of Parliament. We are delighted to see you. (Applause) 

If there are other people, I will introduce them as they come. There is hon. Amajo, former Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido. Hon. Rhoda Acen is hiding there; she is the former MP for Amuria. Thank you for coming. I will introduce those who come in later. Honourable Prime Minister, I think you can now move the motion.

2.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVRENMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Cuthbert Obwangor. I move this motion under rule 40(b) of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with deep sorrow of the demise of Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor, which occurred on the 19th day of May 2012 at his home in Kia Village, Magoro Sub-County in Katakwi District;

AND WHEREAS the late Cuthbert Obwangor offered exemplary service to the country in the post-Independence era;

NOTING that the late Cuthbert Obwangor is to date regarded as one of Uganda’s political models for having contributed to the fight for the political freedom of the people of Uganda;

RECOGNISING that the late Cuthbert Obwangor was a great politician as illustrated by his honest straightforward open-mindedness;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that despite his advanced age, he was still resourceful in guiding the nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda and to all the people of Uganda;

2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late Cuthbert Obwangor in different capacities.” 

I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and to all the people of Uganda on the passing of Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor. The late Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor can be rightly referred to as a principled politician who tirelessly fought for the political freedom of the people of Uganda. 

He offered exemplary service to this country. He promoted unity and solidarity as he emulated feelings of nationalism. He had a principled, straightforward and open-minded character. This, he demonstrated, by his contribution and support of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. He served in the Constitution making process first as a commissioner and later as a member of the Constituent Assembly, an Assembly that saw the promulgation of the 1995 Uganda Constitution and where I was privileged and honoured to work closely with him. 

For generations to come, Ugandans will continue to identify themselves with nationalists like Cuthbert Obwangor. Despite his disagreements with Obote, the late Obwangor was instrumental in the establishment of, among other national institutions, Uganda Meat Packers in Soroti and the Soroti Flying School. 

He has contributed tremendously to the development of this country, not only in the fight for independence but for its progress towards achieving higher levels of development. May God grant eternal rest to the late Cuthbert Obwangor’s soul and also sustain his family and all Ugandans. He will obviously leave a huge gap in the leadership of Uganda and the best tribute we can pay him is to emulate his character. I beg to move.

2.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to second the motion moved by the honourable Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Cuthbert Joseph Obwangor. I do this on behalf of the people who love Uganda and on my behalf.

The late hon. Obwangor’s long and exemplary life should be an example to all of us, as the Prime Minister has said. The late Cuthbert Obwangor was one of the 91 Members of the National Assembly during the post-independence era. These were men and women of integrity who had the nation at heart. It did not matter where one came from and what tribe or political group they belonged to, one thing united them all - they were proud to be Ugandans. 

It is also well known to us that the late Obwangor never said “yes” when he meant “no”. He would never accept to be compromised or sell his conscience. His no was no and yes was yes. He put the country first and he served beyond self. 

He was arrested and detained for refusing to submit to the principle of collective responsibility. He refused to support the proposal to grant the then President more sweeping powers. He had Uganda at heart. 

He was a minister of local administration and then a minister of justice. As Minister of Justice, he could have changed the Constitution if he had wanted to but he did not. This was his legacy. That is the challenge he has pushed to us today. Great men of integrity are now gone leaving behind shoes too big to fit many of our people who ought to replace them. 

During the insurgency, hon. Obwangor helped the people of Teso who had run from their villages to the town by giving them shelter and food. That is the man we now see lying in front of us here. I wonder, if these great men had destroyed Uganda in the 1960s, how would this country look like today? Some people have no shame taking the little away from the poor citizens. They have destroyed this country such that the next generation will have nowhere to start from.

That is why I want to take this opportunity to call upon all Ugandans; it is time we carried out a general clean-up in terms of good governance and defend our Constitution. God willing, the old values of our society will be restored once and for all.

I also want to call upon Government to put in place a policy that will help our senior citizens, especially the so many Ugandans that have immensely contributed to the development of this country yet they are languishing in poverty. In any case, we are all ageing and at one time, we shall all be like them. Government must, as a matter of urgency, take up immediate measures to address these issues.

Madam Speaker, no word can sufficiently describe such great men who have done a lot for this country. They sacrificed their lives to make this country a better place to live in, in spite of the destruction we now witness. However, we are still hopeful that God will give us another generation that will protect mother Uganda based on the core values of the likes of the late hon. Obwangor. 

We promise the late Obwangor that your sweat will not go in vain. As you leave us, rest assured that some of the seeds that you sowed will definitely germinate and will contribute to the fight until Ugandans have a better place to live in. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

2.44
MR MICHEAL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, today is a very sad day not only for the people of Teso but also the country at large. The late hon. Obwangor was a Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality. He resided in Soroti Municipality. He was a man of great honour and very principled, a lion in this Parliament.

When you read the Hansard, you realise that he was a consummate reader, a man who would do his homework before he came to make contributions in Parliament. The late was a man who would call a spade a spade and say what he wanted to say without fear or favour. He was a principled leader and a great debater.

When the late Obwangor was a member of this House in 1967, having emerged from LEGCO, being a Member of Parliament and a Minister, he was one time challenged by colleagues in Government. He was told by one of the colleagues, “I dare you cross the Floor if you think that you can and you are principled.”  He then asked: “You mean to cross the Floor?” He indeed crossed the Floor before resigning as a minster.

That is the man who stood here and said that he would defend the Constitution of Uganda without fear or favour, and he remained a patriot, a nationalist and Pan-Africanist till death. I would like to call upon honourable colleagues to emulate the manner in which the late Obwangor would elucidate issues on the Floor of Parliament. 

The late was also very close to me as a family member. His daughter was married to my uncle. In his last days, the late stayed in our ancestral home in Omodoi in Soroti. I recall that when he was sick on 30 November 2011, when the President had come to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of the Church of Uganda I informed him how the late, his friend, was sick in Soroti Hospital. I thank H.E the President for responding immediately by going to see him after the prayers ended. The President visited the late at Soroti Hospital. The two had a cordial discussion after the President asked us to allow them time.

I would like to thank the President and Government for having chosen to recognise this great man. (Applause) There are many Members of Parliament who served this country. However, the late Obwangor goes into history as one of the longest serving Members of Parliament in this country. By 2009, Uganda had almost 1,806 Members of Parliament including those who had served from the First Parliament to the Eighth Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

2.55
MS CHRISTINE AMONGIN APORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, on Saturday 19 May, tragedy befell us again when hon. Cuthbert Obwangor, one of the gallant Ugandans who struggled for our independence, passed on at his home in Magoro, Katakwi District. Yes, we mourn this tragedy, but we must above all thank God for having given us the gift in the late hon. Obwangor. The late Obwangor died while he was still displaced. He was not staying at his home. Teso mourns him and all Ugandans mourn him.

Born on 1 November in 1920, in the then Uganda Protectorate under the British rule, Cuthbert Obwangor was not born in privileged times. He therefore had a humble background. He was a practicing Christian, having been born on All Saints Day. We learnt that right from his childhood, the late Obwangor was blessed with rare qualities and wisdom. This attribute did not miss the keen eye of Rev. Fr Griffin, a catholic missionary at that time in Teso District.

In 1940, Rev. Fr Griffin supported the late Obwangor to proceed for studies in the United Kingdom at the London School of Economics where he studied law and economics. On his return, he worked with East African countries and served in many organisations. He was employed in Kenya Sugar Factory. At that time, African countries were at the climax of fighting for independence. His educational background enabled him to be elected among the trade union leaders in the sugar industry in Kenya. By virtue of his position in the trade union, he had the opportunity to share ideas and work with leaders who struggled for independence, who included the late Jomo Kenyatta, Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, Arap Moi, to mention but a few.

At the formation of the Uganda National Congress, he was among the pioneers in the organisation for the struggle for Uganda’s independence. Mzee Obwangor came back to Uganda and joined the struggle for independence. In 1958, he was among the Members of the Legislative Council. He worked with people like the late Mzee Abwongoto, the late Leo Okol, and he continued to work with Stanslus Okurut, Silvanos Isiagi who were the politicians of Teso by then. 

A great debater he was. He was humorous. He was a musician, and in Church he had a position. We shall miss him. Because of the attributes of the late Obwangor, he could not always allow a “no” to be a “yes”. He fell out even with some of those who had motives to untangle his aspirations. 

The late Obwangor loved peace, unity and progress. He joined Uganda People’s Congress in 1962 and later on he was elected a minister for local administration, commerce and justice. He stuck to his principles of a good Uganda - he, together with the late Balaki Kirya and others of their time, including those today seated in the gallery as we pay tribute to him. 

The late Obwangor was a significant figure in the leadership, not only of Teso but Uganda as a whole. He contributed to the formation of the National Resistance Movement Council at the advent of the National Resistance Movement. He was a Constituent Assembly delegate in the 1995 Constitution making process. 

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank Government for awarding Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor a medal last year and most importantly before his death, in recognition of his contribution to the struggle to shape the destiny of our country. On Good Friday this year, His Excellency was in Soroti and was again asking about his health. Little did we know that he would pass on. We want to thank, as the people of Teso, the President for the support that he has been offering to him during his time of ailment and even now for the support in giving him this very befitting burial.

Mzee Obwangor has truly walked his journey. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved family and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.55
MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I would like to convey my condolences to the bereaved family of the late Cuthbert Obwangor and those of the people of Katakwi District, the people of Teso as a family and indeed all the people of Uganda. 

I may not be very knowledgeable about the late Cuthbert Obwangor but what I remember is that in 2006, when I joined active politics, I sought counsel from two very prominent elders in Teso. One of them was hon. Cuthbert Obwangor, who is before us here, and my uncle, Mr Robert Elangot, who was the Bank of Uganda Governor during the time when Cuthbert Obwangor was a minister.

The counsel that I sought from him has made me very firm in my political career so far. When I went to seek counsel from him, he told me two things. One of them was that if you want join politics or be successful in politics, or if you want to make politics your career, ensure that you must be frank and straightforward. I think being frank and straightforward is one of the attributes that the members who have spoken have associated with the late Cuthbert Obwangor. I would like to request honourable colleagues, and indeed all leaders in the country, to emulate the late Cuthbert Obwangor in what he did by being truthful, straightforward and very frank.

Madam Speaker, he told me that if you want to know about what I did in Government when I was a politician, go and read the Hansard. On very few occasions, I have tried to refer to the Hansard and the few scripts that I have read when he spoke on the Floor manifest that the late Cuthbert Obwangor indeed had Uganda at heart and was a very hardworking person. On top of being truthful and straightforward, he told me to be a very hardworking person if I want to succeed in Parliament. He told me not only to work hard on behalf of a small picture but to work hard on behalf of the big picture. 

He was a man who was looking forward to having a very peaceful Uganda. He was a man who was looking forward to a united region, and he was a Pan-Africanist. We need to learn a lot from this so that we can keep his star shinning as we pay our last respects to him. 

Finally, I would like to relay, on behalf of the people of Teso and on behalf of the family and the people of Katakwi, our sincere appreciation to His Excellency the President. When the President received this news, he immediately assured us that he was going to consult and ensure that we accord – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just complete that sentence.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me additional seconds. I was saying that we would like to thank His Excellency the President for according hon. Cuthbert Obwangor a funeral that he deserves. I would like to say that may the Lord sustain the bereaved and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.58
MR DAUDI MIGEREKO (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I too rise to support the motion paying tribute to hon. Cuthbert Obwangor in respect of his contribution to building the nation, the country they call Uganda, our country. 

It is common knowledge that hon. Cuthbert Obwangor was one of the best serving Members of Parliament during his days. He was a very eloquent speaker and debater. He had huge powers to comprehend issues and to communicate issues in the best interest of his people. 

At a personal level, the most that I happen to know about the late was through my uncle, hon. Mathias Ngobi, who was a Member of Parliament for Butembe and Minister for Agriculture at the time hon. Cuthbert Obwangor was a Member of Parliament and minister in the post-independence government of the late Apollo Milton Obote. He always used to make reference to him even after they had left Government as someone who always debated and communicated what he actually believed in. All those who have spoken before me have clearly brought out that aspect. 

Madam Speaker, the late Cuthbert Obwangor, even at the time of his death, has still been very useful to all of us. Not long ago, to be exact on the 6th of May, the First Lady and Minister for Karamoja Affairs, hon. Janet Museveni, organised a meeting in Napak. You may all recall that there has been a boundary dispute involving Napak and Katakwi. As much as we in Government thought that we had, in a scientific way, resolved the issue of the boundary between Karamoja and Teso, to the people of this area this problem has not yet been solved. 

When we went for this meeting, the people of Karamoja came with Mzee Asio and Mzee Asio was able to detail us on the history of that area and where the boundary should be. The people of Teso complained that they should have been given sufficient notice to alert Mzee Obwangor so that he could actually come and tell us where exactly the boundary should be. This was on 6 May 2012. I remember I was with hon. Jessica Alupo and my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Toroma, and other Members of Parliament including the Minister for Local Government. At every stage, the people of Teso were saying, “This would not be a problem had we brought Cuthbert Obwangor along.” Why am I saying this? The point I would like to make is that he was looked at as a repository of institutional memory, knowledge and history to the people of Teso just like for those of the entire Uganda and maybe for Africa. 

He valued the concept of value addition when he was serving Government. The whole idea of setting up a meat factory in Soroti, the whole idea of setting up milk collecting centres in Teso and other parts of Eastern Uganda and a dairy factory in Mbale can partly be attributed to his appreciation of the notion of value addition. He had a desire to enhance people’s income and create employment in that part of the country. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kalaki County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank God who gave the late Obwangor more than 90 years. There may be none or just a few who will live for more than 90 years. On that point, I would like to once again thank God for that and the family of the late.  

I would like to thank the President and the Parliament of Uganda for having accorded the late Cuthbert Obwangor a befitting send off. Many times we have had to debate and haggle as to whether we should bring the bodies of senior citizens to this House. I think that we are now on the right track, and I must thank Government for having taken that position and the President for doing that. He must continue doing things right. When we do things right, this country will move forward. 

Madam Speaker, as a child, I admired the oratory skills of the late Cuthbert Obwangor and I admired the English he spoke. He spoke the Queen’s English; he never “murdered” the English language like we do today. We admired his love for education. The bright people who came from Teso owed a lot to the late Cuthbert Obwangor. No wonder during the times of insurgency, he offered part of his building in Soroti Municipality to work as a nursery school for the displaced children. The few people who were able to get an education from those displaced areas owe a lot to that family. 

Madam Speaker, it has been stated here right from the beginning by the Prime Minister and all the subsequent speakers that his “no” was a “no”, even when it came to collective responsibility. How many of us today in the Frontbench can say no to collective responsibility if it means so? There is none so far. We know what it means to be on the Frontbench. I see my colleagues here; how many of you can afford to say no today even if it is collective responsibility? It reminds me of one statement one of the colleagues made in this House that, “There is nothing called collective guilt; there is only collective responsibility.” (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I only compare his oratory skills and straightforwardness with Prof. Kanyeihamba’s. Even the tones of their voices when they spoke were almost similar. 

Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor died in his village but he has died when most of his things that were vandalised during the insurgency have not been compensated. I would like to call upon the government to speed up the process of compensating the people of Teso. Tomorrow or the day after, you will be going there for the burial of this old man but you will see the havoc that was caused by the cattle rustlers, the LRA then, and some UPDA rebels at that time. His home was vandalised by the cattle rustlers and the LRA. We need to look at the issue of compensating the people of Teso.

Finally, I would like to once again thank the Parliament of Uganda and colleagues who have spoken about this great man of Teso and great man of this country. He was foresighted and was able to put Teso on the map because he was one of those who were in the First Parliament together with the lady seated in the gallery, Frances Akello, who was introduced. May the Almighty grant eternal peace to the late Cuthbert Obwangor and may He comfort the family. Thank you.  

3.16 
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (NRM, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said about the late Obwangor but I am going to concentrate on those areas where nobody has said anything. 

I was in high school when this country was in the process of attaining independence. There could have been a lot of violence in this country before independence, but we have to be grateful to the leaders of that time because they were able to guide this country and we attained independence without major violence. They guided this country very well, and Obwangor was one of those who guided this country to independence right from LEGCO.

During LEGCO, every district sent one person to Parliament. Obwangor was the one who represented Teso. Ladies and gentlemen, during the rallies, which led to independence, we as young people were always very anxious to attend rallies where the speakers were eloquent and interesting. Among those, I think I will mention a few, were John Katiti of Ankole, John Babiiha from Toro, George Magezi from Bunyoro and Abu Baker Nekyon who is here. Those people influenced many young people to join politics because of their eloquence. 

Obwangor had humble beginnings but his priorities made him rise to positions of very high influence in this country, but he did not forget where he came from. If it was any of us, maybe we would have chosen to have been flown outside the country to be treated there and then we would have died there and then it would cost the government money to fly the body. Obwangor went back to Magoro and that is where he died and he was brought back to Kampala.

Ladies and gentlemen, we have a responsibility as politicians to be non-tribal. Obwangor was not a tribalist. Obwangor considered Uganda as his home. He was a Ugandan. He valued education, it has been mentioned. He would be reading a book every time you went to his home.

As I said, he had a humble beginning. There was a priest in his area called Father Griffin. Obwangor rode on a motorcycle with Father Griffin through Sudan and Egypt, and then they crossed the Suez Canal, rode through Europe and crossed the English Channel into Britain to seek education. He then came back and led this nation. For that, I would like to thank and extend my condolences to his family for the loss of such a great person, a great Ugandan. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.17
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, first of all I would like to thank God who granted Mzee Obwangor 92 years of age. Two, I want to thank the Government of Uganda for taking care of the burial arrangements. The other day when I heard about the death of Mzee Obwangor, I asked them, “Are we going to bury him today?” They told me, “No, the government and the President of Uganda said he must be given a state burial”.

The late Obwangor comes from the same sub-county and the same village as I do. The late Obwangor is a person that Magoro Sub County will miss, Katakwi District will miss, Teso region will miss. Uganda will miss this man of great honour. 

He was a very patriotic man, very nationalist. To show his nationalism, when the Government of Dr Apollo Milton Obote detained his friends, the ones that have been mentioned, he was able to protest so that his friends come out. This is a signal to all of us, Ugandans, that we must not always allow nonsense to take place in society. We should always be clear-minded. I may not speak much because I feel bereaved because of this great man that we will miss in our sub-county, but there are two things I want to put across. 

One, the house of the late Mzee Obwangor, who we are seeing here lying, was totally destroyed by the warriors and rebels and all his property was destroyed. I would like to request the Government of Uganda, like it has always done for other leaders, to help to resettle the family of the late Obwangor because they have nowhere to stay; everything was destroyed.

Secondly, and that should be the last, I humbly request the Government to follow suit to compensate all the people who lost their property and lives in Teso. Those of us who will be going to bury the late Mzee Obwangor will see the type of life people are living in Magoro. Even right now as we speak, people are in some sort of camp. Their property was destroyed, their animals were taken and people are terrified. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

3.22
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to Cuthbert Obwangor. I am saddened that as we are in our jubilee year, we are again gathered to see off a true son of Uganda. I personally have had a great time looking at the Hansards, which shaped this nation, and I am eternally grateful to those who played a very positive role so that today we can stand and celebrate 50 years of Uganda. 

There are many who speak about the highlights of 1966, but there are few who have read the debates that took place on this Floor in 1964. At that point, it was one of the first challenges of nationhood of Uganda, a new nation. If you read carefully what hon. Obwangor said on this Floor, you can really understand that he was a true nationalist who believed in constitutionalism. 

Our forefathers who formed this nation deserve to be recognised, as those of us who try to follow in their footsteps deserve to understand the dream of a united and prosperous country. Many of them came from humble backgrounds but their contribution is immense. As Members of Parliament, I encourage my colleagues to spend some time reading the Hansard. 

I realise that we still have a journey to make to fulfil the dream for the Uganda they wanted to see. It is sad that he will not be with us when we are celebrating 50 years of independence. However, I am sure that with his other colleagues, they will look upon this nation with the same hope they had at the birth of this nation. On that note, all I can say is, may his soul rest in eternal peace and may the dream for a united and prosperous Uganda rise and shine. Thank you. 

3.23
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Apolon Cuthbert Obwangor. In 1994, while making my political debut to national politics, I was privileged to contest an election in Soroti Municipality with the late Apolon Cuthbert Obwangor. At that time we were a pack of 14 and I was quite young, having joined politics at a tender age after university. 

I would like to take the opportunity at this point to put the record straight. After that hotly contested election, it was Peter Omolo, the current MP for Soroti County, who made it to the Constituent Assembly. So, despite the fact that we lost, the 13 of us continued to work together and it was then that I learnt Apolon Obwangor’s capacity.

Mzee Obwangor was no ordinary politician; he was in a special class of politicians, and I see many of them seated right there in the VIP Gallery. These are politicians who although they knew their parties, to them the country and their regions came before their parties. I do not see this happening today in this country. Although he belonged to UPC, Mzee Obwangor is said to have associated with members of the Democratic Party. Hon. Amajo’s father, – she is seated in the Gallery today - Mzee Oryekot, was an associate of Mzee Obwangor. Today, Mzee Obwangor has a child named after him in the late Mzee Oryekot’s family – Peter Obwangor. That is how people thought about nationalism. Today, I see us talking about our party caucuses and thinking more about our party affairs while forgetting about the nation. That is the lesson we need to learn from our political forefathers.

Mzee Obwangor was a candid politician; he spoke the truth and was fearless. He was an honest person, non-corruptible and principled, which has already been mentioned here. When he set his mind on something, he never wavered. 

Madam Speaker, today the government has granted us a public university but it was because of Mzee Obwangor’s initiative. He spent his personal resources to lay the foundation stone for that university and that university is being talked about today. For us as Teso, it is a great loss. We have lost a generous individual and we shall sadly miss him. 

I would like to echo what my colleagues have said; Mzee Obwangor was internally displaced. I passed by his home a year ago but I could not believe what I saw. Tomorrow, as we go to bury him, I know most of you will be disappointed that this great man, although he had set a foundation for a huge house in his village, it is now an overgrown bush. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Now, before hon. Alaso comes in, I think there is some vital information that hon. Alupo wants to give about the government’s contribution to the late’s family.

MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the House is in light of the request that hon. Cyrus Amodoi made, that Government should undertake to construct at least a house in the ancestral home of the late Cuthbert Obwangor. It was an omission, but I would have shared it with you as area Members of Parliament. Indeed, the President has already made a commitment to have a house constructed in Magoro where we are going to bury him. We undertake to make a follow-up and ensure that it is brought to a logical conclusion. Thank you.

3.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the family of the late. Some of them are very close friends of mine. It is important that I repeat myself to acknowledge the courage and the brilliance of Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor. He was principled and had a big heart. I thought I would echo those attributes. 

In 2001 when I was elected, the late sent for me saying he needed to see me before I was sworn in. When I went to see him, he told me four things. He said when you go there, be principled; nobody should buy you, nobody should sway you. He told me to be a good politician, be a courageous woman. He told me not to eat or drink carelessly. Lastly, he told me not to travel at night. I am going to try to live by those things as long I am in this political office. I really owe it to him. I saw him towards the beginning of this year and we again visited him when he was sick; we went to his house with Dr Kiiza Besigye. 

It is good to give the late Obwangor a state burial but I think it is important that our people – these great fathers – are helped when they are sick to get treated. Mzee exhausted all his resources and his children finished every little thing they had in that house to try to get him treatment. The time he broke himself, if we had just secured a proper operation maybe Mzee Obwangor would have lived to be 100. I guess that is why the founding fathers of this nation are protesting; somebody should read the prophetic behaviour of these old men. The other day it was Prof. Kakoma, and before we knew it, it was Prof. Kajubi and today it is Mzee Obwangor. I think they are protesting the behaviour of their children who neglect them.  (Laughter)  Yes! We neglect them when they are sick and we bring them here and bring all sorts of monies. We should care for them when they are still alive. That is when they will appreciate that we are a good country, responsible children.

Mzee Obwangor loved Teso. However, the meat packers in Teso lies dilapidated, the train no longer goes there. I read about his pain about the cattle rustling in the Hansard. We are talking about Magoro where we are taking him, but the rustlers still go there. The people of Teso are still refuges within Teso. I hope as we lay him to rest, we will remember that we owe it to our founding fathers to resolve the dilemmas this country is facing.

Lastly, this is the only man who fought detention without trial. These days we detain anybody anyhow. When you walk to work, you are locked up -(Member timed out.)   

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, just conclude. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it has become fashionable to have people detained without trial, without complete investigations. Perhaps we need to learn from the character of our fathers. It is wrong to commit somebody when you have not concluded investigations. Tomorrow, you will pass the Public Order Management Bill; will you remember that Mzee Obwangor stood here and fought against such principles? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MRS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is with pain and heaviness of heart that I stand here looking at my father lying before us. At the same time, it is a pride to know that the person lying before us today is an embodiment of honesty, an embodiment of principle, an embodiment of truth and a true son of Uganda. I am proud to say that what I am today is partially a contribution of Mzee Obwangor. 

Mzee Obwangor advised everybody - whoever cared to seek help, whoever cared to seek advice, it did not matter where you belonged, it did not matter what you professed. What mattered to him was, what were you standing on, what are your principles, what is it that motivates you? 

Today many of us have spoken; the house where he lived in Soroti Municipality is very dilapidated. He gave up most of the house, which was supposed to be a storeyed building, for helpless children to learn in and he occupied one room. How many of us today, with the mansions which we have, with the monies which we have, got wrongly or rightly, can share what you have? Mzee Obwangor shared without reservation. I am proud to be associated with him.

Mzee Obwangor gave counsel to everybody, like I said. He advised many of us. One of the four strong issues he always told all upcoming leaders whom he rejoiced in was, “be principled”. Indeed, we shall live to carry on that legacy. How I pray that all of us, young leaders, even the old, even if you have erred somehow, learn today from Mzee Obwangor. 

As we speak these words, let us not speak from our lips but from our hearts. Do you feel judged even as you praise Mzee Obwangor? Where you are today as a leader, do you feel he can be proud of you? Do you feel you learnt something from him?

Madam Speaker, I am not sure that Mzee Obwangor is happy with where we are as Ugandans. He told me he was laying a brick while serving his time. He hoped those of us who were coming after him could continue building on the same block until we reached a place where Ugandans would be free, would be happy, and would rejoice and celebrate being Ugandans. I am not sure that as he lies here, his spirit is rejoicing that we are where he thought we would be after he laid his brick. Today as we lay our different bricks, take care that you are laying a brick for the future not for yourself.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to pray that all of us, wherever you come from, especially those from Teso, stand with the family of Mzee Obwangor, pray with them and share with them whatever it is when you have time. Even as leaders, Members of Parliament, pass by and share with them. We will always be there to stand with you and share with you. Feel free to contact us and we will stand with you because our end is the same. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.37
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kanungu and Kinkiizi East in particular, I also rise to support the motion and convey our condolence to the family, the people of Teso and indeed, Ugandans. We are here mourning a very great man and as the Bible said, a wise man from the east. The Bible says the wise men and women came from the east - (Applause) - but they were going to see a great man in the west - (Laughter) – and that was Jesus. 

The life expectancy in Uganda today is about 50 years. What that means is that when you give birth to a child today, that child is expected to live for 50 years. Here, our Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor has lived for 92 years or thereabout. We thank God for the years he has been able to live. What that means is that those of you who are above 50 are statistically lucky, because you are above the national life expectancy which is about 50 years. We thank God for giving him life for all those years. I think the testimonies given here are that he has used his life meaningfully and there is a lot we can talk about the contribution of the late Cuthbert Obwangor.

Although I never knew him personally and physically, as young people we grew up knowing the kind of work, the kind of debate, the kind of leadership this generation gave to this country as many speakers have given testimony. I think as Members of Parliament serving in this Ninth Parliament, we have a lot of lessons to learn from the attributes, the character, the behaviour of the late Obwangor and also his contemporaries from the post-colonial and the post-Independence Parliament.

As we reflect on his life, let us also reflect on how we are conducting business as parliamentarians and see the lessons we can learn from our leaders who did a lot to put Uganda on the footing at which it is. We are told, for instance, that when he was challenged on the Floor to stand his position, even when he was in Government he stood up, crossed and got a microphone and said, “As I was speaking on the other side”, and he continued -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude

DR BARYOMUNSI: The lesson is, how many of us respect our conscience and can defend a position which we think is right even when you are misunderstood by your leaders? I think those are some of the lessons which we have to learn as leaders, especially we the young generation who are in positions of leadership. 

Lastly, I want to agree with the suggestion that we need a comprehensive policy on the aged. Every time we come here to pay tribute to our aged colleagues, there are always complaints on how they have died, their welfare and health concerns. Government should come up with a clear policy on how we can handle the welfare and other aspects to do with the aged in this country. 

That is why we must have a census on time in order for us to know the demographic structure of Uganda, in order for us to plan properly and also to come up with proper policies. If we know how many people are above the age of 65, then we can come up with a proper policy so that our aged colleagues can always get a decent life in their later years. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.42
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to the late hon. Obwangor Cuthbert. He was a member of NRC and I had the privilege to sit with him in this same Parliament. 

I learnt a lot from hon. Obwangor. I had just come to Parliament and I used to watch how people would debate. I used to admire him because he was very articulate. He would stand up and you would wonder how the words were flowing. He would talk and talk; actually, he used to roar like a lion. When I was outside, I met another distinguished member, Adoko Nekyon. Hon. Cuthbert Obwangor would roar from that corner where hon. Amuriat is sitting and hon. Adoko Nekyon would roar from here - (Laughter) – and the House would be tense; they were great men. Hon. Kigongo would be in the seat where hon. Kadaga is seated and he would just look at them until they settled. 

Whenever there was any controversy or something that would need guidance, the Speaker would pick on some members, and Cuthbert was always among them. There are some people who give their opinion and the Speaker also is guided. He was that kind of person. 

Hon. Obwangor was a nationalist in character. These days when we stand to speak, especially when sharing the small cake called “the Budget”, some people speak and say, “In my constituency”, especially when we are handling education. Education is for all Ugandans but someone will say, “They have taken this to Teso, why aren’t they taking it to our place?” Cuthbert Obwangor would never stand to speak for only his constituency, Soroti East by then. So, I learnt from him that when you are a Member of Parliament, you do not have to speak for only your constituency. Much as we are elected by the people back home, we are elected to serve the whole country. He was very good at that. 

He knew how to interpret the law. Some of these issues which we deliberate on, especially at committee stage, only a few members contribute. For those of us who were new, we would leave it to the few of them. Cuthbert would really contribute. If you read the Hansard, you can see what I am talking about. He often led us when enacting laws. So, this country has lost a great man. 

We thank God for his life. There are very few people who live up to that age. So, we thank God for his life. We also thank the Government for remembering his contribution and because they are going to put up accommodation for his family. 

Let this also teach us a lesson as leaders. Leaders at that time were really for the country. At times they would not reserve for their own. This should teach us to also prepare because a time will come when we will leave this country; so, let us leave decently. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish hon. Obwangor’s soul rests in eternal peace. I thank you. 

3.47
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion as moved by the Prime Minister, but I request to make an amendment before I proceed. On page 1, the motion says, “And whereas the late Cuthbert Obwangor offered exemplary service to the country in the post-independence era...” I want to add, “pre-independence” This is because hon. Cuthbert Obwangor did not only serve during the post-independence period but he also served diligently before Uganda got her independence. That is why I want to make that amendment. 

When we talk about hon. Cuthbert Obwangor, to some of us who are not near his age but were told the history of this country, this is a man we should praise. He is a man who even after his education in the London School of Economics, decided to come back here and serve his people. During those years, it was not easy to find people who studied in the London School of Economics coming back to do what the late Cuthbert Obwangor did. 

During his time in LEGCO, we understand he did many things with his colleagues, statesmen like the ones hon. Mallinga named. Many of his deeds at that time led to development, which we are enjoying even here in Central Uganda. When you talk about Katwe, the black man’s town, and the shops around the Old Taxi Park, all these were initiated by Cuthbert Obwangor and some of the statesmen like Augustine Kamya and Dr Kununka who organised boycotts aimed at not buying goods from shops of white people. That was not because of tribalistic tendencies, but he was looking for fairness and justice. So, he is a man we need to praise at this time. 

Secondly, we have heard that he took a decision when he stood against the principle of collective responsibility. That should be a lesson to our colleagues on the Frontbench. They should not do wrong under the guise of collective responsibility. In Cabinet, we always hear, “I had nothing to do because of the principle of collective responsibility”. The late Cuthbert Obwangor did it, and we request that it should be a learning lesson for our colleagues on the Frontbench. Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

3.52
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I extend my condolences to the family and the people of Teso. A lot has been said to describe the late Cuthbert Obwangor. One of the most important achievements that the people of Teso benefited from him was education. At one time, Makerere University had over 20 professors who were all hailing from Teso. This was because of the wise counsel and mentoring of the late Obwangor when he was a Member of Parliament.

When the late was a leader in Teso, he used his position to develop the youth and not to destroy them. The late used his position to develop infrastructure in Teso as a leader - not only Teso but the entire country just like the rest of the speakers have already said. 

Therefore, my contribution this afternoon is to the members. My challenge is to you and me; are we emulating the same? They have talked of words like, “a man of principle”. How many of us stick to principles? They have talked about the late being a model politician. Are we doing the same? Aren’t we stepping on each other’s toes? They have talked of honesty. Are we really honest today? His death had a purpose; why did it have to happen at that time when we are Members of Parliament? I think God wanted us to learn from his rich experience. 

My contribution this afternoon is that a vacuum has been created and the challenge has been thrown to us, the existing leaders. Can we borrow a leaf from what the late did for this country, the good foundation the late put into this country when they got independence? 

To the people of Teso, they have talked of the late as a peace-loving Ugandan. Let us use this opportunity as we celebrate the life of the late Obwangor to reconcile the differences in Teso so that we can move ahead with development in Teso. That is my message. Therefore, Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

3.54
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I rise to play tribute to the late hon. Obwangor as a student of history, a researcher and a reader. When I joined Parliament in 2006, I was so eager to know the level and standard of debate in Parliament before the Eighth Parliament. I had two personalities in my mind because I had heard about him and I had also interacted with hon. Adoko Nekyon. 

When I entered the Parliamentary library, I read the contributions of these two honourable Members of Parliament. For those who have read hon. Obwangor’s submissions recorded in the Parliamentary Hansard, you can definitely know the calibre, stature and substance in the man lying before this House. I can, in a nutshell, describe him as a political icon of his generation blessed with amazing traits.

Secondly, I want to sound prophetic. The generation of UB-40 is worried at the rate at which, as Uganda prepares to celebrate the golden jubilee, senior citizens who have made enormous contribution to this country are passing on. Madam Speaker, it is a fact beyond any reasonable doubt that within two to three months, this Parliament has paid tribute to three senior citizens, from Prof. Kakoma, Prof. Kajubi and here is the late hon. Obwangor. 

As we celebrate the 50 years’ jubilee, may the passing on of these three, and many more that will definitely come because I have said we are not prophets of doom, send a clear message that let the legacy that they left reign and reign for ever. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.57
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to testify to being one of the young kids who studied in that school that was founded by the late Obwangor. The other day, mum called and told me that the late Obwangor had passed on. She told me that during the time of insurgency, I was among those who stayed in his building in Soroti Municipality. When we talk about coming from humble backgrounds, I want to testify that the late helped us a lot at that time. 

I want to stand here and request Government - it is not about the village home only but what are we going to leave with the family as a project for income-generating activities? Why don’t we focus on helping the family and on the house of the late Obwangor which was used by the IDPs in Soroti Municipality? Sincerely, this goes to Government; can we renovate that home so that it becomes a source of income to the family of the late Obwangor?

When I talk about the late Obwangor’s contribution to the youth of Teso, some have talked about Teso University but I want to say that to the Teso students of higher learning, the late has been a direct adviser. He has been an adviser to most of these young children at university. The late used to advise on political issues including economic policies. 

I am among those who visited the late in his home in Soroti Municipality having won elections in Soroti. The late used to counsel us. Last year, I led a delegation of the Teso students to meet the late at his home, specifically when we were chatting about how Teso can have a public university. I want to thank Government for that. Besides that, how much contribution did the late make on the issue of having the university in the Teso sub region? I want to assure the family that we are behind them, and I want to request Government to stand and support the family of the late Obwangor. 

Last but not least, as a Member of Parliament – and the late was one of the great Members of Parliament - Madam Speaker, through your Office I would beg that we have a direct deduction towards the amount that your office will agree on and pass it to the family of the late Obwangor. This is in commemoration of the great service he gave as captured in the Hansard, which generations are going to come and read in this House. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the rest of the members.

4.00
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Koboko, I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences first to the bereaved families, the people of Soroti Municipality, the people of Teso and Uganda as a country. 

I had the privilege to be a neighbour of the late hon. Obwangor in Soroti Municipality between 1980 and 1982. As a neighbour, the late Obwangor advised me. He told me that if as a young man I wanted to live in this world for a long time, I should not be doing the following things: He told me not to drink and secondly, he said smoking was dangerous. Thirdly, which he had already seen me do, he told me not to eat a lot of meat. Indeed that time Teso had a lot of cows and there was a lot of meat. There were a lot of places for roasting meat and every evening, he would see me eat meat. So, he called me and said, “Young man, please, if you want to live long, avoid eating a lot of meat.” I am not surprised today to hear that the late has died at the age of 93. This is because he used not to eat a lot of meat and he used not to drink as heavily as some of us do today.

The late Obwangor had a restaurant called Alakar Restaurant on Bugweri Road, and this restaurant used to cook traditional foods like ecadoi, eboo, malakwang and emagira. If you wanted cooked chicken or meat, he would smoke it and paste it with simsim. I asked him why he loved cooking these traditional things and he said, “You see, I am cooking these things not because I want money, but I am just helping poor people, the people who have come from far.” 
What lesson do we learn from this? Hon. Obwangor was a very generous man. There were so many people coming from the northern parts of Teso, especially from Toroma and Magoro, and these were sometimes stranded people. He kept all these people without getting any single shilling. If he was like – (Member timed out)
4.04
MR KENNETH ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kalaki, whom I represent in this House, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Cuthbert Obwangor. Personally, I find it a privilege and a great honour to even be standing here to pay tribute to this great man. As a young man growing up, I got into numerous fights with my friends just for the privilege of being called Cuthbert Obwangor. Such was the influence he had in our lives. 
When I think of Cuthbert Obwangor, two words come to mind; the first word is colossus. Here lies a giant. He is a man who was a giant in every sense of that word. Physically and mentally, he had big ideas. He had a big heart, a heart that was capable of loving the whole of Uganda. That outside shell of Cuthbert Obwangor that many people knew to be tough and gangly actually hid a very tender and big heart. When I got to know him, I knew a very tender man.
The second word that comes to mind when I think of Cuthbert Obwangor, Madam Speaker, is a word I have heard spoken only once in my entire lifetime, and that one time it was Cuthbert Obwangor who said it. That word is infracaninophile. It took me years of searching to find out the meaning of this word and when I finally found the meaning of that word, I discovered that an infracaninophile is actually someone who loves a good fight. He fights for the underdog. He fights for what he believes in. He is a man, above all else, who will fight even a losing battle as long as he knows it is for truth and justice. 

Today I have the honour of saying back to Cuthbert, you were an infracaninophile. You fought for what you believed in, you fought for what is right. As you go to meet your maker, as we will all do, I say you have fought the good fight, you have finished your cause, you have kept the faith; go now and claim your crown of righteousness from the Lord. Thank you. (Applause)

4.07
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to the colleagues who have spoken about the good deeds of the late hon. Cuthbert Obwangor. 

On a personal note, I want to say I met the late in 2001 when I was still a student at Makerere University. I happened to have gone there with Capt. Mike Mukula. However, prior to getting that opportunity of going to Soroti, my grandfather used to tell me so much about hon. Cuthbert Obwangor and he used to admire him a lot. So, when I got the opportunity to go to Soroti with hon. Mike Mukula, I told him I needed a word with the late Mzee Obwangor. I was afraid of talking to him but he said, “No, come closer.” I went and spoke to him and he asked me what exactly I wanted to be in life. I told him that I wanted to be everything about him; “Just like what you have been, that is what I want to be.” He then asked me to kneel down and said, “I have given it to you”, and indeed I knelt down and he gave it to me. 

I think hon. Cuthbert Obwangor is a person who has left a legacy. He has mentored most of the people in Uganda. Teso has lost someone of credibility, someone who has fought for us. He has left history. Actually, we read history because of the legacy that he left behind as he strove to uplift Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I want to stress is that since I came to Parliament, I think this is the fourth person that we are mourning. It is time for us not only to mourn those who have passed on when they have immensely contributed to the development of Uganda. As we celebrate 50 years of independence, I think it is the right time to look at those key individuals - I imagine they are so many - who are still alive and in pain. We would want to just hear a word from anybody who matters in this country. All these things that we speak when someone has passed away can be spoken to that person when he is still alive. All these monies – (Member timed out)
4.10
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is painful to be here talking about someone we will not see again tomorrow. However, since that is a journey for us all, all of us will take that direction. 

The late hon. Obwangor was someone whose name was a household one in Eastern Uganda. He is one of the very few leaders of this country whose names constituted songs in our local music compositions. Therefore, his contributions to this country cannot be underestimated.

It is good to hear when everybody is saying everything they can about the role and life lived by the late hon. Obwangor. He was an exemplary person, as people have said, a nationalist and Pan Africanist, a good cultural leader and mentor. Every time I see such useful and developmental people pass on, I start to ask myself what contribution I will ever make to this country, the people Uganda and those of Pallisa in order to be recognised the way some of these people have always been recognised. 

When one time I heard about him defying collective responsibility, which is a key principle, I thought it was just a simple thing. I was still very young and I was just reading it in history. However, when I joined politics, I got to realise how tough it is for one to stand up and be counted among those who respect the values of Uganda, irrespective of what they are and who they are dealing with, and that was his contribution - (Member timed out_)

4.13
MR MUSA ECWERU (NRM, Amuria County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to a hero. A few weeks ago, I had the privilege of visiting one of the cities in Italy. While there, on one evening I took a ride, under the guidance of some tour guides, and I came across a cemetery. That cemetery had a big inscription at its gate; it was like the departed were communicating to those who visit that cemetery. The inscription read, “We were once like you and one day you will be like us.”

Madam Speaker, for everything that we are doing today, some people laid the foundation. I have the privilege of being the grandson of the late Mzee Musa Ecweru, who may not have been known at national level, but together with these old men they brought UPC to Teso sub region. That time, UPC was a very good party. It was indeed strong. With the support of the local government, my grandfather and other colleagues were able to construct Teso College Aloet. This school was built by the then local government of Teso. It is true they got a loan from the Bugisu Co-operative Union, but they cleared it.

Madam Speaker, many members who have spoken before have said so many things about the late hon. Obwangor. One thing is clear, the late obeyed his conscience. It is true that at that time, like it is today, many of us, on both sides, sometimes do not obey our conscience. It is only me maybe many times (Laughter). When something is wrong, I will say that is wrong and I go on record. You have seen me say that on many occasions.

Madam Speaker, when the LRA invaded Teso sub region, I and other people consulted the late together with other leaders. One of his characteristics was that even in such a tense situation, he remained calm. He said, “My children, do you need me to remind you that your future is only safe in your hands, that your destiny is only safe in your own hands?” That is what led to the creation of the famous Arrow Boys Brigade. With this brigade, we were able to fight LRA. 

Many people fear to talk about it and many do not want to attribute the success, the pacification of this country, to this special group. Joseph Kony had become such a menace to many groups for 20 years but in six to seven months, we were able to demystify his force, thanks to the guidance and wisdom of such elders. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we are going to bury Mzee, but one thing will be glaring - the scars of destruction are still evident in Teso. In Cabinet, we have discussed in detail the need to support Madam Amongin Aporu to rehabilitate Teso. We have created a ministry for this distinguished lady, but that ministry has not been supported very strongly with the necessary resources. It is very important that a lot be done – (Interjections) – I am part of the Executive but it true that a lot must be done to support Madam Amongin Aporu and her group to recover so that we can clear the scars that are evident to any visitor.

Finally, apart from the house and the support, I would like to say that the late has left behind a son, fortunately who is very polished and educated. This boy is now going to be the head of the family. We will again discuss this matter, now that the Deputy Leader of Government Business is here. This young man needs a job. He must be given a job to help him look after the children that will remain under his control. May the soul of the late rest in eternal peace.

4.19
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I want to join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to Papa Obwangor who is lying before us now. The late was a politician and if you are a politician in Teso and you did not get advice from Papa during his life, you would not survive the waves of Teso.

When I was elected the chairman LC5 of Soroti District, Papa summoned me and the mayor of Soroti, who is seated in this House. He gave us a lecture. He said, “You are young, you are energetic and I know you must be ambitious but you have to control yourselves and do the following things…” Everything the previous speakers said here about what papa would advise them is exactly the advice he gave us.

We tried our best during our leadership of Soroti District to follow the advice that papa gave us. I think that is why some of us have endured, even when Musa and the team come there with a lot of money. We have managed to sustain ourselves because we followed papa’s advice. We have been straightforward. We can say a “yes” for a “yes” and a “no” for a “no”. If Government has done something good, I will say, yes here Government has performed and where Government has failed, I will say so. That is what papa Obwangor taught us. 

Papa was an educationist. I want to challenge us who are here. Madam Speaker, you heard about the primary school papa started. By then he was in this House. You remember they were giving Toyota Stouts to all Members of Parliament then. He used that pick-up for ferrying stones, not for constructing his house but for constructing a primary school, and that is Moru Apesur Primary School, which is now serving our people. That is the man lying before us here. (Applause) It is a big challenge to us. I think honourable members who are present here and witnessing papa lying before us should emulate him. When we are in these positions, we must use these positions to serve our people so that we leave a legacy.

There is one thing which papa told me about - I am happy my sister, hon. Alupo, is today the Minister of Education -  and that is the issue of Teso University. Papa thought he would live to see Teso University operating but he has left before that dream comes true. I think now that we have a minister coming from our place, it is a big challenge to her. If by the end of the five years of her stay – (Member timed out_)

4.24
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to pay tribute to this great man. Papa lying here is a model of excellence that this country will miss. The Iteso are a very proud people. (Interjection) Positively proud; there is negative pride but there is also positive pride. 

On a personal note, I was not a politician but because I used to sit with papa lying here and hon. Stanislaus Okurut, my dear husband, through osmosis I became a politician. (Laughter) These are very principled men. Papa here was a very principled man. He used to listen to his inner voice and you could not shake him. He used to give credit where it was due. The few times I met him, he would tell me, “Our wife”. I would laugh and say, “I am not a communal wife”, but it was respect. He would say, “Our wife, NRM may not have done this and this but NRM means well.” For him, those words were not careless words. 

When the rebellion broke out in Teso in 1987, my husband was then a minister and they were abducted. I started writing a book 10 years after that. I told my husband that Papa Obwangor must contribute to this book and he said, “I agree with you because he has part of that story.” Unfortunately, he has gone before I could get part of that story. 

He played a very big role in the pacification of Teso. I used to make ajono for them; I have everything on my finger tips. During those sittings, they would talk and talk sense and not rumour-mongering because they had facts. These were factual men. 

As we stand here, we appreciate his contribution to this nation, his contribution towards independence, and we can see the testimony. Honourable members, for somebody to live to be 92 years, you have to be God-loving, and this has been researched upon. To live to be 92, you have to be God-fearing, which he was. Secondly, you must be honest, and he was honest to a fault, like most Iteso. They are so honest, sometimes we say you are too blunt, but it helps. Thirdly, you must eat healthy food, and Papa Obwangor used to eat healthily, not junk food that we see today.  

This is a generation which we salute and shall always salute. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

4.27
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): I rise to support the motion for a resolution of this Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Obwangor. 

I did not physically interact much with the late but I interacted with him through his writings and by also looking through his contributions in the Hansard. I later interacted with him when he used to come home, because he was a contemporary of my late dad. They were contemporaries in the UPC at that time. 

Many speakers have spoken of the late Obwangor being a patriot, truthful and straightforward man. They have all posed one question: how many of us today can dare say the truth even in the face of our own party’s decisions or our boss’ just for the sake of patriotism? The answer to this came from the Constituent Assembly during the formulation of the Constitution. Provisions were put in the Constitution to the effect that leverage be given to members so that even in times of disagreement, a member could cross, just like he did. 

However I am aware, Madam Speaker, that later on there was an amendment to the effect that crossing had its own implications, that you would lose your seat. At one time when I physically interacted with the late, when I visited him, he told me that I would not be able to do what he did, that I would not have the courage because the implications are far reaching. Today we have heard members, including my honourable colleague on the other side, praise Government for the good gesture in according the late Obwangor a state burial. Probably if we did not have this blockade in the Constitution, he could have crossed. He did say that this is a violation of people’s right to assembly, to associate. 

I think the time is now to amend this provision to give leeway, without serious sanctions, for members who feel like crossing from either side, so that where disagreements occur they are free to cross and therefore follow the footsteps of the late Obwangor. I know many of the senior citizens who have been spoken of very well and termed as patriots did not start and live only in one party. We have learnt that the late Obwangor started in one party and moved to another but continued to do good work for this country. His contemporaries, in the names of the late Abu Mayanja, hon. Mayanja Nkangi and those in the current leadership that we have now, including our own President, did not start and finish their work in one party. They traversed all parties - (Member timed out)

4.31
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To begin with, I would also like to personally convey my condolences to the bereaved family for the loss of our elder brother. 

Secondly, I would like to thank God for granting Mzee 92 years. That was a blessing, since very few of us will reach that age. God should have had a purpose for him to allow him live that long. That is why you hear us talking about glorifying God for that. 

I also want to thank the President for affording time to visit Mzee more than once on his sickbed. A number of people who have talked here have given evidence that the President visited him. I believe that if a President visits a sick person, it is normal for him to leave something behind, although nobody told us what exactly he left behind. It is logical to do so. So, Mzee Obwangor should have been among the lucky few to be visited by the President while sick. 

One other thing that I should clarify is that the President promised to build a house for Mzee two weeks before his death while he was on a visit in Soroti. It has not just been promised now when he is dead. So, we are duty bound to give credit where it is due regardless of which side of the House you are. You should not just criticise because you are in the Opposition, no. You ought to criticise objectively because death is not partisan. I would like to tell you, if you did not know, that when it comes, it has come. 

In fact, God gave us three occasions: As human beings, God created us differently and we were born at different times.  We also live for a different span of time and then die. Mzee has lived for 92 years and then died like all of us will die. So, God in His wisdom kept us ignorant about our death, which is good because it has kept the world peaceful. You can board a plane without fear that you will not reach and indeed you go, arrive and come back. But you will die one day, which is a fact of life. 

However, there is another factor that we have not proved, although it is believed - since we believe that God is there - that there is life after death, which we are not sure of because nobody has ever come back. So, Mzee will come back to life but that life is not here on the earth; it is with God somewhere. Also, remember that God will not make you come back to life for nothing. According to our faith, He makes you come back to life for accountability. What did you do when you were the Leader of the Opposition? (Laughter) So, for that reason, we should be careful in whatever we do here. Even if you go to courts of law and win a case, there is another case there. God is there and He will judge you without any witness and there is no attorney-general there. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to once again thank Government for this occasion to pay tribute to Mzee. This is a very important occasion to recognise Mzee. I want to agree with hon. Akena who pleaded with us to go and refer to the Hansards. Hansard is a record of the House and all Mzee’s records for the time that he was here have been recorded there. You can now go and refer to them and prove that his records are not going to die. We shall keep referring to them from time to time. 

Sadly, so many of our leaders, including Mzee, have not left us with their personal memoirs. The only person who wrote was our first President, Sir Edward Mutesa, about the discretion of his kingdom. Good enough his Katikkiro is still living; I do not know whether he is writing but if he is not, he should because he does not know when he is going. He should leave us with some history. So many of our leaders have left without leaving their personal experiences in form of books; Amin, Obote and Binaisa left us without any records.  
 
When I was in Makerere, I convinced Binaisa to come and give us a lecture and my colleagues were very happy that they were to hear verbatim from somebody who was the attorney-general at the time. They posed a lot of questions to him, but he was evasive. Later I asked him what happened. He feared to write a book because that means you are giving evidence. Even if you have written the truth, now you are dead, are they going to get you from your grave? But you would have left out the truth. So, I appeal to all of us here because we do not know when we are dying - I have written enough now and I am going to publish soon. I think I will be allowed to leave it until I publish.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank colleagues for their contributions. They have been very generous. I also want to thank our colleagues who have not had the opportunity to contribute; their presence has made it possible for this House to pay tribute to Mzee. We are very grateful once again to the government for according us this opportunity. I will also be happy to represent the government during the burial as I have already been instructed.

Insha Allah the Leader of the Opposition will also be there and we shall send off our Mzee at that time. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to end the debate and I am happy for that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Honourable members, I apologise to the members who have not been able to contribute, but we need to release this family to go to Soroti because they have activities tomorrow. So, I want to put the question that this House do resolve to pay tribute to the late hon. Cuthbert Joseph Obwangor as proposed in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this is the programme: Tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock there will be mass at Immaculate Conception Church in Soroti and then the burial will be at Ojiya in Magoro Sub-county in Katakwi on Wednesday, 23 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we want to thank your Office because you have been able to help the area MPs by providing transport to take members on Wednesday morning to Toroma. Hon. Amodoi and hon. Jessica Alupo, get in touch with the Clerk for details. Members, we expect you to be here early enough because it is far and the road is rough. If we can leave by 6.00 a.m. on Wednesday, we would appreciate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us conclude this before we adjourn.

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late Cuthbert Joseph Obwangor)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. However, in view of the need perhaps to go and give solidarity at the official burial, I am proposing that we sit tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. for just 30 minutes. The business we have is very light so I do not think I should keep you around Kampala to bring you for 30 minutes at 2.00 p.m. and send you away at 2.30 p.m. So I am proposing that we sit at 10.00 a.m., handle that urgent business for 30 minutes and I leave you to go and do other work and probably to proceed to Katakwi early enough. So, House adjourned to 10.00 a.m. 

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 May 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
