Tuesday, 24 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like to introduce to you senior one students from Caltec Academy, together with their teachers. Caltec Academy is in Makerere, Kawempe South. They have come to see how we work in this House. You are welcome. 

Secondly, the spiritual leader of the Ahmadiya Moslem Mission invited all Members of Parliament to dinner this evening at the Sheraton, at 7.00 p.m. These cards arrived one month ago and I would feel very good if members turned up for the dinner. This is just a reminder; you have the cards.

2.41
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of public interest and this one regards the Ministry of Public Service. 

We have two departments in the Ministry of Education called the Construction and Instructional Materials units. According to information, whomever has been heading this institution or the department of construction management has been directed by the Permanent Secretary of Public Service that he should quit this job because he is not an engineer. 

However, I would like to bring to the notice of members that the head of the construction department, Mr Nakabugo, has been doing a good job. The World Bank even appraised him as a project manager and in as far as his duties are concerned, I find this to be kind of irregular because we have several managers who are not engineers, for example managers of the former Uganda Electricity Board and managers of the National Housing and Construction Corporation.  

Information reaching my desk indicates that he is supposed to hand over on the 1st of June yet his contract was to expire on the 30th of June. Madam Speaker, allow me to quote this. It is a letter, which was written on the 11th of June 2003 and I will read it in parts. It was written by the head of the civil service; the subject is, “construction management unit and instructional materials unit”. This is written to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service. I will lay it on the Table.  

Paragraph 2 reads, “Having studied the correspondences, I am of the view that the head of the Construction Management Unit may not be a professional engineer. This may explain why both the development partners and the ministry concerned have expressed dissatisfaction with delivery of the people who have been doing the work though outside the ministry’s structure. I would, therefore, recommend that the job descriptions as well as persons’ specifications be reviewed by your ministry and that of Education and Sports so that what is looked for is a competent manager to coordinate and run the affairs of the unit”.

It goes ahead to say that, “In your letter dated 2nd June 2003, you, among others, advised your colleague of Education and Sports to proceed and make submissions to the relevant service commissions.  You also authorized him that in the interim he should retain the existing project staff on temporary basis until the service commission completes the recruitment process. Since temporary employments are not encouraged any more, it would be useful to all of us if you would come out clearly and advise on how those staff whom you have advised could be on temporary basis would access the payroll in order to be paid their salaries”. This is signed by Mr Mitala, the head of the civil service.

I find it irregular for a Permanent Secretary to defy his head. Like I was saying, the head of the construction unit within the Ministry of Education has been doing a good job. At one time he was recommended by the Permanent Secretary to be interviewed on a permanent basis –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: I want to give information to my colleague that we are aware of people who are working in offices and do not hold the necessary qualifications for as long as the managerial ability is there. I will quote an example. In the recently privatized UMEME the district managers of the former Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd are not necessarily electrical engineers. So there is really a hidden agenda in that communication you are talking about. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This item that my honourable colleague has just raised might sound hypothetical or isolated but apparently it is now common practice and it has taken on some new dimension, ethnicity, which we condemn in this country and in our public administration. Apparently certain areas of this country are being systematically removed from certain positions and then replaced by certain people.

I would be the last person to talk about tribal politics in this country. I hate it; I do not want to talk about it. The only time I talk about it is when I see it rearing its ugly head through. Sadly, some people are being removed, others being recruited, and I hear this has gone down to various professional faculties at Makerere, Kyambogo and MUBS where certain people are being prepared to take on certain positions while other people are being discouraged. This is taking the worst position when we talk about the commercialized aspect of admission whereby independent students who can afford it can now take certain courses at Makerere and those who cannot afford it are disadvantaged. Worst still the Ministry of Education can confirm this. I said this is an ugly situation but we have to face it, Madam Speaker. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I know John Nakabugo as the Director of the Construction Unit in the Ministry of Education and some of us have worked with him on some programmes. I can say this for him that he has engineers indeed, I can mention Eng. Tinka, Eng. Pontiano Ocan and as far as managing engineers to accomplish tasks is concerned, John Nakabugo is one of the best civil servants we have in this country.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am about to wind up. Having raised this matter, I would like to request the minister concerned, the Minister of Public Service to tell us whether this is nepotism as the person supposed to replace him is called Akankwasa and we have another Akankwasa in the Ministry of Education. So, I do not know whether this is nepotism. I am really concerned because I am raising the concerns of the marginalized societies in this country. I thank you.

2.49
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The subject raised by my colleague concerns two ministries, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, we are going to ask the two ministries to respond. However, before that happens I would like to say that certainly what hon. Aggrey Awori has alleged is news to all of us. I want to assure this House and the nation that this government will neither accept nor condone what is alleged. Therefore, if there is truth in it –(Interjections)- yes, and we mean this. 

I would like honourable members, including hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, to know that those of us who are speaking here now have got records of our performance in public life. So, I am not being hypothetical about what I am saying. (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I thought that hecklers belonged to the streets not to this House? We sit here and listen to the honourable members. It is not in order. I am only a beneficiary of my brain; yes, I am.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Generally we refer to this House as august. The word “august”, among other things, includes proper decorum befitting the gentlemen and ladies who sit here. Is it in order for my colleague who sits in this august House to start shouting at the top of his voice as if we are in a market place? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister has a very vigorous way of putting his submission so I think that is his way of speaking.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Kagonyera for giving way. I followed hon. Aggrey Awori’s campaigns and at one time he stated categorically that it is now time for easterners to eat; he said it! I was wondering if hon. Kagonyera would take that into consideration given his new concerns today.  

MR WACHA: Thank you hon. Kagonyera for giving way. I want to inform hon. Kagonyera and the House that it is very normal for us to change our minds on certain matters. (Laughter).
 
PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable members for the very constructive pieces of information we have received. But surely I want to assure this House seriously that we are not going to accept anything like what my colleague has alleged. Therefore, the Minister of Education and the Minister of Public Service are going to be specifically charged to go and investigate this matter, get to the root of the matter and come back and report to this House. Oh, unfortunately we are going on recess - I was to say they should report back in two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they should report before we close.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence, when are we closing? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At the end of this week.

PROF. KAGONYERA: At least the Prime Minister is going to ask the two ministers to make a preliminary report because this being very short notice we may not get to the bottom of the matter. Therefore, I will ask the two ministries to make a preliminary report to the House latest by end of business on Thursday. However, I want to thank the honourable member for raising this matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministers of Public Service and Education, we expect a report from you by close of business on Thursday this week.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I lay this letter on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay it on the Table and speak to it; explain what it is.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, the document I am laying on table is a letter written by the head of the civil service, Mr J. Mitala, addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service. It has two headlines: the construction of management unit, and the instructional materials unit. I would like to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The date?

MR KUBEKETERYA: It is dated the 11th of June 2003. Reference is ADM215/21601. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.56
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is going to the Leader of Government Business in this august House, the man who is ever in charge. Some time back the Government found it necessity to improve the quality of coffee in this country by replacing old trees with new ones. To effect they decided to contract nursery operators, and these nursery operators did their job. They grew coffee seedlings and those coffee seedlings were supplied to the farmers. The farmers who received these coffee seedlings are already picking ripe beans but the nursery operators have never been paid to date. 

This government owes the nursery operators about Shs 6 billion, and they have not been paid for the last three years. Madam Speaker, in my constituency these nursery operators are women’s groups. They formed themselves into groups, collected money, bought high yield coffee beans from Uganda Coffee Development Authority, and put up the nurseries. Their coffee was taken by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority and supplied to the farmers. The farmers are already getting money out of their sweat but these women have never been paid. And it is not only in my constituency but it also affects the whole country. May I know from the Leader of Government Business, when are they going to pay these nursery operators, Madam Speaker? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Shs 6 billion related to Ibanda only or is it for the whole country?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is the whole country. All nursery operators have never been paid for the last three years. They are owed Shs 6 billion.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, it is not only the coffee nursery operators but also the nursery operators for tea seedlings have never been paid and they are owed to the tune of over Shs 2 billion.  

MS BABIHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform this House that it also applies to cocoa because for us we have coffee and we have cocoa in Bundibugyo; it also has the same problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Alintuma has something to say. I do not know what he grows in Masaka.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I was just moving on to an entirely different subject.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. The Minister of Agriculture?

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. We handled this matter during the preliminary discussion of the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture and I was reliably informed that under the public debt this money would be paid in the next financial year. So I want to thank them for having been patient but I urge them to also continue to be patient until I am given money to pay them.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I raised this question because I have got a very big problem with the answer from the hon. Minister of Agriculture. When we were considering supplementaries, coffee nursery operators featured and we were promised that they were going to be paid, and I think this money must have been released. If it was not, let her tell us that the money was not released. But every budget every year this is considered and they are going to pay nursery operators yet to date you have not paid them. Therefore, I cannot –(Interruptions)

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has just said that the Government will pay the nursery operators in the next financial year. Is it in order for the honourable member to allege that money was released in the supplementary budget and that the minister has not paid the farmers when their money was released? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think he internalised the contents of the supplementary budget. Minister of Finance, did you provide money for the growers?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. As usual I am always prepared. I have supplementary schedule No.1 here, which was passed and I wish to report that there was no item whatsoever to do with coffee seedlings. 

I can read for you Vote No. 010: Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. What was provided for was general staff salaries, general supply of goods, fuel lubricants and oils, and the details are additional funds sought to cover shortfalls in staff salaries; batches of Foot and Mouth disease vaccine, and support to the Uganda Coffee Development Authority. Additional funds are to facilitate the honourable minister and the ministers of state to purchase fuel. That was all.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister in charge of Finance but I am seeking clarification. When a nursery operator sells his or her seedlings in the year 2003 and he is paid in 2006/7, do you put into consideration the foregone income that he would have been using when you come to pay him or you pay him at the same level of amount he sold you the year he delivered these seedlings? If not, as a Minister of Finance, do you not see how you are crippling the very people who would have been supporting the development of this economy?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the foregone income is not only in respect to coffee seedling providers. It is true there is foregone income every time payment is delayed but government does not delay payment just because it does not want to pay. Government delays to pay because of the size of your resource envelope. There are so many competing priorities, honourable members but you must appreciate that this bill was very big but over the period we have been reducing it. I am not sure what the balance is but I know we have paid more than three quarters and as the minister stated, next financial year another substantial payment will be effected. Of course we regret the occurrence but it is the size of the resource envelope that dictates that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I would like to conclude this matter because it is not a government assurance. You are providing money for the coffee, for those who provided coffee seedlings, the cocoa and the tea. Is that the position? Okay, Committee on Government Assurances, -(Interruptions)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, all I have to say is that, yes, there is a provision. It may not cover all that is due like indeed we do not have provision to cover all domestic arrears –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, when it comes to the question of settling dues out of court, it is a priority but when it comes to the question of giving the poor farmers the little to live on, the peasants, it is not a priority. Can I know from the minister how they prioritize their issues?  

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Surely we must be serious as government. His Excellency the President was one and a-half years ago in Masaka attending the Labour Day celebrations and he directed that this money be paid right away by the people concerned. It is on record because the people of Masaka also are victims of this fiasco. Therefore, one of the sources of funding of government is through internal borrowing and the minister has just stated categorically that it is not only the coffee, tea and the cocoa, but also everybody else. So what is government doing? People are fed up. In fact we are going to encourage people to start charging interest on their money, otherwise, it is totally nothing. Government must be serious.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Six financial years ago government, being aware of the fact that it does not have a very big resource envelope, came up with a commitment control so that it does not incur large domestic arrears. Is that policy of commitment control in place so that you only get services that you can afford, or you only receive goods for which you are prepared to pay? Is it still holding or was it just a way of giving an impression to the public that government is strict about accountability yet at the same time it is taking on more that it can afford? 

Is commitment control still in place? Is it still being used? If it is used, how come farmers especially now as it has been raised, the nursery operators supplied the Government goods for over Shs 6 billion? For this long you took on their seedlings knowing very well that you do not have the money to pay them. Is commitment control still in force or not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, answer and then we tie up this matter.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honorable members, the policy of the commitment control system is in place and to some extent it works. However, because of changing priorities over the period, because of new occurrences, which were not anticipated at the time of each budget, we have always come here to seek supplementary spending. Honorable members must know that every time we come here to seek supplementary spending to cover activities that were not anticipated in a budget, some activity is being affected adversely because supplementary spending does not in any way increase the volume of the money that is available to government. So –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, this minister needs to know that, first of all, agriculture is under-budgeted for. 

Two, in the course of implementing the budget there is a lot of re-allocation. By the end of last financial year government owed nursery operators money to the tune of Shs 8.5 billion, but they have been able to reduce it slowly by slowly up to Shs 6.5 billion. We have been told, as the Minister of Agriculture has informed you, that there is very reasonable allocation this year, which will be able to reduce this debt by Shs 3.5 billion. That means we still need an extra Shs 3 billion. The problem with the Ministry of Finance is that they mix two issues when it comes to the coffee industry. One is, we fight so that our farmers can be able to get support and the debts are cleared. When it comes to implementing the budget, they re-allocate the money for value addition abroad, and this is the worry. So we want the minister to be categorical that money, which will be allocated, will be protected to reduce on the debt that government owes nursery operators. It is a very serious issue and if we go into the details of the cocoa, the tea, the coffee and even cotton, it is running into billions of shillings. So, the Minister of Finance should prepare a very clear statement to inform this House before we go for recess. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the minister told this House that the commitment control system was a very serious system and that if an accounting officer violated this system he would be penalized and there would be sanctions against such an officer. The minister should tell this House, now that he has admitted that it works somehow, can he tell the House what sanctions the Government has put up against certain officers who have violated this system?  

The other clarification is, to go into coffee nurseries is a business and I know in my area people have borrowed money from banks in order to establish coffee nurseries. If government is going to take its time in paying these people and yet these people are suffering interest rates with loans they have taken from government, and the minister after taking his time is just going to pay the original amount without even paying interest, is he really serious about fighting poverty in this country? 

At the end of the day these very people will wind up their small businesses of coffee nurseries and lay off people who would otherwise be earning money from these nurseries. Would government, therefore, seriously consider paying interest on such long outstanding payments to people like these? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, please answer that and we conclude.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Going back to the commitment control system, I said the system is in place and it works. However, there are instances when it fails and those instances, to give an example, are where accounting officers embark on commitments expecting that money will flow in the programmed manner. And as I said, on a number of occasions we come here for supplementary expenditure. When you pass supplementary expenditure here, that means every vote is being affected. If an accounting officer has embarked on expenditure, which he cannot stop and yet the money he was expecting is curtailed to cover some other priority or some unforeseen emergency as you have approved in this House, how do you expect him to pay?  

Secondly, there are court awards. Every day that passes courts are passing judgments against government. Those awards are not anticipated, so they form the bulk of domestic arrears.

Three, there are utilities like water, electricity, et cetera, which cannot wait because offices must run. If the ministries and government offices consume these utilities and somewhere in the middle of the financial year we get other priorities, which were not anticipated, and we cut the budget with this Parliament’s approval, where does anybody expect the accounting officer to get money to pay from?

Having said that, it is true that the commitment system control works. It has reduced the crop of domestic arrears from about Shs 600 billion to about Shs 200 billion or Shs 300 billion today. It works but there are circumstances, which arise that are beyond the accounting officers’ control. 

To come back to hon. Mwandha’s question, the accounting officers who breach the commitment control system without justifiable cause are punished. They are brought to book. If you gave me time I would give you examples. 

Lastly, government pays interest only when there is an agreement stipulating so –(Interjection)- yes, any creditor should be wise enough to put in something to protect himself. Those creditors who have agreements with government, which agreements stipulate payment of interest, benefit from such agreements. Once there is no such interest it would even cause an audit query. What justification would I have to imagine that since Prof. Kamuntu was supposed to be paid Shs 1 million last financial year, now because he has not been paid he must have incurred some financial loss? What formula would I use to determine what interest he gets? (Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, time has money value and the minister knows that for every time I am not paid, there is time value to money, which is measured by the interest rates. He can go in the banks and establish that rate, which he should pay me from the time I delivered the service to the time he pays me. All this time there is a loss and indeed when you deliver an item to an agreed contract implicitly it means if you do not get paid there is an implied penalty or interest rate that should be paid to you. And the Minister of Finance should be the first person to know this. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware of what hon. Kamuntu is saying but the advice I would give anybody –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, we have a very clear record on our foreign debt of how much is owed and the sources of this debt and how much is being spent; and even the ratio of the foreign debt to our gross domestic product and so on. It would be very useful to this House that what is called domestic arrears, which is basically our domestic debt, should also be known to this House as on the 30th of June this year. That is the cutting point. I am aware the minister says certain expenses are always incurred, like court awards and so on, but there must be a cut off point. As of the 30th of June this year, the minister would be able to come in a month’s time after that and say, “As of 30th June 2005 our domestic debt is of this amount”. He should then say the effort being made by government to pay it.  

I am very serious on this issue of the domestic debt because it is government receiving goods and services from its nationals free of charge. So many companies have gone broke, banks have closed, industries have closed, law firms have wound up because they have won cases against the Government and their clients and the Government is unable to pay for three, four, five years. Pensions, all this! So, it is only prudent that while we know the state of our foreign debt very clearly, the minister should at an appropriate time, with the cut off point being the 30th of June this year, come with a very clear portfolio of our domestic debt so that we also know how to look at it and also with a policy on how the Government is going to pay this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honorable members, we have said enough about this.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I agree it is very prudent –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I guess the minister is aware that spending on goods, which later on end up accumulating domestic arrears, constitutes spending money, which has not been allocated and approved by Parliament. Therefore, it is unconstitutional. It is much more serious than he seems to treat it. It is much more serious than this; it is unconstitutional and if we are supposed to be adhering to constitutionalism we should treat this matter with seriousness and reduce it to a great extent. I thank you. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, every time we change priorities, every time new occurrences arise for which we have to revisit the budget we come back to this House with a supplementary budget and this House approves the supplementary budget. Even where we spend before this House approves we come here for retrospective approval in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

MR BYANYIMA: It is not my habit to rise on points of order but the issue that is at stake is that members are concerned about Ugandans who render services to government. Every ministry has a contracts committee that sits to see which companies can deliver services. They get them LPOs so our people have been taken for granted. But now is the minister in order to come and confuse that with supplementary? The supplementary is just a block figure; you do not go into details to show how much money you are going to pay particular people. These domestic arrears have been on for so long but what you care about is World Bank, Metha and many others. 

The problem is that we are failing to address the issue of our local people. Is he in order to tell lies to this Parliament that you bring domestic arrears for supplementary in this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, it would be wrong for any body to create the impression that this Parliament budgets and forgets domestic arrears and that, therefore, they come through a supplementary. Parliament is very organized in the way we work. When you bring your budgets, we include the domestic debts. So do not push us into the supplementary. (Applause) You are out of order.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, for a reason I do not know, I am not being understood. How the issue of supplementary expenditure comes in, which I thought I had explained, is that when we line up paying domestic arrears among other things and an issue comes in over which we need to change government priorities, we come here for supplementaries. And I said the moment you pass a supplementary that means every vote, including domestic arrears, is affected. That is what I explained. I do not know why, as usual, I am being deliberately misunderstood by this House.

I want to say that it is prudent, as Prof. Kamuntu was suggesting, for any person or indeed any entity, including government, to pay it’s debts when they fall due. Failure to pay one’s debts when they fall due can be caused by both exogenous and inexogenous factors. And I have told this House that the reason we do not pay - even not withstanding presidential directives as by the way the President is concerned and he always directs us to do what we can to pay all the domestic arrears. But what do you want me to do if your resource envelope cannot afford it? 

The budget process is these days consultative; we go through the process together. Why do you not - when you are in the budget process - show me which activities we can postpone in order to cater for all the domestic arrears?

We know it is our desire, we wish we could pay each and everybody, but we just cannot afford it. And I have said that we should be credited because taking an example of seedlings, I know that the original bill was of about Shs 12.6 billion but we have now managed to reduce it to Shs 6 billion and we are continuing to reduce it. Instead of being –(Laughter)- I would have been happy if I was appreciated and encouraged to go ahead and clear the balance of the bills, honourable members.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, I think one point should be understood. Nursery farmers were faced with a problem of mature seedlings. If you do not take them on, they grow into bush. Giving them away on credit is better than losing the whole crop. So, whereas it is not as good as it should be, but taking them on was quite a wise decision in favour of the farmers.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL TO PARLIAMENT ON 
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2004 (PART I AND II)

3.30
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairman, Public Accounts Committee -(Interruption)
 
MR LUKYAMUZI: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have called the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. What do you want?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have a procedural concern. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no, let us go to Public Accounts.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, Parliament has received the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30th June 2004, and I beg to lay the report on the Table. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report comes to this House through the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. So we give it back to them to peruse and come back here to advise us on what to do. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 22/05 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS

3.32
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): “(i) On speed governors for all public motor vehicles:

(a) When does the minister plan to introduce speed governors for all public vehicles such as taxis of all categories and lorries or pick-ups?

(b) If the law is in place or instituted, how will the Government enforce it?

(c) What are the penalties?

(ii) On seat belts and road accidents, since the introduction of compulsory wearing of seat belts in all vehicles, what has been the impact in reducing fatal and serious accidents to date on the road?

(iii) On road and railway crossing warnings, is the minister aware that there are hardly any warning signs at railway crossings on our roads?

(iv) On the 28-30 seater (coasters) taxis for mass transport, in order to reduce road traffic congestion, when does the Government plan to substitute the 14-16 seater taxis (matatus) with 28-30 seater (coaster) buses?”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Works is not here. Yes, Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office.

3.35
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence and that of the House. As you may know, the minister who was supposed to –(Interjection)- can I be protected from hon. James Mwandha? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, do not anticipate his response. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Andruale Awuzu was supposed to come and respond to this question. I am sure you got information in your office and I got the same information that actually he as got a serious indisposition and he can hardly move. Therefore, he is unable to come and be present this afternoon. As soon as he is able to, he will come. It is something that suddenly happened to his body. So we beg the indulgence of the House that the answer to this question be stayed. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again the Government has let us down. Normally the Order Paper is known to the Government several hours prior to the sitting. This question has been appearing on the Order Paper for the past week and I thank you, Madam Speaker that you have kept it on the Order Paper.

I am also aware that we have got a Cabinet of 62, some hard working, some indolent, ministers. Madam, –(Interruption) 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to refer to some of my colleagues as being indolent? Can he be in order for making such an irresponsible statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the language you have used is really non-parliamentary and unless you can substantiate who those people are, I would like you to withdraw it.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, definitely I agree with you, but it is at your discretion to determine what is decorum and what is outside parliamentary language. If I offended any member of the Cabinet who might be in the habit of not doing his or her work, I do apologise and I call upon them to keep up to do their work.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Aggrey Awori to prematurely turn himself into a Prime Minister when he has not gone through an election? (Laughter). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori I think you should abandon that line of evaluating the ministers. The Leader of Government Business, now that hon. Awuzu is sick, when can we have this question answered because I want this business off my Order Paper?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, thank you. I am glad the House understood the problem but the point is - and I would like hon. Aggrey Awori to understand this as well - hon. Awuzu Andruale suffered a serious injury. He rang me just before I came to the House. Surely, it was not humanely possible for him to arrange for another minister to respond to the question. However many of you may be in a ministry, you programme yourselves; you give each other duties. 

If hon. Awuzu had realised that he would get an accident, like hon. Aggrey Awori seems to imply that we should know we are going to get accidents, then he would have arranged for someone to answer the question. But the point is, this was an accident that happened suddenly. Therefore, hon. Awuzu had no time to arrange for another person to answer the question. (Mr Awori rose)- I am listening.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we always accept any explanation on behalf of any minister from the Office of the Prime Minister, for those of his colleagues that are not here. However, for my honourable colleague in charge of General Duties to stand up and start putting words in my mouth and making allegations, which impinge on my rights as an hon. Member of this august House - I never, ever said what he said. 

Is he in order to insinuate such terrible things about my character when he knows very well that his colleagues, normally whenever they ask such questions they write up answers so that any minister can stand in at any time, at short notice, to answer on their behalf? Is he in order to be totally oblivious to parliamentary practice in this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you both misunderstood one another. Let us move on. What do we do with this question, Leader of Government Business? We should get it off the Order Paper. What do we do for the rest of this week?

PROF. KAGONYERA: I will need the rest of this day. I will make consultations with the Minister of Works and your office will know by tomorrow morning who will answer the question. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Did Rev. Peter Mukasa Bakaluba assign anybody to ask his question? Have you assigned yourself the duty, hon. James Mwandha?

QUESTION 24/05 TO 
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

3.39
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the interest of at least getting on with some business, I would like to put the question that was asked by Rev. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa.

“The media, for example the Monitor newspaper of 3rd May 2005, has reported that the UPDF plans to convert all places of worship (Churches and Mosques) within the barracks into residences for army officers. In view of that:

(a) Would the minister state whether or not the said reports are true?

(b) If the answer in (a) above is in the affirmative, what policy considerations dictated such a sensitive and drastic measure?

(c) Has consideration been made on how such a measure would affect:
(i) The respect for freedom of worship in general and in particular that of the officers and men of the UPDF and their families?
(ii) The effects to modernise and professionalise the army to international standards whereby easy access to places of worship, counselling and spiritual guidance from the clergy within the barracks hence a God-fearing army, is of paramount importance?”

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa Peter, Member of Parliament for Mukono North asked the above question. 

My answer is no, the reports were not true. We have not taken any decision in Defence to turn such places into residences for army officers. So, the answer is no.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

MR AWORI: Supplementary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there cannot be a supplementary question. She has said it is not true. If it is not true, there is no supplementary.

MR AWORI: But matters of worship by the officers and men –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. The question was: has the Ministry of Defence converted the Mosques and Churches into residences thereby interfering with the right to worship, and she has said, no. So there is no supplementary.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, since I am the one who asked the question, I wish I could be permitted to raise one or two supplementaries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honorable members, you really know our rules and hon. Mwandha, you are a very senior member of this House. The supplementary must arise from the answer. The answer is no, it has not been done. So, there cannot be a supplementary, please.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BILL, 2004

3.44
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Agricultural Research Bill, 2004” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker and honorable members, as we are all aware, the core objective driving the national development agenda is poverty eradication through the Poverty Eradication Action Plan geared towards engendering social transformation by raising incomes of smallholder farmer communities. Inevitably, this implies increasing agricultural profitability, a strategy that government is addressing through the implementation of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). 

The PMA specifically addresses the factors that undermine agricultural productivity, namely, poor husbandry, low use of improved inputs, limited access to technical advise, poor access to credit, poor transport and communication and marketing infrastructures, and insecure land tenure and user rights. 

The National Agricultural Research System (NARS) is being re-engineered to focus on providing agricultural research services that address, in a sustainable manner, the needs of the poor. This demands that the NARS derives priority research issues from the perceptive and needs of the majority of the resource poor, subsistence male and female farmers without necessarily compromising sound, scientific judgment.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the philosophy underpinning the NARS reform is the need to empower farmers, particularly the poor men and women, to demand and control agricultural research processes and services. In addition, the new NARS is grounded in the over ranking government policies of decentralization, liberalization, privatization and increased participation of the people in decision-making. The institutional architecture is designed to enhance the efficiency and sustainability of agricultural research service delivery.

The NARS review and reform was being guided by a team of Ugandan experts representing a wide range of stakeholders in agricultural research. It works in consort with and consults widely with key stakeholders most notably the National Agricultural Scientific Community, selected global researchers and research planners, administrators, district authorities, civil society, private sector farmers and development partners. 

Uganda does not currently have consolidated agricultural research legislation. I am aware of the NARO Act, but the NARO Act caters only for the nine public, agricultural research institutes engaged in public research. Furthermore, the NARO Act does not provide for the involvement of private sector institutions in publicly supported agricultural research. 

Similarly, although NARO has contributed significantly to agricultural technology development and dissemination, its institutional framework and development and research programmes were developed before the formulation of the PMA. It, therefore, does not fully address some of the key principles of the PMA or ensure macro-economic and public service reforms. The reforms were taken against the background that despite the significant achievements NARO had made, the country stands to maximize gains from agricultural research if the private sector and other players are brought into the system.

The National Agricultural Research System has gone through hardships over the last three years due to the uncertainty of its direction. More supportive programmes to NARO are ending and our development partners are eagerly waiting for the restructuring of the system in line with agreed principles and funding arrangements before committing themselves to supporting agricultural research.

Furthermore, we need to seriously address the issue of performance-based incentives for scientists working in the public agricultural research system, which is seriously getting depleted of good scientists. The new legislation seeks to address this issue. Madam Speaker, it was in the context of the above that a comprehensive National Agricultural Research Policy was developed and adopted by government.

The approval of the policy by Cabinet necessitated the drafting of legislation for agricultural research. The drafting of the NARS Bill, 2004 has been undertaken through a nationwide consultative process and consensus arrived at. 

I consulted various stakeholders, namely the Members of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture of Parliament, agricultural scientists from the existing agricultural research organizations and the universities, the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, the top management of my ministry, the chief executives of both the National Agricultural Research Organization and National Agricultural Advisory Services, and the Board of Directors of both those institutions and other relevant government ministries.

The Bill addresses all the issues raised by the stakeholders. The objects of the Bill are:

One, to create an integrated agricultural research system that will facilitate the achievement of sustainable increases in economic, social and environmental benefits from agricultural research services and products by all the people of Uganda.

Two, develop a market responsive and client-oriented national agricultural research and disseminate demand driven problem solving, profitable and environmentally sound technologies on a sustainable basis, create options for financing and delivering of agricultural research services appropriate for the different categories of farmers and market needs of the country. 

Further, to facilitate the involvement of the private sector, civil society and others in the carrying out and financing of agricultural research.

It is also intended to amend and replace the National Agricultural Research Organization, Cap. 2002.

Since the Bill was presented to the House, my ministry has had to respond to various comments, criticisms and concerns raised by the public. Allow me to make a few points on the Bill generally. 

It is not true, as stated in some circles, that the NARS reform was from the outset against NARO as an institution or that NARO had made no achievement, or that the national economy has not made significant gains from NARO activities. Indeed the reforms were taken against the background that despite the significant achievement NARO had made, the country stands to maximize from agricultural research if the private sector and others are brought on board in a decentralized agricultural research system.

The existing institutional arrangement put paramount importance on the role of the NARO Secretariat. Therefore, its preservation and overbearing role as opposed to the public agricultural institutes where actual research is undertaken, needs to be addressed. For the public agricultural research institutes to work effectively, they need autonomy to carry out some basic functions that are absolutely necessary for their unique situations. After all, these institutes will be employing some very qualified Ugandans to be in charge of their major operations. We only need to ensure that they are co-ordinated in a manner that does not stifle their operations through excessive bureaucracy. This arrangement may weaken the current NARO Secretariat but will certainly strengthen the research institutes where actual research is undertaken. 

In addition, the recommended apex institution will still have an oversight function on the public research institutes. The current NARO Act provides for the semi-autonomous status of the institute, except that it was never fully implemented. 

Section 19 (1) of the current NARO Act states:
“The research institute of the organisation shall be autonomous in their operations relating to the implementation of their programmes and in the allocation and management of their resources in accordance with their annual programmes and Budget approved by the Board”.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the creation of Public Agricultural Research Institute as body corporate, there is fear in some circles that this is not feasible and would create unnecessary fragmentation. There are several such bodies in other ministries. For example, the bodies handling electricity generation and distribution in the Ministry of Energy, which used to be one and now separate. The most important thing is actually to make sure that the laws and functions of the bodies so created are well defined and there is no duplication. This has been done in the draft Bill. 

Another example is the Local Governments Act that created several body corporate in one legislation. Therefore, Madam Speaker and honourable members, creation of Public Agricultural Research Institute is a well-tested tool enhancing decentralisation and increasing efficiency.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Public Agricultural Research institutes will be body corporate to: 

• Enable them enter into contracts with the Council, suppliers, their own staff and any other organization to enable them perform effectively and efficiently.  

• Ensure equity in fund distribution based on mandates and functions of each Public Agricultural Research Institute.  

• Provide for easier accessibility, management and accountability of funds.
 
• Enhance direct interaction with immediate stakeholders and formation of partnership based on mandates and functions.

• As public institutions, they will depend on the Council and the ministry with regard to funding, policy guidance but fully accountable for their actions.

Granting the Public Agricultural Research Institute this same autonomous status does not prevent them to perform their own associations where they can discuss and decide on common issues as it is being alluded to in some circles.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members a critical analysis was also carried out to determine the financial implications of the creation of the Public Agricultural Research Institute as a body corporate in the proposed Bill and it was found that these would not cause any problems. It was on this basis that the Ministry of Finance gave the clearance and certificate for submitting the Bill to this House.

Madam Speaker, my ministry further did carry out a cooperative study on Kenya and India and found that the Kenyan and Indian experience is good and relevant and is included in the Bill. The proposal in the NARS Bill is not at conflict with these recommendations.  

Madam Speaker, we have listened and I concur with the committee and those who feel that additional public agricultural research institutes be created to cater for the diverse agro-ecological zones, and the necessary amendments shall be effected at the Committee Stage to include Mbarara and Serere as zonal institutes. 

There is fear in some circles that NAADS under my ministry has been a victim of basket funding. NAADS as a publicly funded institute has to operate within the MTEF ceiling. This limits the expansion but has nothing to do with basket funding. There are marked differences between basket funding and trustee funds. The basket funds are affected by the MTEF while the trustee fund is affected only with regard to public contribution.  

In conclusion, after protracted and lengthy discussions with the committee, to which I am very grateful, because as you will see Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, there are some grey areas which the committee has helped Government to clear as the amendments will show. That is why I had to make a long speech in order to bring on board the chairman and everybody and reduce debate.  Madam Speaker, at Committee Stage, I will be agreeing with amendments presented by the Sessional Committee by the Chairman that support the principles of the Bill. I beg to move that the National Agricultural Bill, 2004 be read the Second time. Thank you very much.

3.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, I think the Minister has tried her best to respond to our concerns in advance. Perhaps this is the advantage of accessing the report well in advance.  

Permit me to make some corrections before I formally present the report of the committee. Page 11, paragraph 5.1 under “Institutional Arrangement”, delete “Council and NARC” and replace it with “Organisation” because that was appearing twice.

Then on page 13, paragraph 5.2.5; correct that word “autonym” it was miss-spelt. It should read “autonomy”. 

The last correction is paragraph (b) of 7.2. That word “ARDC” should be “Bulegeni”. 

Madam Speaker, from the on set I must also express gratitude to the new Minister of Agriculture on behalf of the committee whose effort made it possible for us to process this Bill. As you realize, the Bill stayed with the committee for more than a year, there were serious complications and option was to advise Parliament to withdraw but she took it a priority over the last two months and we are grateful that we are presenting the report.

I must also say that we were grateful for the facilitation that we got to take part of our committee to India and also to Kenya and this enabled us to get a very enriched report. I now want to present the committee’s report on the Bill as follows: 

Madam Speaker, the Bill was tabled in the House on the 13th May 2004 and referred to the committee. As the Minister has indicated, the Bill provides for the development of an agricultural research system for Uganda for the purpose of improving agricultural research services delivery, financing and management, establishment of a national agricultural research council, its powers, functions and administration. It also provides for the establishment of a new National Agricultural Research Organisation as an umbrella organisation for all public agricultural research institutes and repeals the National Agricultural Research Organization Act (CAP 205). 

The committee now presents its findings on the Bill for debate and adoption.  

Methodology:

The committee made two types of consultation, national and international. At national level the committee held discussions with major stakeholders in agricultural research and this included:

• The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

• The Minister of State for agriculture

• The Permanent Secretary who led the technical team from the ministry

• The Director General of NARO who led the research scientists from NARO

• The NARO board led by its chairperson

• Makerere University, Faculty of Agriculture led by the representative of the Dean

• Agricultural research stakeholders conferences held at Hotel Equatorial and Botanical Beach Hotel in Entebbe

• The private sector in agro based industries,
 
• Representatives from the donor community also had the opportunity to share their experiences with us.

At international level, Madam Speaker, the committee visited the Agricultural Research Council of India and Kenya Agricultural Research Institute.  We chose these two countries because India has one of the most developed agricultural research systems from where third world countries can learn useful lessons for adoption.

Kenya, the Director General of Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI) is one of the leading consultants appointed by the consultative group for international agricultural research to carry out institutional reform for agricultural systems in developing countries. So these were very useful areas for us to understudy in order to present reasonably well informed report. 

Background:

Agricultural research system in Uganda was started by the colonial administration way back at the beginning of the 20th century. It was focusing mainly on cash crops and other commodities of colonial interest. The research was undertaken in stations belonging to different ministries that make up the agricultural sector. This approach continued after independence. 

Agricultural research was totally run down however in the 1970s and early 1980s with hardly any impact. Research was uncoordinated with a lot of duplication of efforts. Towards 1989, Government embarked on the process of reform in order to reform the system resulting into the creation of NARO.

An Act of Parliament known as the NARO Statute, 1992 was established and this enabled to put in place the National Agricultural Research Organisation. The organisation was created to consolidate, streamline and improve the agricultural research systems that had been fragmented in various government ministries and departments prior to its establishment.  As a result therefore, NARO was charged with the mandate to facilitate the coordination of all agricultural research in the country. It was hoped that this would improve the agricultural sector and uplift the standard of living of the people of Uganda.

NARO’s achievements:

NARO has made consideration improvement in agricultural research service delivery. Similarly, significant contribution has been made to national agricultural development and the well being of the people of Uganda.  This achievement is found in:

a) The establishment of a strong coordinated public agricultural research system, and 

b) Institutional capacity development, which brought about a number of impacts.

NARO therefore has been able to register remarkable improvement in agricultural sector arising from the agricultural technologies developed as recorded below:

a) The control of cassava mosaic disease: 
The cassava mosaic was a menace in the early 1990s, which resulted into serious threat to food security in the country. The problem was solved by an intervention from NARO that introduced mosaic resistant variety of cassava in Uganda.

b) The development of upland rice varieties: 

NARO has released several rice varieties including NARIC I, II, III. This is an achievement, which saved the country to the tune of US $90 million on importation of rice from outside.

c) Fisheries research: 

Through its effort at FIRI (Fisheries Research Institute) in Jinja, aquaculture is now emerging as an important commercial business. For the first time NARO has been able to breed tilapia and Nile perch out of their natural habitat and fish feed has also been formulated through research initiative locally in the country.  

d) The livestock sub-sector in Tororo: 

NARO has made a breakthrough in developing the New Castle vaccine for vaccinating poultry affected by New Castle Disease.  

e) Forest sub sector:

In forestry, NARO has come up with fast growing Eucalyptus clones, which attain harvestable yield within 5 years as compared to the original species, which would take 10 to 20 years to mature.  

f) Appropriate Technology: 

Through the Agricultural Engineering and appropriate Technology Research Institute, NARO has developed equipment and machines, which remove drudgery and increase work efficiency. The multi purpose threshers and windmills that supply water to rural communities are some of the examples of this technology.  

g) Sweet potatoes: 

The orange fresh sweet potato varieties, which are very rich in vitamin A, has been developed and promoted by NARO. This has been done in partnership with the ministries of Health and Education and it is hoped that this will eliminate vitamin A deficiency in the country and save the country billions of shillings for importing vitamin A capsules.

Other achievements in the research sector include the control of coffee wilt disease and water hyacinth and a long line of maize and bean varieties, which are now found in the markets in our country.  

Contribution of Research to our economy: 

A study by the International Food Policy Research Institute and another one by British and South African scientists published in March 2004 issue of the World Development Journal and also covering the local daily, the New Vision, reported that agricultural research in Uganda is one of the most paying investments. The country ranked third among the developing countries in terms of the rate of returns to investments, Morocco leading followed by Ethiopia and then Uganda and the Philippines tie in the third position. 

Furthermore, for every one shilling spent on agricultural research and development in Uganda, Shs 13 are returned, far above the returns of Shs 7, Shs 3 and Shs 0.9 from equivalent investments in feeder roads, education and health sector respectively. It is reported that at least 58 people were lifted out of poverty nationally and more so 175 from the northern Uganda for every Shs 1 million invested in agricultural research and development according to the same study.  

Comparative figures for feeder roads, education and health are 33 people – This can be corrected, it is not 33 shillings but 33 people, 13 and 5 respectively getting out of poverty as a result of investment in these other sub sectors. These promising figures produced on the basis of NARO makes the organisation one of the country’s most viable development institutions on which government can relay for its investment. Madam Speaker, there was therefore need for the research system to be reformed. 

According to the new NAADS policy, there is no considerate agricultural policy and a legislation governing agricultural research and therefore the research system is fragmented. As a result, agricultural research is not adequately coordinated. 

Furthermore, the new policy notes that the NARO statute does not cover the public institutions engaged in agricultural research such as universities, which are regulated by the Universities and Tertiary Institutions Act.  

Similarly, the policy notes that the NARO Statute does not provide for the involvement of private sector institutions in publicly supported research.

Above all, the new policy makes it clear that although NARO has contributed significantly to technology development and dissemination, its institutional framework and research programmes were developed before the formulation of PMA. It therefore, does not address some of the key principles of PMA and governments’ macro-economic public service reform.  This shortcoming prompted a formulation of NAADS policy. NAADS is meant to improve sustainably on the efficiency, responsiveness and relevance of agricultural research, building on the gains already realized through the current institutional arrangement.  

Madam Speaker, the genesis of the reform system runs as follows: 

In 2001, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries at its top management decided to carry out a full review and reform of the agricultural reform system. In effect, the review targeted NARO because the other players in the agricultural research such as the university and the private sector were beyond the jurisdiction of MAAIF. A task force was immediately appointed, its terms of reference and inspection report claim that NARO was ineffective and an unviable public research organisation, which must be completely reformed or dismantled. 

The committee was informed that the views of the board of NARO at that time and its technical advice were not always welcome and in many instances labeled as being against the reform. This in effect means that the review took a negative view from the on set. I am pleased, as I reported earlier, that under the leadership of hon. Janat Mukwaya, much of this position changed and we are grateful. (Applause) That is why we are confidently presenting this report because she spared no effort to consult and she cooperated fully with the committee. This openness enabled the key stakeholders to be consulted and I now present the views of the stakeholders that we consulted: 

Views from NARO: 

NARO appreciated the need for reform in order to adapt the new challenges brought about by globalisation and the country’s economic policies.  The review should in effect identify and build on current NARO’s strengths, exploit new opportunities and address the organisation’s weaknesses and threats.  

The review process should have provided government with a number of policy options either to dissolve the existing organisation, reform it or expand its mandate to create a new organisation. This process was not allowed to take course as stated earlier on. 

That the ministry produce a new national agricultural research system policy and national agricultural research Bill 2004 prior to exhaustive and objective consultation with all the stakeholders.

Views from the private sector: 

The private sector welcomed the need for the reform of agricultural research. In their opinion, research is the heart of agricultural development.  However, they do not undertake research in their enterprises as a matter of necessity. Private sector is guided by profit and so public services are not their priority. It is difficult for the private sector to put aside their already over stretched financial resources into a venture that may not be of immediate benefit to their business.  The sector prefers to contract NARO to undertake research in a particular area and meet the cost other than investing in a much wider field as the case may be. For them basic research is outside their purview and therefore mandate of NARO.  

Similarly, strategic research may be beyond their reach and a strategic interest is an undertaking, which is normally done in the interest of the country. So, private sector may not necessarily be handling a wider mandate than what a nation would demand from such kind of research.  

Views from the National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST):  

UNCST recalled government commitment to the advancement of science and technology as the engine of Uganda’s economic development and that this is what led to the establishment of the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. The UNCST was established under CAP 209 Laws of Uganda as a body corporate in the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development to rationalise the integration of science and technology in the development process of Uganda, and to advise government on all matters relating to science and technology for development of the economy. 

UNCST is also responsible for formulating, managing and overseeing the implementation of a national science and technology policy, which sets the gender for national science technology development.  

UNCST also coordinates all scientific and technological activities including research and development in a country.  With that mandate there is therefore no need to establish a national agricultural research council unless provided for under clause 5 of the NAR Bill. 

UNCST Act Cap 209, establishes a specialized committee, the Agricultural Sciences Committee, which committee under Section 17 of the Act is mandated to perform such functions as proposed in Clause 7 of the NARS Bill. The Committee on MAAIF therefore, strongly believes that enacting a law with this provision will cause a duplication of functions and hence wastage of resources.

The Agricultural Research Trust Fund: 

The National Advisory Services, NAADS, a statutory establishment has been a victim of basket funding.  The Agricultural Research Trust Fund propose in Clause 45 should therefore be considered with a pinch of salt to avoid pitfalls of basket funding and details should be avoided to create room for evaluation. An organisation should be given an opportunity to determine how best to fund its activities.

National Council of Science Technology therefore pointed out in its advice to the committee that current experiences showed that as more institutions and organisations are created, there is an increasing structural complexity and duplication of functions in Science and Technology and Research and Development systems; yet to rationalize the allocation of public resources and to respond to socio-economic development needs, synergies have to be created within the Science and Technology systems. 

To them the establishment of NARC as a constituent of the National Research and Development and Science Technology system would be a step in the right direction, necessary reforms shall eventually be required to build a coherent Research and Development and Science and Technology if the challenges of transforming the Ugandan economy into a modern industrial based, technology led by economy are to be met.

In Kenya, the Committee was informed that the challenges of globalisation had brought about science and technology at the heart of development.  Countries with strong science and technology have registered rapid economic growth and the reverse is true. Consequently Kenya Agricultural Research Institute did not find it realistic nor desirable to fully liberalize the agricultural research in Sub-Saharan Africa.  

Kenya Agricultural Research Institute pointed out that research is an expensive area to invest in and yet it is the most vital element of national strategic interest for any nation. No country or donor will likely sponsor a research component of another country as long as it is of no strategic interest to its own.

It was further observed that every developing nation should be prepared to invest in research for its own national development to take carefully calculated measures that continuously strengthen its research capacity. For this to happen, government should meet the bulk of the cost of research and pay its scientists well. If this is done, additional funding for other research activities can be sourced both locally and externally.  

On the need for farmers to demand for research, KARI noted that this is an administrative arrangement.  All scientists and farmers could come together in an annual forum to evaluate the previous years performance and set new research priorities for the new year on the basis of demand from farmers from a particular ecological zone.  

In the Indian experience, the committee learnt that Agricultural Research was one of the top priorities of the Government of India. The government provides all the necessary funds in the national budget and this is very important, honourable members. It is very important to note this development, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  

In India the apex body owns all agricultural research and training institutes. The committee learnt that 95 percent of the research funds comes from government. There is strong collaboration between the public and private sector institutes in that the sector puts funds in public research.  Farmers based commodities have been able to put up research institutions where they support their own research programmes.

Observations on the Bill:

The committee now makes the following observations on the National Agricultural Research Bill:

Institutional Arrangement:

Clause 5 provides for the establishment of a National Agricultural Research Council as a body corporate. This NARC is established to oversee, coordinate, monitor, evaluate and provide funding for agricultural research to public and private sectors, educational institutions and civil society research service providers. 

Clause 28 provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural Research Organization as another body corporate to oversee, coordinate, and provide a forum and advocacy for national zonal agricultural research instates in the country.  

Clauses 29 to 30 provide for a NARO Secretariat and an advisory committee. The committee will carry out similar functions to that of the board.

Clause 32 provides for the establishment of five national and six zonal Agricultural Research Institutes. Each one will be under a general supervision of its management committee, carrying out the functions of the board.  

Clause 33 provides for the autonomy of the National Agricultural Research Institutes in programming implementation, management and allocation of resources. Each institute may enter into contracts in its own name and may use or be sued in its own name. This in effect empowers a National Agricultural Research Institute and zonal agricultural research institutes to enter into legal contracts in their own names, and yet the institutes are not bodies corporate.  Each institute will have a management committee in clauses 33(2), with the functions of a governing board that is not accountable to NARO Secretariat. 

Implications of these provisions:

The committee notes that the various clauses referred to have serious implications on the strength and effectiveness of NARO. If retained in the present form, they will have a negative bearing on the performance of the organization. In effect this could undermine the national strategic interest of Uganda.

Whereas the purpose of the bill is to provide for pluralism, that is to bring on board other players such as universities, civil society and private sector in agricultural research. The core function and institutional arrangements of these other players have remained intact. To them, the function of delivering agricultural research results is just a secondary undertaking. It leaves the bulk and responsibility of agricultural research to NARO, which is being undermined and weakened by some of the provisions in the Bill. The end result is that agricultural research services may not be delivered effectively. This means that a much weaker agricultural research system is being proposed which will not be able to address the country’s challenges.

On governance organs as proposed in the bill, there will be too many governance organs at all layers of establishment such as the apex, NARO secretariat, five National Agricultural Research Institutes and Zonal Agricultural Research Institutes. This will result in diseconomy of scale, that is costs, duplication and inefficiency.

On the coordinating function of NARO, as reflected in the bill, it is not provided for in the function of its secretariat. This leaves the Public Agricultural Research Institutes and Zonal Agricultural Research Institutes hanging and uncoordinated at NARO level.

On the autonomy of Public Agricultural Research Institutes, as envisaged in the bill, the autonomy of PARIs makes the secretariat of NARO dormant, irrelevant and ineffective. This is because the bill provides for each PARI and ZARI with a strong management committee with powers of a board and could be accountable directly to the National Agricultural Research Council. This will result into fragmenting NARO into several splinter bodies.

The Powers of PARIs:

Clause 33(3) mandates PARIs to enter legal and contractual undertaking when in fact the PARIs are not legal entities. This is a misnomer and could bring legal complications in the implementation of the programmes. There are also possible risks that could arise from institutes undermining any provisions that could force them to adhere to national priorities and research of strategic interests as they are autonomous and could decide on their own research priorities, programmes and seek additional resource from elsewhere through borrowing, and this ought to be checked.

The risks associated with NARO fragmentation:

Madam Speaker, the fragmentation of NARO introduces eminent risks of losing synergies, interdependence in intellectual capital and physical resources and a shared vision that NARO has already established.  The operational costs will increase due to lack of synergies and duplication of certain common functions at the different institutes. In effect this takes us back to the pre-NARO days when research was fragmented and undertaken in different sub-sector ministries.

The Establishment of National Agricultural Research Council (NARC):

The main justification for establishing NARC and its secretariat is being envisaged as to safeguard separation of funding from research service delivery under competitive funding mechanism. 

Implications:

a) A closer look at the provisions reveals that NARC is overloaded with operational and functional responsibilities. This affects efficiency and effectiveness of the research system.

b) NARO as a corporate body has no control over the institutes, and yet the institutes have full powers to hire and fire when in effect they are not legal entities. They are unlikely to stand on their own in a court to face a legal sue.

c) The loss of international image and corporate identity that NARO has established over the years of successes.  It is prudent to build on the premises and repute that NARO has established.

d) With both NARC and NARO in place, the Bill is creating two legal corporate entities, each with similar functions, structures, a secretariat and a board within the same institution. This duplication is unnecessary and should be avoided to minimize costs and an eminent conflict.

The Establishment of Apex:

In order to retain the national trademark and avoid duplication in governance and management of the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS), the committee recommends that NARC should subsume the functions and responsibilities of NARO Advisory Committee. This should also embrace the secretariat including the functions of coordinating agricultural research service providers such as the universities and the Private Sector and Civil Society Organisations.  

The committee further recommends that the name NARO be retained for the apex body because of the corporate image and identity that NARO has already built locally and internationally.  In so doing the apex also brings the coordination of all research service providers under one body and governance structure, that is, the new NARO Council, and maintains the corporate identity NARO has established.

Separation of Funding and Research:

To ensure impartiality in the management and administration of funding, the committee recommends that the secretariat provides for three departments to coordinate the functions of:

a) The PARIs and ZARIs;

b) Non-PARIs, that is, universities, Private Sector, Civil Society Organizations; and

c) Finance and resource mobilisation.

This arrangement also eliminates possible conflicts that could arise from the need of NARO secretariat as provided for in clause 28 of the Bill to coordinate the activities of PARIs.

The committee strongly recommends that the separation of funding can be effectively instituted by creating a Department of Finance and Resource Mobilization, which is backed by a closely guided technical sub-committee of the Board to ensure its independence in operations, decision-making and allocation of resources. This sub-committee will also be responsible for the competitive grant and trust fund and ensuring its transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in all its locations.

On the autonomy of PARIs, the Committee observes as follows:

a) The autonomy of the PARIs contradicts the functional responsibility of NARO secretariat.  It also undermines the coordination function of NARO as provided for in the Bill.

b) NARO as an establishment should be saved and that the organisation should rightfully claim its assets and liabilities. This is so because the Bill has also saved NARO.  

c) No other legal entity known as NARC can be created as a corporate body to acquire the assets and liabilities of NARO, which after all legally exist in the present arrangement.  

d) Assets and liabilities of NARO should also include a provident fund. This is contributory staff benefit scheme, which is on-going as provided for in the current Statute, section 25(2).

The Third Schedule: Public Agricultural Research Institutes

Part one of the Third Schedule of the Bill provides for five National Agricultural Research Institutes, one for crops, one for livestock, one for forestry and one for fisheries and laboratories. This proposal has dropped out Serere Agricultural Research Institute, which is currently an important national institute with a lot of infrastructure.

Observation:

Serere Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute is carefully and strategically located in the heart of the short grassland savannah region of the country. No strong reasons were given for relegating this institute to a Zonal Agricultural Research Institute except for the need to retain only one institute per sub-sector. Crop enterprises and research is clearly diverse and one National Research Institute located at Namulonge alone in the Lake Victoria Crescent cannot serve these diverse interests. Both Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Research Institute and Serere have had comparable crops research needs of their region on the basis of the ecological conditions.

The committee strongly feels that the number and location of the institute should match with the demands and diversity of the sub-sector.  

Recommendations:

a) Based on a number of factors considered including strategic, economic agro climatic, geographical and historical factors, the committee strongly recommends that Serere remains a National Public Research Institute and retains its miniature.

b) Furthermore, the Committee recommends that Bulegenzi Agricultural Research and Development Centre in Sironko District should replace Serere as a new Zonal Institute for the Eastern Ecological zones.

Mbarara Agricultural Research and Development Centre (ARDC)

This has been a fully-fledged research centre for the pastoral region of Ankole. The technology developed here can be extrapolated to other pastoral regions such as Karamoja, Nakasongola and Sembabule Districts. The schedule here does not include Mbarara as a zonal research centre and it is reduced to a satellite of Kachwekano Zonal Agricultural Research Institute.

Implication of this Arrangement:

The committee expresses fear that with this arrangement the pastoral and agro-pastoral system management shall not be adequately addressed as the Livestock Research Institute in Tororo is not the best location to handle the matter. Rangeland and pastoral systems management require considerable research and development attention.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Mbarara ARDC should remain a zonal research institute for pastoral systems and rangeland management.

The committee further recommends that the institute should be renamed Mbarara Zonal Rangeland Research Institute to serve the cattle corridor and have a satellite station at Nabwuni in Karamoja region.

Having undertaken a very protracted and in-depth consideration of the Bill, the committee in close liaison with the ministry and particularly the new Minister for Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries came with a number of amendments to tally with the observations and recommendations and the same have been hitherto attached as agreed upon by the committee for consideration and adoption.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, Agricultural research is increasingly becoming a very strategic area for innovation of agricultural development technologies and if a less developed country like Uganda that is predominantly dependant on agriculture for its development is to have an edge in this millennium our Government should ensure that agricultural research system is well developed.

The proposals as incorporated in the Bill are a major step in attaining this much needed strategy and the committee urges the honourable members to adopt this report as is one way of showing our commitment to a well developed agricultural research system.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report be adopted. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have examined the report and I note that 19 out of 25 Members appended their signatures, so it is well beyond the required minimum. So, we are now for the Second Reading general debate; you may contribute. 

4.46
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Minister for being so exemplary in her new duties. I also thank the committee very much for a very elaborate report and I would like to say at outset that I agree with most of the recommendations of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, like the committee said, agricultural research is very fundamental to the development of agriculture.  In the analysis in the Bill, the committee applauds NARO very, very, much.  The committee admits that NARO has done a good job. Throughout the report I did not see any justification why there should be another organisation above NARO. 

Madam Speaker, the committee says that in Uganda there is a high return on investment on agricultural research.  If we create another heavy institution above NARO, are we still going to maintain that high return on investment or are we going to reduce the return on investment in agricultural research? 

Madam Speaker, one of the biggest challenges and maybe the biggest challenge in agricultural research in Uganda is the fact that there is so much research done but there is very little filtering to the ground. Very little innovation in the agricultural research station reaches the ultimate user, that is, the farmer. I had thought that the emphasis here would have been to look at the gaps. NARO is doing so much; what is missing in terms of taking these innovations right down to the ground? In Uganda sometimes it is very shameful to see let alone research innovation, but even what should be the basic practices in agriculture are not even followed. 

If you take a walk on some of the hilly areas say for example in the Elgon areas in Bugisu or Kabale, you will be surprised to find –I have been to Kabale, I have been to a number of places. Even basic things like terracing is not done and then you see soil being lost. By the way, soil is very difficult to rejuvenate or to refund soil when it is lost. With all the funds that we are spending in research and extension service you wonder what we are doing to make sure that the basics in agriculture are followed. 

Like I said, if NARO has done so well can’t we, as the committee said, expand the mandate of NARO so that we get what we want from agriculture? 

Two, if the National Council of Science and Technology has a mandate to research in this country can’t we expand their mandate and we get what we want?  

Now, Madam Speaker, I turn to basics like the use of some of the NARO institutions like Serere Research Station and the other research stations in the west. I am really shocked to learn that in the Bill there is a plan to down play or to almost get rid of Serere Research Station. Let me tell you, Madam Speaker, the only time that I can say that there has been some impact of research to the people of Teso is when I consider what Serere Research Station has done. Serere Research Station NARO has developed varieties, which are applicable to the zones that it serves. 

Varieties of millet, groundnuts, cassava, sweet potatoes and sorghum have been developed from CERINA I up to V, and the unique thing is that these varieties are on the ground. As I speak now farmers are growing from CERINA I – V; there are farmers who are expanding who are testing and adopting these varieties on the ground. 

I talk from the point of view of an agriculturist, which is my basic training. I think it is not enough to undertake research and leave it in a research station. With Serere Research Station even the zoning of agriculture is going to be workable because the varieties are being tested adopted by the farmers.  I, therefore, find it very absurd for a bill to suggest the downplaying or the scrapping of an agricultural research station like Serere when we are talking of zoning. Are we just talking about things in a very fragmented manner? We are talking about zoning for agriculture and we want to scrap off the very artery that feeds the zoning in a particular –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, let me hope that it is because she was seated behind me; I do not want to suspect that she was not around. I mentioned that for Mbarara and Serere it was an oversight and we agreed with the committee that when we come to Committee Stage we are going to introduce it. Nobody is underplaying the contribution of Serere. It was an oversight and we have agreed.

MS AMAJO: Thank you, madam Speaker. It is because we did not have the contribution of the minister in writing. I am sorry; if it was said it could have escaped from my mind. But what was read is fresher in my mind and therefore I apologise.

Madam Speaker in conclusion, I agree with most of the recommendations of the committee, and if we are serious about linking agricultural research to the farmer, let us reduce on overhead costs. May be this is because there is some money from donors. I think from now on we should also learn to make interventions in agriculture and aim at sustaining them from our own budget. Thank you.

4.54
MR JACHAN OMACH MANDIR (JONAM COUNTY, NEBBI): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for such a good report, and the Minister for Agriculture for the good work she has exhibited for the short time that she has been in the ministry.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the word “NARO” (the National Agricultural Research Organization) you think it is narrow. But it is not; it is very wide and we should make it wider and wider financially, intellectually, and in terms of infrastructure, so that it can become more efficient and more effective. 

Madam Speaker, a lot of research has been done by NARO and the results are right within us and among us. But one problem, which my sister Mary has also mentioned, is the lack of publishing of the research findings. A number of very good researches have been carried out and they are just shelved. I am happy Government has now given a price for those scientists that will come out with research positions, discover certain very important things so that they are recognized and whatever they are doing for the betterment of this country is paid and recognized. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to mention something –(Interruption)  

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, NARO has a journal called Uganda Journal for Agricultural Sciences and I am proud to say I was one of the editors. So, there is also the issue of being published.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, hon. Dr Esele is one of those scientists who did research on the sorghum called Epuri-pur and up to now we don’t know who is the scientist who discovered the Epuri-pur. So, we would like to know and acknowledge the author, the person who has made a certain achievement. I distributed over 400 kilogrammes of Epuri-pur in my constituency, and it did extremely well. That particular sorghum could get Uganda out of poverty because we make very good beer from it. This Eagle Lager –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you hon. Omach for giving way. I just want to inform you that besides Epuri-pur, there is a millet variety that was developed in Sahari called Pese and many people do not know what it is. It is actually Dr Peter Esele who discovered that variety. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much for that information. So, hon. Dr. Peter Esele, you should have mentioned that because you have got to be recognized. 

Now, this particular variety of sorghum is extremely very successful in sandy areas, but it is also important that when you introduce a variety you should follow it up with good information. When we grew this variety, when it reached fruiting stage little did we know that it was attracting all the birds from Sudan. So, they came to hold their meeting in Jonam County. Thank God that we the Jonam people do not spare birds. We use simsim to send them where they belong otherwise they destroy the crop. So, after the scientists discover something, they should follow it up to ensure that they also deal with other parts of it.

Madam Speaker, there is also the issue of Sesame II. For a long time we in Jonam have been growing the very traditional type of simsim, but since Sesame II was introduced, now we get four to five times where we used to get one. This variety grows extremely tall and the yield is very tremendous; it is definitely towards poverty eradication to which we should say that NARO should become wider and wider and wider. 

But Madam Speaker, I think the issue of GMO, which is also being handled by NARO, should be looked into a little more careful. For instance, when you grow some of the seeds that are being introduced, and you want to re-grow from what you have harvested, they will not germinate. This has created a lot of problems for our farmers. So we need our research stations to bring us seeds that will be in a position to be recycled and with a reasonable good output. (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you my colleague hon. Omach. The issue of GMO and the seeds that do not grow have for a long time caused alarm in the public. So, it is important for us to know which particular crops you have encountered the situation where after harvest you plant the seeds and they do not grow. I think the public needs to know these things truthfully rather than being alarmed.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, Prof. Ogenga Latigo. One of the varieties of maize seeds that are being given out, I think from Kawanda, when you plant it and you harvest, it is a good harvest, but when you try to plant that very same, it does not grow. I do not remember the number, but –(Interruption)­- Okay, I will take it.

MRS MUKWAYA JANAT: Probably hon. Esele can clear this, because I do not want us to be recorded that we have GMO seeds grown in Uganda, because we do not have them, and we do not have a law to facilitate that. But scientifically, the person who has been generating cereal can add, because I am a layperson and I am not competent. But I am saying, we do not have GMO seeds in Uganda, because we have not developed a law to allow us to do that.  Probably the scientists can come in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to add something Dr Esele?

DR ESELE: Yes, Madam Speaker. As of now we do not have any GMOs in Uganda. We do not have the law and we do not have anything to allow us have GMOs in the country.

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think we are mixing two things. There is GMO and hybrid. At the moment the technology, which is generated in our research institutions are hybrids.  Even in Kenya, they have not yet commercialised GMO, but they are on trial and they are very advanced already.  So, it is true that hon. Jachan Omach might have harvested the first generation of the maize and if you keep it out of its genetic segregation, it can revert to lower qualities. So, that one is different from GMO. At the moment I think we still do not have GMO seeds in the country.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, let me ask hon. Odit, did we have this famous workshop, which was promised by the ministry on this matter? You did?

MR ODIT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, members are at home on those issues now.

MR ODIT: Yes, Madam Speaker, we did at the International Conference Centre and at Hotel Equatorial, but the debate should continue because, we think that as we develop policies on this new technology, the country should have been well informed.  So, I think the process is going on, we have not reached a conclusive stage, but the scientists are consulting at very high level and we think the message should be carried down so that we can be able to carry the entire country on board.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I just want to give a little bit of additional information. This GMO, which raises eyebrows is the specific type in the United States carried out by I think a research company called Monsanto. But strictly, even hybrid maize is genetically modified maize. What genetic modification means is, you take a gene and you take another one and you bring them together in whatever configuration you want. So, even hybrid maize is strictly genetically modified maize. 

If you take a cow called the Fresian, there was not such a cow in Europe about 300 years ago, but through research and development, the genes of the cow were modified and the new cow called Fresian was got. So, science goes on as long as you add either through adding or subtracting or dividing the gene, you are modifying. But I think my colleagues should distinguish between scientifically modified products and the American type, which is not strictly scientific, it has to do with politics and economics. 

So, I thought I should add that so that my colleagues do not always jump when they hear about genetic modification. Even you, you are all genetically modified products of your mothers and fathers.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know last time we talked about this matter I asked you, how do you explain to an ordinary person the meaning of the words “hybrid” and “genetically modified” in Lusoga.

PROF LATIGO: Madam Speaker, if I could help, the hybrid may not be in Lusoga.  If you call the half cast –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about vernacular so that people understand it in vernacular. (Laugher)

MR OMACH:  Madam Speaker, Prof. Mondo has said exactly what I was going to say. In all these things we have quarter cast, half cast and full cast; and those are GMOs. I am saying that if you are going to bring out seeds, bring seeds which the ordinary farmers when they plant they know that –(Interruption)

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for allowing me to give information. I am a member of the National Bio-Safety Committee together with Prof. Latigo and we are charged with a duty of making sure that the science of GMO does not cause imbalances in this country and I want to inform you that a law has been drafted, we are waiting for this bill to be able to regulate GMOs. GMOs are necessary inflows, there is no way we can avoid them, they have to come, but they have to come in an organized way governed by a law. So I appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture to speed up this law to Parliament so that we can enact a law to govern bio-safety and GMO in this country. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, we would also like the Ministry of Agriculture to start importing exotic goats to Uganda.  We feel a bit uneasy that in the third millennium we still continue to import what we call Angola goats from South Africa, when we have all these very powerful scientists in Uganda.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we in Jonam are very proud of the species of fish we have. We have over 40 species in the River Nile and I request the research organisation to try to carry out some further research on them. One of them is the electric fish. It is found in the Albert Nile. When you touch it, you actually get an electric shock. If you want to skin it, you have got to earth it first with either a spear or an arrow and then it will not electrocute you. I believe our research department could develop the fries from this and the country could benefit from the skin of this fish. We could also get some carotene out of this fish and my sister Syda Bbumba could do away with load shedding because of this electricity that comes from this electric fish. 

Madam Speaker, we also have a small type of fish, which we call Otetel in our local language. It looks like a snake and it is blackish. When you try to cook it, it does not get ready. You can only roast it and then chew. If the men chew it, it attacks parts of the body, which look like a snake. (Laughter) So I believe Madam Speaker, that if this was researched upon - (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Omach. I believe you are speaking English but the message you are trying to convey is very difficult for us to grasp. Can you clarify precisely what you are talking about?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, this fish, which looks like a snake is only available in the Albert Nile, in Jonam up to Rhino Camp and it is an aphrodisiac. So when the ladies serve it, the names of their husbands change at night. I thank you very much Madam Speaker.

MRS MUKWAYA: Since my scientists cannot come on the Floor I just want to get what my honourable colleague wants us to do with that snake fish so that my researchers can take proper instructions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, the last part of your submission, I found it rather unpalatable really.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, what I am asking for is that this particular type of fish has got a lot of qualities. The scientists need to research on it and find out what the people of Jonam have discovered many years ago, then they should then multiply it, they get more fries and have this then the country would be able to benefit from it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, what you are saying is that there is Viagra in West Nile in that item, and you want the Minister to improve on it; isn’t it?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Speaker, I did mention that it is an aphrodisiac and research has been done in the past, but it has not been published and it is only right and fitting that our scientist should now carry this to the end and when they reconfirm this, you can then increase on the fries and those who would like to use it, it would be available. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please register your patent quickly before other people hear about it.

5.14
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntugamo): Thank you very, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues have mentioned, I would like to thank the Minister for her presentation and Chairperson of the committee for his elaborate report. 

Madam Speaker, I am unfortunate I did not get the committee report, however, when I listened to the honourable minister’s presentation and that of the committee chairperson I would like to know from them why it has taken government so long to bring this important Bill to the House considering the importance of agriculture to the economy of this country. We all know that it employs more than 80 percent of our population, and it contributes more than 50 percent of our exports. So Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the minister why the ministry has taken so long to bring this important Bill to the House.

However, I would like to thank the new Minister who has worked so hard to make sure that at least the Bill has been tabled.

Secondly, I would like to get assurance from the Government that this important research is going to get the necessary funds. We all know that the Ministry of Agriculture has continuously been getting less and less budget. Last year, they got just 3 percent of the total budget, so how sure are we that if we pass this Bill, the Government will be in a position to provide adequate funds to run this institution.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable Minister of Agriculture to tell us when the NAADS programme will go to the other districts like Ntungamo so that we can also benefit from this noble agricultural programme. Otherwise, I thank the committee for their report, and especially the recommendations, especially if they are going to help our people realize and get tangible benefits from this research centre, I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
MR MICHAEL OGOLA (West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for awarding me this opportunity to say a few things about this report.  First of all, I would like to thank the committee and the Minister of Agriculture for a demonstrated positive relationship between them. I say this because in both their remarks there were expressions of compliments that were reciprocated. I think this is not only very good, but it is also a rare demonstration of this symbiotic relationship that Parliament must have with the Executive so that we do work for the people of Uganda fully. 

I rise sincerely to support this Bill because whoever controls research controls development. Research is a long-term affair, it is a costly matter, but ultimately, it improves on the income of the people; it enlightens the people outside one zone country and it is good publicity for the nation, both internally and externally. Therefore, I am positive about this bill and I am sure I speak in the name of my constituency who will definitely enjoy the benefits of what is narrated here.  

We talk about the integrated agricultural system, true, and we talk about making research in agriculture meaningful. But what I would like to plead for is that meaningful research goes beyond the theories initiated in what is being done in research. A good research becomes practical when it is made available to the people at less cost. If this is done, that means that not only the benefits is to the name of the Government but that the people themselves become party to the research activities that are being done in that country.  It is no good to make a research, which ultimately is not reaching down to the people who finally make the results of this research practicable and positive.

I am saying this because no matter what we do the research we have received in this country is good, but the production end is not as clearly discernable as it ought to be. This is because the research in the crop is good but somehow the ministry does not make a positive alliance between the research stations and the people on the ground to produce them.  

I believe that to make a good and practical outcome of a research is to ensure that there are people who are immediately accessing these products in order to multiply them within the villages so that the business can ask, “where is this thing coming from?”  

A research must make a difference between yesterday, today and tomorrow. I believe, hopefully, this active and very positive Ministry of agriculture, which is committed to the development of the rural person, will make this possible.

I am saying this also because we have been in –(Interruption)

MS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, what my colleague is yearning for is that component of PMA of credit. We have facilitated research; we have facilitated extended work through NAADS and now in the budget that is going to come, Government realises that - exactly as he has said – that research which remains in the research stations without being affordable and accessible is no research. So, through the NAADS, people will access the enterprises that they have selected with the assistance of Government through support.

MR OGOLA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the information given. I am worried that the speed is slow.  Sometime back, in fact last year, there was a large outbreak of cattle disease in the East. A number of small farmers lost their cattle; those who kept piggery lost it, the chickens were lost, the response of the Ministry was slow and this discouraged many farmers. They asked, “why should the Government encourage us to go into this business if they do not have provisions to protect us when a tragedy strikes?”  Therefore, I am hopeful that – (Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, we have requested the Prime Minister to organise – because other programmes affect agriculture. My Ministry advised during resettlement through NUSUF that all the returning animals should be vaccinated because they were unwell. I did not have the money but NUSUF had the money but they did not take this as a priority.  But now we are advising that money, which is for production in NUSUF – actually vaccination is part of production because you are protecting the already existing animals before we produce. But recently through the supplementary, you gave us money and we are moving to vaccinate animals in the East.  That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OGOLA: Thank you once again honourable Minister and thank you very much Madam Speaker. I am also hoping to persuade the Government that to make a research as an independent activity without the proper inputs required by the farmers is also not very helpful.  I am talking about the fact that if a crop whose yield is 10 times what was before per hectare in order to realize better outcome for the farmer is to make available the implements necessary for him or her to use in order to realize more acreage.  

Today the agricultural inputs in the form of even hoes, even ploughs, obviously tractors is completely unaffordable. You are talking about Ugshs15 million per tractor without the planters, without ploughs, with those others additions; you are talking about Ugshs70/80 million.  There is no farmer in Uganda today who can invest in such high cost implement and make a profit. In that case where are you going to get that money? The banks are expensive; they will never lend an ordinary farmer this kind of money because they do not trust that he will ever get this in his life.

So, we are running around in a circle. We make an effort in research; we get good results but then in implementing, in hoping that the farmer will grab this and make excessive productivity, is unable to do so.  So, I am pleading very strongly that large production requires affordable inputs such as agricultural implements, chemicals and even tractors.  

In the past, Government had thought about making it possible for a farmer in a rural area, perhaps a group of them or at a Gombolola headquarters to have one tractor which all of them can use in order to make production possible.  But that idea has ceased to be active and I am hoping that the Ministry of Agriculture could see whether they can revive this thought in order to make it possible for the people in rural areas in particular to increase production.  

Just before I conclude, I am very, very prayerful that the responsible officers in agriculture and veterinary should once again be able to react quickly whenever the farmer is desperate.  

Madam Speaker, today as we talk, unless we make also a variation, even in our nutrition regimes we may find that agriculture will not be paying. 50 years when we were in primary, we ate posho and beans. 50 years later, the schools in Uganda still eat posho and beans.  Now we need a regime here even in nutrition as well. In the hospitals where many people need good feeding, there is no good feeding.  

In schools today, there is no good feeding different from what we had 50 years ago. I believe if we make that regime, right now before we create an outlet of an increased production, we will run into a vicious circle.  If we said today, let every boarding school feed the students with only chicken -(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. The honourable colleague is giving an impression that in those days people ate posho and beans, and even today people eat posho and beans and to him that is not good feeding.  If that is not good feeding, what would be good feeding in his context so that we can go by it?  I would like to have that clarification. 

MR OGOLA: Madam Speaker, my honourable friend rose too early. This is exactly what I was going to say. I was going to say that it is time we changed the feeding regimes in schools so that a balanced diet is provided for the children.  

But, unfortunately, right now if we make such a law and even suggested that let all the schools in Uganda, boarding section, for instance, feed children on chicken one meal a week, we do not have the production end which can sustain that demand.  Even if we say, let it be one egg a day for the child, we do not have the production regime to sustain that demand.  This is why we think that we must relate research to production and consumption rather than we thinking all the time in terms of export.  

There is great market internally here which we are not satisfying and if we were relating that to research and production, the health of our people would get better; production would increase and exports then will come in.  

My fear here is that we tend to rush to export before we satisfy the domestic market. I really pray that we must insist on getting comfortable domestic market fully satisfied, and we then proceed to export; export with good quality and good standard.  This is my plea. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the movers of this bill and the committee which presented this report for the work well done.  However, I would like to raise the following salient issues, which I think they will take into consideration.  

The difference between Uganda and the developed world and between Africa and the developed world is the scientific difference.  It is not humans, it is not colour, it is not resources, but it is the scientific difference.  It is in good spirit that research is now being taken seriously. 

I am sure since the backbone of our economy is based on agriculture, 80 percent and above, if we incorporate research, we shall make a very big difference in the economy and in the development of our country. 

I, however, have the following salient issues which should be addressed. As raised by my colleague, hon. Rwakimari, 80 per cent of our economy depends on agriculture. But the allocation of the budget to agriculture, 2 to 3 per cent is very minimal. It is does not reflect the source of this funding.We should work towards an improvement of the allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture.  

Furthermore, the allocation to research is extremely invisible. If we have to improve this country, if we have to improve our economy, if we have to narrow the difference between the developed world and Uganda, we must give more money to research. This has to be addressed immediately otherwise all that we are doing will not make us move faster.

There is an issue, which I did not see. The biggest asset we have in this country is land. This country lacks a land use policy. All we are doing without a land use policy, we are wasting our time.  This research will not be implanted properly unless we have a land use policy. 

So, I would request the Minister to liase with other ministers to make sure that the land use policy is put in place. Otherwise, it will be very difficult for us to develop our agriculture, our main source of income.

Most of the urban areas, especially the urban areas which I represent, Mbarara municipality, 40 to 50 per cent of those urban areas depend on agriculture.  But the policies in agriculture, which are raised, they do not address these urban areas.  You find programmes like NAADS, PMA and all the other programmes do not incorporate the urban areas. Honestly, unless you do this-(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: That is a very useful concern, Madam Speaker.  But the Ministry is developing a policy for urban and pre urban agriculture. As soon as we are ready, the bill will be before this House.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the interventions of the Minister, but I was just wondering why all comments are actually addressed to her. Would it not be procedurally right if she took them on and gave us the responses towards the end? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It might be more convenient if you line them up unless something is really very drastically wrong.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, honourable Minister. I am grateful that something is in the pipeline for urban and pre urban agriculture. Otherwise, this was a very big issue and it needs to be addressed. I hope it will come first. It will not be mentioned here and we wait for months and years and it does not come.

Another salient issue that I would like to raise, Madam Speaker, is the issue of researches. Someone also mentioned it. These researches which are on the shelves; there are researches done by NARO. But then there are researches done by these universities. These researches most of the time stay on the bookshelves and they are not put into use.
  
Is there any department that is charged with the duty to coordinate these useful researches that they can be put into practical use by this country, by our farmers and by the ministries? I would like the Minister to give a comment on that so that we are sure that many researches done by these universities are very useful.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, my brother for giving way.  Research all over the world generates huge amounts of information.  Out of that information, maybe five per cent is put to immediate use.  Sometimes even the five per cent known to be relevant may not be put to use because of the prevailing circumstances. So it is important to recognise this because the emphasis is that research results are not being put to use. This gives the implication that our researchers are doing irrelevant things, which is not the case.  

The essence of research is that you do so many things, but out of those things, only one or two things will be valuable and it gets carried on. It is manifested, for example, in the varieties that our researchers have produced, in the intervention that they have done, for example, in addressing the issue of wilt in coffee, et cetera.  So that must be the context in which the activities and the output of research are considered.  If we consider that everything that is done must be put to use, then we shall have a crisis.

MR KIGYAGI:  Thank you, honourable colleague.  What I mean is that of all these researches that are done, whether it is one or two or three or five per cent of this component that should be put in use; is there a body that is looking at these researches to incorporate this small percentage that we need to incorporate into our systems? If it exists, then the honourable Minister will let us know, if it does not exist, something should be done about it.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I think really that is an excellent question. I do remember, for example, I supervised a colleague on food policy. I did encourage him to publish it; he was not interested. All he wanted was to get a doctorate and be called doctor X. So there is also a problem with the researchers themselves. They should be able to market their findings and also Government should be responsive to what is done.  

For example, it may be unpalatable but the Government must take into account the consequences of the research and act accordingly. So there is sometimes also a weakness in Government, especially when someone is critical; we may ignore, but that is wrong.  But also the scholars should not try simply to praise Government for the sake of it, but simply state objectively what is done.  

But of course there is a problem, namely, that many of our university staff are getting a very poor wage. That is why you have had strikes. The President intervened and directed that during this financial year at least a professor should get a reasonable amount. I cannot remember, perhaps Ugshs. 2.8m per month.  

But there is a resistance because if this directive is not being obeyed, you find all sorts of pretext. People are not implementing this directive and consequently people get frustrated. They focus their attention on research, which is going to increase money. So that is an excellent question and someone could do a doctorate on it.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Prime Minister, is the capacity to publish within the reach of many of these scholars? Do they have funds to publish even if they wanted to?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, that is a very good question. Many of our publishers would like to get a subsidy; that is one problem. But if they did apply, because you can apply for assistance on publication, they could do it.  But there is a problem.  We have tried also to get journals, but many of our journals are not sustainable although there are some which are now sustainable and they think that if we do it regionally, then we might sustain those journals.  

But you could also publish your findings in the New Vision and the Monitor. Some of our papers are excellent; they publish academic statements. For example, when we are discussing the issue of lifting term limits, the Ekisanja, we have had excellent statements from academics, which have benefited us. So the initial stage is to use newspapers.  

But also you could knock at our door and say, “Now Minister of Agriculture, I have been doing research. This is what I have published”.  Can we interface and see a way forward so that we improve, for example, the policy making process?  The duty of the Minister is to ensure that you do not use only the saliva, but you reward that person with something.  I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister.  Yes, the question, which I wanted to raise next has been raised ably by the Speaker. I am very grateful because after these scholars have gone through the tussle of raising the resources to do the researches, sometimes they are limited in the resources to do the publishing.  But I appreciate that there is a weakness on both sides.

My next salient point is the issue of appropriate technology. It is a shame that when you and me and many honourable members of Parliament and the local people from the rural area, when we are all practicing agriculture, we are all still using a hoe, it is unbelievable.  I do not believe in the tractor because that is something beyond us.  But there should be some intermediary technology, which you and I should be using, which other middle commercial farmers should be using.  But most of the time the commercial farmers are engaging labour to use the hoe. So something has to be done on the appropriate technology. 

 I have heard in the report that appropriate technology has been developed, but we have not seen it.  Where is it?  Where can I buy an appropriate technology, which I push instead of using the hoe, which I can afford?  A tractor cost millions of shillings. I want something for maybe one million shillings or five –(Interruptions)

MR OMWONY OJWOK: The honourable is rightly concerned about the development of appropriate technology beyond the hand hoe. I am happy to inform this House, Madam Speaker, that actually Uganda has gone to some very, very interesting companies that are producing that kind of technology. One such a company is actually in Soroti.  Although it is having problems, those are the problems we should address.  

One of the reasons why that company is having problems is precisely lack of market.  Here is an honourable member who is correctly concerned about knowing where he can get this kind of technology; and here is a company that is actually providing this kind of technology but which is not being used.  This is just one- (Interruption)  

MR OGOLA: The information I want to give you is that that very factory in Soroti may by now be closed because – and I am corrected that it has been closed. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Honourable Minister, besides the question of market, I think the onus is on us to appreciate that when we went for privatisation, there should have been some backdrop situation created for some of those critical areas. Since you are in charge of economic monitoring, surely that is one area we privatised without thinking that some day somebody would not think about how critical this intermediate technology will be for us. So the people go for the market trends rather than for the demands that are really very crucial to the community.  I hope that as you look into the future, you will make provisions for such a situation. Thank you.  

MR BIKWASIZEHI: The technology the honourable Minister is explaining is in most cases not integrated. That is why it may not be sustainable because we have some technologies, which emphasize opening of large chunks of land. So one opens a large chunk of land, maybe plants, but that technology does not address the issue of weeding that big acreage which has been opened.  That technology does not go beyond to address the harvesting of that large acreage. So it is not integrated and I am not surprised that, that kind of technology cannot be sustainable.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, conclude so that hon. Kigyagi can also conclude his statement.

MR OMWONY: Madam Speaker, this is a very important and interesting area, which I would like to invite our colleagues to study. The first thing I would like to do is to request members to physically, not through all sorts of rumours and so forth, go and visit some of these factories.  There is one factory on Sixth Street. It is called Farm Engineering and Implements Limited (FEIL). Let colleagues go and actually see; there is a lot of intermediate technology available.  

The problem that we are facing in agriculture is actually very complex. In my opinion it is not simply a question of lack of technology, it is whole range of areas.  It is even our own capacity as farmers, for example, telephone farming; here we are in Kampala, we call ourselves farmers, we set up a farm somewhere there, we send some people who do not actually have the capacity to manage a farm.  

So the question of management is a critical matter; the question of finance is a critical matter; the question of logistics, even movement, is a critical matter; it is a whole range of issues.  I think what the Ministry of Agriculture is trying to do and it is working together with other sectors, is to see how to address the issues of agriculture in an integrated and holistic manner. 

I am happy to say that the Committee on Agriculture is really a very helpful partner in this process.  It is not politicising the issues. It brings issues as they are and works together with the Ministry and the rest of Government. I think this is what we need to do. Otherwise, there is a lot available here in Uganda. Let us go and look at it. Thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much.  I think with all due respect, the argument of the honourable Minister is academic.  Now, look at a person in Kisoro and Mbarara; where can he find that appropriate technology?  It is only based here in Kampala.  What I am talking about, honourable Minister, is something beyond a hoe, which we can use, which should be very easily available, and which is affordable, not a tractor because a tractor is very far.  So, I believe something should be developed that can help us to be able to improve our production.

The other salient point is zoning.  Districts are now busy taking the onus on themselves to put crops in the productive zones within those districts. The Ministry of Agriculture should take an initiative –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, much as you did not want me to interrupt, but I want to see that some of the issues are actually outside the ambit of this law. Zoning is a new thing and we are developing the policy and involving the districts.  So, if zoning comes here, under research, I find that I will have to go an extra mile when I come to respond to an issue that is not related.  

I would plead with my colleague to address the issues of research and the research system. When we come to zoning, he will have ample time to see whether we have done a good job or not.  

MR KIGYAGI: I will concur with my colleague that the Minister should wait and respond later. Now, if zoning is done haphazardly without appropriate research, it will be disastrous.  So, zoning should follow the research principles: Certain parameters should be taken into consideration when zoning because the districts are doing it. They do not have enough capacity; they have no research information on soil, on weather and all these things, and we are going to have a problem.  So, research zoning is an important aspect, which should be addressed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you could, please, conclude.

MR KIGYAGI: I am concluding.  The issue of the appropriate technology, which I had mentioned: District Farm Institutes were meant to be trial points, demonstration areas of some of these instruments of this appropriate technology you are taking about.  I have been to the NARO centre in Mbarara, I have been to many of – I have not seen this appropriate technology being shown.  Now, where do you expect the people of Mbarara, Kisoro, Bushenyi and Kamwenge, to get this appropriate technology if it is not even being shown at the District Farm Institutes?

The final issue, which I want to raise is the issue of these varieties, which are being developed. I know the issue of clonol coffee when it came and all of us said, “high yielding, wilt resistant, and drought resistant”; you know what happened. This coffee was even planted in the cattle corridors where the weather was poor.  I had expected that when these varieties are raised, they should be tried in the district farm institutes in different ecological areas; so that when they decide to plant clonol coffee in the cattle corridor, it has been tested within the farm institute within the cattle corridor. 

But, you know this was disastrous. It is one of the aspects that this country will struggle with; to establish the issue of clonol coffee because many people lost a lot of crops and money simply because the district farm institutes did not carry out these trials in the different ecological areas, so that we the farmers could see what was appropriate and in turn plant according to what was being demonstrated.  I think that issue should be revived and it will be very useful if we have it.

Finally, the Minister of Agriculture managed with districts certain diseases, especially the animal diseases. There is one important disease, which is in the west, which they left to the district, and the district cannot manage it. This is the issue of anthrax; anthrax is a disease that should be managed by districts. 

As I speak now, districts in Mbarara, Kamwenge and Kasese - I know UWA came in to intervene, the farmers cannot afford to have the treatment or the prevention of this anthrax because a dosage costs something like UgShs 4,000 or 5,000 to 6,000 each. So each animal needs a dosage, which the farmers cannot afford.  Some of these disease policies, especially on anthrax should be reviewed because many districts cannot afford to handle this disease.  With those few remarks, I thank you, honourable Speaker.

DR DAVID BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much indeed, Madam Speaker. First, I will start off by thanking the committee for a good report, which I think is very well written. 

I would like to point out that biological science researchers are some of those few people who have lived to the motto of this country, “For God and my Country”. In the sense that administratively in most cases they have been the least recognised as far as results are concerned, but they are the least appreciated. 
Biological science researchers be it in agriculture or in medicine, the fault is not theirs mainly, because they do the research, but the real devil lies in funding and supporting them in the implementation of the results. So, I think biological science researchers in agriculture and medicine deserve much more. The report gives comparable returns of what Ugandans have gained from agricultural research.

My second concern is about that council that is being created. I am not so sure about that council.  Firstly, NARO has done a superb job both in actual research and coordinating it. So, I do not see any point in having those biological science researchers. That money should be used to maintain that council. I would suggest that it would do better if it was put in improving the actual research itself including the welfare of the research workers. But, I do not know; my feeling is, as I said, my concern is about that council. 

I was talking about the welfare of the research scientists.  You know, we have got a job; we have got a challenge of training these scientists, but it is challenging to retain them within the research institute within the country. So, I think some more money could be put to better use when it comes to considering that body.  

In most academic institutions, the research board gets the least amount of money, which is very pathetic.  The private sector I do not think is ready to finance big research. There are very few private institutions that can really finance research as it were and that leaves only the Government as the major bigger spender on research. 

However, we all know there are too many small and direct mouths to be fed by the Government, in which case it is understandable if little money for research is there, but still we could do with a bit more money for research.  

But, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, if we cannot spend that much money directly on research as it were, we can at least support the researchers morally, even if it is a question of supporting them in publishing their results.  

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister said they could publish in prestigious journals or from where they are likely to attract big and better investors. This could go along way in some of the real good journals. You have to pay money to publish there and we have got fantastic results, which can be published in such journals. We stand better chances of getting our research results implemented and supported or funded as it were.  

Finally, we should put a bit more money in innovation funding, so that we make research attractive for those who are within the research institutions and outside the research institutions. This is one way of making science or research attractive for our youth, so that all this money we are going to spend on scientists being trained at the universities could be put to better use.  I support the motion.  Thank you very much indeed, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO ALICE (Woman Representative Soroti): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The impression I get from the whole aspect of research that we discuss this evening is a tendency towards liberalising it, kind of privatising it and having maybe a little input from Government. If my thoughts are anything to go by, I have a worry and my fear is the affordability of the output.  

I know that something has been mentioned about it, but considering the fact that those who will be willing to come in to invest in research are people who will be geared towards profit or something strategic to them.  If that is the case, I would like a situation where Government allays my fears for certain things that are not really that lucrative for agricultural products but are necessary. 

I want to point that, for instance, looking at our own heritage; if you look at millet now, millet is not an exciting thing. Nobody is out there really looking for millet all over the place as they do for maize. But at the end of the day, we still survive on millet.  There will be people who want it, but they cannot afford even to buy or to attract an investor into search for market. 

I want to be assured that as we go into privatising and liberalising research in the field of agriculture, some of these areas will be clearly looked at. Because if they are not, one day we will wake up as a country and find that we left out a very big component. 

The affordability is the other thing I have emphasised. I know that when products or crops have just been released from the research centres, they are quite expensive. Now that has been with the input of Government. What will happen if it is somebody who is trying to work out profits? May be the hon. Minister would like to inform us that by the time we go through the budget, there will be a financial assurance that we will not leave it all to private investors.

The second thing, I want to bring to the attention of this House is Serere Agricultural Research Institute. Serere has not been merely a zonal thing, the way it has been operating. It has not been just a zonal institute producing a little groundnuts for a few people in Kaberamaido, Katakwi and Mbale. The products of Serere Agricultural Research Institute have been beyond national level. Our neighbours in Kenya already have the Serere nuts, those varieties of nuts that have been produced in Serere. When I hear the Minister trying to assure us that Serere is not going to be downgraded, I get the impression that it is supposed to be zonal. 

I want to buy the recommendations of the committee that Serere be retained as a national public research institute. The committee recommended it for economic, agro-climatic, geographical, historical and political reasons. I want it to be on record for political reasons. 

I know that the Minister for Economic Monitoring has been saying that we do not want to politicise agriculture, but allow me to politicise it because that is my job, Madam Speaker. 

I know that Serere has been producing goats, poultry - my colleagues in this House go to Serere to get some goats; they go to Serere to get some improved chicken varieties that we consume all over the country. I, therefore, find that the suggestion to turn it into a zonal, whatever you have called it, in the report is unpleasant. What the Ministry of Agriculture would be saying about Serere is to revamp it, renovate it, give Serere more life and give it more support based on the good job it has done for this country.

 Madam Speaker, if you go to Serere you will find very old structures. Sometimes you wonder whether all the good stuff we consume is coming out from those old structures. I think we would be looking at how best to make Serere deliver more.

The other concern is that- if the honourable Minister could help me with this. I do not know, but I just imagine that when we pass this bill there will be job losses. When those job losses are going to be in place, what provisions has the honourable Minister maybe – because already the staff of Serere whom I interact closely with have raised this concern. Some of them do not know whether it is downgrading or restructuring, whatever it is, there will be job losses. And so before I really support the bill as it were, I want to be assured that those concerns are addressed. 

Finally, the question of pastoral development in this country. For a long time when we look at the budget, I believe our policy in the Ministry of Agriculture will not leave out the pastoralists. If we do anything for them, it is miserable. I want an assurance this evening that this shift in research will adequately cater for the pastoral areas in this country. 

And you know, Madam Speaker, while we marginalize pastoralism in this country, we actually get a lot of money from pastoral products. I am told that we get a lot of money from skins and hides, but the investment we put into animal production in this country is very, very miserable. 

Now assuming that is the case, and also when you look at those pastoral areas, they are the poorest areas in the country. Now with this innovation of contracting demand driven research and their related development, I want to seek assurance from the Minister that she does not expect, for instance, the people of Karamoja to be able to pay for research. 

I really just want that little assurance. Otherwise I foresee that with pre-existing marginalisation of the pastoral areas, it is only going to get worse. I, however, want to welcome the committee’s recommendation that a satellite research centre for the pastoral areas be put up at Nabwil. I believe that will be helpful. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for their work in attempting to bring to this House a bill that would probably make sense to what we need. Theirs was a very great effort to panel-beat a bill which should have been rejected in its entirety because of some of the reasons that I am going to outline.

I would like also to congratulate and thank the Minister for the enthusiasm and commitment she has shown since she took on the Ministry of Agriculture. I only wish that she was the Minister of Agriculture two years ago when I was still on the committee. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have a chance to go back during a new session. (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Minister, before I make my specific contribution, I would like also to take this opportunity to actually express my condolences to the Minister and Director General of NARO for the loss within one week of the Deputy Director General, Dr John Aruma, and then a few days later, Dr Otwa Kalule who was my student and an entomologist. These two losses were hard hitting for NARO at a time when many have fallen on the way and others have abandoned NARO because of the conditions of service.

When NARO had just been formed, I was still very active in research. One time, one person wrote a letter of complaint and this letter addressed very pertinent issues of NARO at that time.  That was in 1993. I took the liberty, although I was not in NARO, I was in Makerere then, to write a letter saying that, “As much as NARO was formed as an institute, if the money required for researchers to do their work and their conditions of service were not addressed and clarified, NARO will not achieve the objectives for which it was set.” 

I remember that letter was put on the notice board of the Ministry. I was rebuked though I could not be touched because I was in a different institution.  Since then, I really must congratulate NARO. They have achieved so much for this country, and I speak very authoritatively as somebody who spent many years collaborating with NARO researchers.  

The committee has pointed out some of the achievements. But maybe to help NARO, since they really felt so much for NARO, they should have brought out some other elements of NARO’s achievements, apart from those specific research areas.  For example, some of the new crop varieties that we have made reference to.  But more importantly, NARO has built scientific capacity by training scientists who are competent.  

Some years ago we started the Africa crop scientists society. Every year young scientists working in NARO and Makerere win recognition awards. Many of these research outputs of NARO have been published in one of our journals called the African Crop Scientists journal, of which I was a founder associate editor.  

Secondly, under NARO, Uganda actually developed agricultural research facilities that are comparable to any in sub-Saharan Africa. Sometimes many of us in politics and administration do not recognise that we already have in place a critical instrument for delivering those research results that people keep talking about. The scientific laboratories in Uganda are some of the best that you would want to work with. I only wish that the resources to do research were given to these people, all these issues would not arise.

Now, coming to the bill, and this is where I have a fundamental problem.  On page 6, under four, “The need for National Agricultural Research Systems Reform”. The committee outlines the framework that drove the reform process that has led to this bill. I am totally discontented with the framework. 

In the first paragraph, they said that NARO Statute does not cover the public institutions engaged in agricultural research such as universities.  Why do they have to be under NARO? What difference does it make?  All these things we did, the research and the collaboration was when Makerere was doing its research as a separate institution. NARO too was a separate institution and Uganda is not an exception.  

All over the world, universities have their own programmes, they have their own capacities and they compete; that was a basis.  In other words, this bill is supposed to grab all these things under one umbrella. And legally, would you do it, when the universities are governed under a different statute as pointed out in this bill?

Secondly, the NARO policy says that, NARO Statute does not provide for the involvement of the private sector institutions in public supported research.  Again, the private sector institutions that do research are very specific.  

The sugarcane researchers do very specific things; they have a commercial objective. The tobacco people also do their specific research pertinent to what they are doing.  But even then, they benefit from some of the things.  For example, one of the scientists in tobacco is a scientist from your district, madam speaker, whom I trained and while he trained in the faculty of Agriculture, he became a very useful researcher in BATU. So, whether in agriculture or in NARO, they are still addressing the problems of this country, Uganda.  Therefore, there is no crisis.  

This new policy asserts that although NARO has contributed significantly to technology development and dissemination, each institutional framework and research programmes were developed before the formulation of PMA. With or without PMA, science is governed by its own principle.  You have a problem and you have to address it.  The only thing that will be required is that you have the capacity to recognize the problem and address it. You have the resources to enable you address that problem; it has nothing to do with PMA.  

But even if we challenged it with PMA, you remember last year, Madam Speaker, when we were discussing the budget. The Second Deputy Prime Minister, then the Minister in charge of Agriculture, was put to task to explain what PMA is about and how it is doing to address the agricultural concerns of the country. The Second Deputy Prime Minister, Rt.hon. Kajura promised this Parliament that Government recognizes the problems with PMA and that they were coming back to explain to us.  We are still waiting for them to come and explain to us.  

PMA is a problem. It is not a new problem; some of us pointed it out to Government a long time ago.  Now, if you have a problem framework, and you use it to judge something, you compound that problem into your solution of the other problem. This is where this bill comes in.  It does not address the basic challenges that NARO faces. If it is producing, why are its results not being delivered?  

The problem is not the research results; the problem is our agriculture. If my mother is happy to grow her groundnuts, no matter how high yielding your groundnut is, if you do not change my mother, your groundnut will not be grown.  That problem is not NARO’s; NARO has a good variety, but how can we make this good variety work for our agriculture?  

In ecology they have a law; they say, “law of the minimum”.  That if, for example, you have five sheep moving together, the speed of that group of sheep will be determined by the speed of the slowest; and that is the problem.  The point is that Agriculture, as a development process is not being adequately addressed.  

When I was still on the committee - I believe the committee has continued with this struggle - we fought over the low budget for agriculture. We said, “without money you will not transform.  If you cannot get money to show that fertilizers work, even if you have the best fertilizer, what will happen when nobody knows about it?”  So, that is really the key channel. 

Therefore, in my own view, I would wish we go back and say, “You have a NARO Statute here. You have NARO and we had our objectives; what is the problem with NARO Statute and NARO that has led to our failing to achieve our objectives?”  If the problem is our objectives, as I see in PMA now, then the starting point is PMA other than saying, “Come and see whether NARO as it is does not meet your need”.  Otherwise, Madam Speaker, this reform is just the issue of spending too much money. 

Secondly, the issue of targeting donor money. When we were reviewing, the common talk was that if this reform is not passed, donors will not give us money. Is the problem donor money or research in Uganda? 

The other problem and that is the last one- (Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I think it is unfair to say that this whole reform is targeting donor money when actually everybody here knows that even the salaries of NARO under RP II and the money we get for research is from our development partners. Even as we talk now, our social development partners have given the money. So the thing is not that the money will come because of this bill; no. Even as we talk now, the salaries enhanced and some research programmes, the rehabilitation of institutes, is money given to us through basket funding by our development patterns.

PROF. LATIGO:  I thank you. The point you have said just complements what I was saying. I have no problem with that because I am actually aware of it. I am just informing the House what was being said when we were reviewing these issues. That if this bill is not passed, the money for research will not be given.  I am saying that other than saying if the bill is not passed, let us say, how can we best reform NARO and amend the NARO statute so that, that money that these people give us actually achieves the results that they want. Unless they just want us to keep down their, it is okay. But in my own view, I would even propose that this bill be returned to Government for review. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, debate on this matter will continue tomorrow. But I just wanted to say something about Dr Esele. Last year, during the budget, his contribution to science was mentioned in passing. Now again, today, it has come up. Although this Parliament cannot give monetary benefit, I think there is something we can do as Parliament to recognise his contribution to science, not just as a Ugandan, but also as a member of this House. I cannot move this motion. I have thrown a hint. It is up to you members of the House to do the needful. The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock

(The House rose at 6.24 pm and adjourned to Wednesday, 25 May 2005)


