

Wednesday, May 23 2018

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will amend the Order Paper to include an item of personal statement from Gen. Elly Tumwine, UPDF Representative.

Secondly, honourable members, we are busy on the budget process. However, last week, I met several groups of Muslims and they wanted to know when the Islamic Banking is going to commence. We made that law. In the last session of Parliament, we were assured that the regulations had been completed but we do not see progress from that side yet those serious Muslim believers are not allowed to borrow money that attracts an interest. The delay means that we are excluding them from the economy.

Therefore, I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when the Islamic Banking is going to commence so that the people can know.

The third issue concerns the ex-servicemen. I think something was mentioned when we were discussing the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. However, yesterday, I received a letter from one of them – he is 93 years old. I would like to read two paragraphs of the letter and demand to know from the Government why they have not yet been paid since 2014, when they got judgment. Let me read the two paragraphs - His name is Eliab Kavuma. 

“Dear Speaker, I write to you with great reluctance and sadness, though with a level of desperation that I cannot fathom with word. My name is Eliab Kavuma; Service Number LP53783, aged 93 years old. I am an ex-serviceman who fought in World War II. Presently, I hold the chairperson’s position in our association, which came from a free elected committee tasked to recover the entitlements of World War I and World War II ex-servicemen of Uganda.

However, I have been struggling with prostate cancer for the last four years. I have continued the pursuance of this entitlement. While we managed to win Civil Suit No.527 of 2014, Eliab Kavuma and Others Vs. Attorney-General, we have not received our gratuity, pension or the allotted land. Therefore, the struggle must persist until we receive that which we are legally entitled to.

Honourable Members, I had narrated that recently, three of his colleagues had travelled from Luuka to come and follow up on their money but one of them died in his home. However, they had no money to take the body back. The letter is very long; I will circulate it.

He is writing to request Members of Parliament to contribute Shs 500,000, over a period of five months, to assist them in the battle to get their money from the Government. Can you imagine they are asking us to help them to get money, which they are owed from their Government through a court judgment? 

Therefore, I would like to request the Attorney-General to follow up this matter. In fact, there is a Commonwealth League Office in Uganda. This office receives donations from the British Government to assist the surviving ex-servicemen. I would like to also state that the office bearers do not assist any ex-servicemen and some of the office bearers who benefit from the assistance are not dependents of the ex-servicemen. 

We shall ask the Attorney-General to come and update us on these entitlements. Otherwise, in some of their letters, they said that the money was paid to the Uganda Government but it has not been passed to them. We need to settle this matter once and for all. If the Government of Uganda received their money, we need to settle their issue. These are old men of 100 years and I think the way they have been treated is not right. I request the Attorney-General to come and explain that issue.

There are two matters of national importance; hon. Odria Alioni, I am giving you two minutes. 

3.18
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and this matter has been raised in this House not once but this is the third time we are raising it.

In February, Government of Uganda lost Shs 4.4 billion because of failure of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to collect taxes due to the interim court injunction, which was raised by the British American Tobacco (BAT), against the Attorney-General of Uganda. Again in April, BAT smuggled 7,000 cartons of cigarettes and the Government in the same month, lost Shs 1.4 billion. 

Madam Speaker, according to the Excise Duty Act, BAT is supposed to pay - as an importer of cigarettes - Shs 750,000 for every 1,000 sticks of cigarettes, and the local manufacturers are supposed to pay Shs 55,000. However, BAT has insisted on not paying what it is meant to pay.

In countries like Tanzania and Burundi, BAT is paying a higher Excise Duty. I will not go into details because of time. However, I will give you a difference; there is a difference of Tshs 21,596. That is the difference between the locally produced cigarettes in Tanzania and what BAT pays.
	
In Burundi, there is a difference of Burundian francs 22,000 plus $0.25. However, in this House, when this matter was raised on 13th January, you instructed the Attorney-General to not only appeal. You insisted and told – you ruled, saying, “I would like to ask the Attorney-General to first file a certificate of urgency to the appellate court and then appeal.” 

Madam Speaker, I remember very well our Minister of Finance, my brother hon. Bahati, stood up and – it is in the Hansard – said, “We are working together with the Attorney-General to see that we appeal.” However, in the month of March, when the Deputy Speaker was in the House, we raised the same matter. The Attorney-General said, “We have appealed the matter and we are going to appear in court in April…” which was last month. 

In April, Government lost Shs 1.4 billion again. Local companies are closing. We have got Meridian Tobacco Factory in Arua. They are facing a very big challenge and that is the only factory we have in the whole of West Nile which is producing cigarettes. You are aware that 80 per cent of the people from West Nile are educated because of tobacco growing. This factory is now closing down because of this fight from the British American Tobacco.

Therefore, can the Attorney-General – (hon. James Kakooza rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: No, no, it is not a debate. He is raising a matter of national concern. Please, hon. Odria, make your prayers.

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, my prayers are:
    1.  Let the Attorney-General appear before this House and prove with evidence and lay the appeal that he had filed in the court in Arusha.
    2. Let him give us evidence that he appeared in court in the month of April.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, that matter is very crucial because it touches on the revenue collection of this country. As I indicated when I was sending the Attorney-General to appeal, it was urgent and it is still urgent. I would like to call upon the Prime Minister to ensure that the Attorney-General comes here to update us on what is happening. It is now several months. This is about the revenue of Uganda.

3.25
MS GRACE KESANDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance.

On Saturday, the night of 28th of April, tragedy befell the tourist destination district of Rubirizi when heavy rains caused floods and landslides that affected several areas. The affected areas include Nyangorogoro in Magambo Sub County, Nyakasharu in Rubirizi Town Council and Kabukwiri and Ndangara in Ryeru Sub County.

Over 150 households were affected, whereby people’s property, including farm crops - banana and coffee plantations - were destroyed. Some of our craters, that is, Lake Mafuro; Lake Kasiriya and Lake Kamweru were also affected; whereby the landslides deposited all the washed away soils into these lakes.

As I speak now, the affected families are hopeless –

THE SPEAKER: Your prayer, quickly.
   
MS KESANDE: Madam Speaker, I hereby call upon Government and the ministries, departments and agencies responsible to immediately intervene so as to support these affected families. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Of course, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is urged to assist the Rubirizi people but more than that, which is part of the Rift Valley. Therefore, the damage may be more than the usual. I think it is important that Government takes interest in that part of the Rift Valley.

3.28
MS LYDIA MIREMBE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance concerning the very many accidents on Mpigi-Kanoni Road that have claimed over 50 people. There have been numerous accidents on this road, yet it is still under construction. The over-speeding cars have claimed many lives and there has not been intervention from Government for a long time.

Last year, during the Masaza Cup (the Buganda football tournament), we lost about 18 people in Kibibi as they headed to Gomba. Another Ipsum vehicle claimed five people from the same family and so many other accidents. My prayer, on behalf of my people in Butambala, is that the minister in charge puts in place control measures such as humps to save the lives of Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Works and Transport to respond. Did you hear the issue of multiple accidents and over-speeding on Kanoni-Mpigi Road which is under construction? 

3.29
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As happens in all areas, there is always need to find out why accidents are happening. I have heard and the road is under construction - what we will do is to find out the cause of these accidents. If they are speeding and if it is to do with the road design, we will put in place measures.

3.30
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and this concerns the Anti-Stock Theft Unit, commonly known as ASTUs. While this group was deployed in Katakwi specifically in the year 2000 - when the Karimojong insurgency was at its peak then - because of the disarmament in Karamoja - the cattle rustling in Teso, especially Katakwi district, reduced drastically. 

What we have now are simple thieves, still by the Karimojong. However, the biggest challenge we are facing now by this group are rampant deaths or killings by the ASTUs. Within a period of less than one year, we have lost about 10 people. I have their names here and would like to read them.

    1. Ekoluot from Ngariam was killed last year.
    2. Ojikan who was a student from Ngariam Seed School, was shot dead in November last year.
    3. Ikabat Moses was shot dead, about two weeks ago on May 16, by the ASTUs.
    4. About two months ago, four people were shot dead by ASTUs in Kokorio landing site. 
    5. Opio from Apeleun, Ngariam was also shot dead by the ASTUs.

The four whom were killed included a police woman who was pregnant. She was killed together with her unborn baby. Other than the killing of our locals, the ASTUs have also been involved in grabbing the wives of the locals because they have some money and guns. Then, they go drinking in the local centres within the community without paying and when the locals intervene –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS AKURUT: The list is quite long but the prayer is that we would like, as the people of Katakwi, the operation of the ASTU suspended in Katakwi. 

The people are also requesting for more deployment of the UPDF in the border areas especially in the sub-counties which are mainly affected by this by the Karimojong thefts.

They also request for an increase in the number of the Local Defence Units (LDUs); they request recruitment and training of the local boys and girls into the LDUs to do the work that the ASTUs were doing in the area.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) was deployed there for a purpose. We ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to examine their need there but also address the other security arrangement and come back to this House.

3.33
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance to do with the pricing of agricultural products. 

We are busy budgeting and appropriating for the benefit of our people but for a long time, our people in the rural areas have suffered the low pricing of agricultural products. This has been as a result of the liberalisation policy which was enacted by this Government over 20 years ago.

The majority of our people depend on this sector. Over 75 per cent of our people are in this sector. Many of the young people - the potential farmers - have left the rural areas and have come to town because the agricultural sector does not pay. To some extent, as Members of Parliament, the way we are budgeting does not show serious support to this sector. We only appropriate three per cent of the national budget to this sector which is not in line with the Maputo Protocol, which fixed a rate of 10 per cent of the national budget.

Madam Speaker, if the Government has failed to do much about this pricing of agricultural- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could state the problem and ask for a solution. Now, you are discussing the policy. You have half a minute to conclude.

MR MAKUMBI: Madam Speaker, my prayer is about the review of the liberalisation policy. It is high time this Parliament passed a motion to review the liberalisation policy because this is an emergency. I would request you to allow me move that motion under Rule 58 (k) so that the liberalisation policy is reviewed by Government to make sure there is an indirect intervention by Government through the UDB by capitalising the individuals or potential investors who can go out and buy products from the rural areas and invest in agro-processing. 

What Government can only do is to go out – I have been to Kinshasa and Sudan; there is no food – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating your motion before you present it. Just file the notice and we will give you time on the Order Paper.

MR MAKUMBI: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you give me time to work out a motion that will make the Government review this policy of liberalisation. Otherwise, enough is enough. Our people have suffered. It is now 25 years over a planning period. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Makumbi, your prayer is granted. You are free to bring the motion. You will get time on the Order Paper.

3.37
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding heavy rain that has caused severe flooding in Amudat. As we speak now, most of the people from Amudat have lost property and lives because River Kanyangareng has had a flood outburst. 

In Amudat, River Kanyangareng is everything because the people farm around it. Since the river has had a flood outburst, everything is swept away; the people have lost their animals, granaries and houses. 

Madam Speaker, this flood has affected around 10,000 people and the most affected areas include Achoricor Parish in Loroo Sub-county, and Loburin and Alakas Parishes in Amudat Sub-county. Amudat Town Council is also affected because the entire town is flooded. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is this: The Government, through the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, should immediately provide shelter, food, clean water and blankets for the affected people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness, please respond to the issue in Amudat.

3.39
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise an issue of national importance. Kaabong District borders South Sudan in the north and Kenya in the east. We have a problem of the boundaries. Currently, the South Sudan government claims part of our district to be part of their territory. Likewise, on the eastern side, the Kenyan government claims that part of our district is part of their territory. The Kenyans have done it worse; they have moved 13 kilometres into Uganda and built facilities like schools, roads and dams.

Madam Speaker, we have been raising this issue and I think I even wrote to Dr Baryomunsi, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Lands) that we need a response because we are now in Uganda by map but the land has been taken over by the Kenyans. (Laughter)

So, what do we do as a country? Within Uganda, we also have a problem of boundaries but now this is an international issue because the Kenyans have come in and put up their facilities.

We have also had an issue where in the last Parliament, money was granted to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to put two immigration posts; one in Kamion in the east and the other one in Karenga in the north. However, Government failed to put them up because there was a land dispute.

So, it is my prayer, Madam Speaker, that this Parliament designates a committee, if Government of Uganda is failing, to go –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: My prayer is that this House resolves to ensure that Government moves up to negotiate with Kenya Government and see where they can establish and open up boundaries. Otherwise it is very difficult for us to do business and see where our boundaries are; we may be belonging to two or three states.

Even in cattle rustling, you cannot pursue armed Kenyans. My prayer is that Government should intervene and ensure opening of boundaries. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite the Minister for East African Affairs to give us a solution. We have two border disputes with two neighbours in the community.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The concern from the honourable Member of Parliament came to our attention. It is not only Karamoja which has an issue with the border conflict. Almost the entire border of the East African community has a problem.

However, Uganda has a bigger issue between Kenya, South Sudan and Tanzania. We held a joint meeting which included even the lands ministers across the region and we have identified the money where the African Development Bank is giving the East African Community a grant to identify the colonial mark stones because somehow they disappeared; we will do demarcations and create a buffer zone and then do the general survey.

Therefore, a team of the joint surveyors of the East African Community, especially from the lands ministry, are already doing consultation and we believe that before the end of this year, the general survey of the boundaries of the East African Community would have been done. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can you please keep us updated so that our Members know where they belong?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I can commit that I will come back and give a statement concerning the problem that the Member of Parliament has raised on the Floor.

3.44
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance in regard to the illegal cutting of trees in Mt Kei Forest Reserve that is located in Yumbe. The background information is that the Ministry of Water and Environment outlawed or suspended the cutting, transportation and sale of shea nut and afzelia Africana trees in the entire country.

However, of recent, a group of people calling themselves “investors” has invaded Mt Kei Forest Reserve and within a short period of time, they have depleted a very big chunk of that forest reserve raising concern from the local community. The people have asked me to raise this matter as a matter of urgent national importance but also they are preparing a petition that should reach your desk soon so that this matter is addressed comprehensively.

Madam Speaker, one of the issues that they brought to my attention is a letter that was written by the Minister of Water and Environment, dated 31 January 2018; to the attention of the coordinator of law enforcement, National Forest Authority to clear a group of traders who deal in furniture claiming that they were importing timber from South Sudan and for export to other destinations.

However, it has been discovered that this letter is being used to deplete and transport the suspended or banned tree species that are under threat. Therefore, the prayers are to ask for the Ministry of Water and Environment to intervene urgently to either reverse this position that the minister had granted or the Prime Minister to prevail over the Ministry of Water and Environment so that we preserve this forest because that is the only source of rains for the entire West Nile region. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Water and Environment here? Honourable members, if what hon. Atiku is raising is true, I think it is an extremely serious matter for us. We are talking about deforestation and we are the same people allowing people to cut the forest. Can the environment minister come back to us tomorrow with an answer? This is very serious about the environment. We want an answer from the environment ministry.

3.47
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I stand up on a matter of national importance. There is a disease that is ravaging Manafwa District that affects or attacks the children and they urinate blood. It started as a simple matter but we have carried out a research in three sub-counties of Bukusu, Khabutola and Bugobero. I left out my sub county but there are three children who are sick.

Well, the doctors say it is a fever, but a fever which results into a child’s passing urine throughout – and out of the 14 children that have been affected in the three sub counties, eight of them have died because they pass urine and die. Six of them are still suffering although alive. We do not know what the doctors think because they have not given us a definite cause of this disease that is killing the children.

As I speak, one man called Simwende has lost two children and another one is still sick. I have the details here of the names of the children that are alive but are suffering; those that have died, the parents, their sub counties and where they are being treated or were treated from before they died.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health carries out verification – before that, I beg to lay a list of those affected for record purposes so that the Ministry of Health can go out and verify. I have indicated even the hospitals and then they should also come and tell us the cause of this disease and what remedy can be put in place in order to save the children. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Mutonyi has supplied the names, areas and hospitals where the victims have been treated. We request the Minister of Health to urgently examine the situation and report to us in case it is something that is going to spread all over the country so that we should be ready to handle it. Please report to us next week.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, we have students from the Law Development Centre. Is that you, people? Stand up. They are studying administrative law at the Law Development Centre and they are here to attend the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

Honourable members, I would like to move item eight to come before the Bills. 

Under which rule are you rising, hon. Ssebagala?

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, it is not Rule 117 but guidance is not provided for in our rules (Laughter). You raised a very important issue about Islamic banking in your opening remarks. And tomorrow is a very big day for our Parliament; you must be equipped with what you are going to tell the Muslim community that you have invited. Could the honourable Minister of Finance give us the update about Islamic Financing?

THE SPEAKER: In my opening remarks, I said that I met several Muslim leaders in the east and they would like to know what has happened to Islamic Banking. We made the law but there is no update after that yet we cannot continue forcing them to the banks where their religion does not allow them. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to make a proper response tomorrow. It is true that the law is in place; we have been working on regulations. There are also some provisions in the existing tax laws to facilitate the process.

THE SPEAKER: As you have heard, I am hosting the Muslims and I must have an answer.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON A PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW USD $212,669,840.08 FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF CHINA FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT ‘BRIDGING THE DEMAND SUPPLY BALANCE GAP THROUGH THE ACCELERATED RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME”

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that Parliament resolves to consider a proposal by Government to borrow $212,669,840.08 from the EXIM Bank of China for the implementation of the project: “Bridging the demand supply gap through the accelerated rural electrification programme.” 

This is to purposely complete the remaining sub counties that are not connected to the grid in the country. 

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and Members. I stand here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $212,669,840.08 from the Export Import Bank of China for the implementation of the project code named “Bridging the demand supply balance gap through the accelerated rural electrification programme”. 

Before I proceed, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the signed report, signed minutes, the brief on the proposal, the request by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the loan request, the contract management plan, Government concessional loan agreement, contract agreement, feasibility study report, project brief on environmental and social impact assessment and a letter of confirmation on availability of counterpart funding from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay.

Parliament committed the request from the Ministry of Finance to borrow that amount which I have already mentioned from the Export Import Bank in accordance with Rule 175 (2) and Article 159 (2) of the Constitution. We have reviewed the request and I wish to present as follows:

We had meetings with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Energy and the Rural Electrification Agency. We also reviewed documents – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the Members can read those parts themselves; go to the substance. 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I proceed to the project objective under paragraph five. It aims at accelerating access to clean and modern electricity while spurring growth in demand through the electrification of all un-served sub counties nationwide.

It is important to note that this loan is meant to pick up all those sub counties and the environs which are not yet served. The project is located in central, southern, western and south western, north western, north eastern, West Nile, central, northern, Ruwenzori and mid-west Uganda.

It includes the construction of the distribution network infrastructure of 287 sub county headquarters and the environs of 83 districts in 12 service districts. 

The proposed project mainly focuses on construction of power distribution infrastructure for electrification of the 287 sub counties and environs in 12 service districts. 

The design of the project includes the design of 33 KV medium voltage lines, low voltage lines and consumer projects. The project is an extension of the existing grid. It is only the connection to the consumers that is new here.

The location of this project was identified based on the current transmission lines and power supply points. The construction of the medium voltage lines in this project are all accessed from the nearest 33 KV medium voltage lines that can meet the load requirements.

The scope of the work is given under paragraph 7 (4) and the detailed components are covered under Table 2 paragraph 7 (5).

Project Cost and Financing

The project is going to cost $225,669,840.08 and out of this $212,669,840.08 million will be sourced from the China Export Import Bank of India while $13 million will come as counterpart funding from the budget. Table 3 has a breakdown of the costs and the sources of funding. Table 4 shows the project cost and sources of funds. The bulk of the money; 94 percent will come from the China Export and Import Bank and six percent is what is coming from the coffers of the Government of Uganda. 

The loan terms are the standard ones; the requirements include the approval by the Attorney-General while the interest rate is indicated under Table 5 on the loan terms under paragraph nine. This has a maturity period of 20 years after a grace period of five years. The interest is commercial, at two percent plus a management fee of 0.25 percent and the commitment fee of 0.25 percent. 

The project is going to be implemented by any agent who has been appointed by Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) - the contracted company is Tebian Electric Apparatus (TBEA) Co. Ltd - to carry out the construction work under the project after securing all relevant procurement and contracting clearances from the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority (PPDA). 

The Ministry of Energy and Rural Development and REA will be responsible for the overall management of the project. The contractor, TBEA Co. Ltd, will conduct a detailed engineering design and wrap studies prior to procurement, construction and commitment. In order to enhance quality financial management and general project management, REA will procure an independent supervisor who will oversee the project. 

The project is aligned to the Environmental and Social Impact guidelines by National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and it was arrived at after consultations. 

Madam Speaker, I now move to paragraph 7 for observations and recommendations. The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

i) 	The Loan is required to finance the proposed project. The implementation of this project shall enable the electrification and will cover all the remaining 287 unserved sub-counties in the country boosting the economy and service delivery to the people.

ii) 	Through increased access to power, the tariff will be reduced by picking and consuming to maximum the power generated in the country since the power contracts are for capacity under “take or pay” arrangement. Right now, we have got excess capacity and we are paying for redundant energy. Therefore, when this project is implemented, that redundant energy will be picked up and through economies of scale, we expect the tariffs to come down.

iii) 	The proposed project was designed to speed up the progress of rural electrification, improve electricity access rate, increase local power system demand and consumption efficiency, and bridge the demand-supply gap balance in Uganda. We have a mismatch right now; we have got a lot of capacity and a generation capacity in excess of the transmission and distribution lines. This loan is going to help to cure that mismatch.

iv) 	The project will build rural electrification networks in the service stations, which I have named. Focus will be on electrifying all un-electrified sub-counties and related infrastructure as these have a huge potential in transforming people's lives through the provision of critical social services including health, education and water. The other observation was that:

v) 	Government has invested heavily in power generation and transmission resources in the last decade through Government and private sector financing. In the immediate and medium-term, this has solved the supply problems of electricity but not the demand. By the year 2020, the country will have over 900MW surplus of power generated. If this power is not consumed, the Government will have to pay the developers for the idle capacity - which we are doing now for Bujagali - in deemed energy charges to private investors if aggressive measures are not taken to build distribution infrastructure and extend the customer base.

vi) 	The Uganda Climate Change Policy identifies promotion of sustainable energy access and utilisation as a means of sustainable development in the face of uncertainties realistic to climate change. 

	It also identifies promotion and use of clean energy as one of the key greenhouse mitigation adaptation policy priorities. In appreciation, the design of all Rural Electrification Projects is climate proof.


vii) 	The project shall also facilitate the connection of over 170,000 public institutions such as schools, hospitals, health centres, district headquarters, businesses, and other customers directly onto the grid, which will realise an immediate growth in demand of over 300MW. This will go a long way in consuming the surplus power, which will be generated by 2020.

viii) 	The project will also connect all load growth centres within the environs deliberately targeting small and medium enterprises (SMEs), educational institutions, health facilities, commercial centres and agro-businesses, parish headquarters and villages along the way. Right now, there are many areas where the wires are passing and there are no step-downs so people cannot access the power. Therefore, through this programme, they are going to have what they call “Intensification” put in more step-down transformers for more people to access the power.

ix) 	The project will also directly reduce on the carbon emissions through the reduction on the dependency on biomass.

The committee further observed that some of the service providers contracted by REA do sub-standard work as demonstrated by poor quality electric poles and transformers, which are quite rampant.

The committee recommends that REA should emphasise supervision of the quality of work contracted out. There is also need to review the performance of service providers in every region with a view of eliminating inefficient and incompetent service providers.

The committee further recommends that companies providing sub-standard work should be blacklisted and PPDA should scrap them from the list of pre-qualified Companies.

x) 	The committee observed that this is a very important project, huge in amount that is spread across the country but with one contractor, which may affect the timely completion and quality of output of the project; in case of failure or poor implementation, the fault will affect the entire country.

	The committee recommends that REA should ensure strict recommendation of the project and timely completion. We are suffering from a disease of starting projects and they are never completed in time, we end up with cost overruns and lose value of what is invested.

xi) 	The committee observed that counterpart funding is one of the problems facing speedy implementation of the projects. Among the lessons learnt from the implementation of projects, especially those funded by externally borrowed funds is insufficient and untimely release of Government counterpart funding and the low absorption capacities of projects implementing agencies.

Madam Speaker, on scrutinising the reasons why external loan absorptions are low and why project implementation is delayed, one of the biggest problems is release of counterpart funding. In this case, we have requested the finance minister to give us an equivocal commitment that the funding will be made available and has laid at the Table the letter of commitment which they have made.

The committee recommends that Government ensures that adequate counterpart funds for this project are timely and are integrated into the national budget during the project implementation period so that when we are making allocations in the budget, we should follow up the provision for this project.

Government should make a firm commitment to provide counterpart funding for loan projects where there is low absorption due to the lack of counterpart funding. Madam Speaker, absorption of the current development fund is now around 30 to 40 per cent and I have already given the reason.
 
All future loans whose counterpart funding is not provided in beneficiary sector projects should not be submitted to Parliament for approval. Madam Speaker, I think we should make this a requirement for loan approval by this Parliament.

xii) 	According to Electricity Regulatory Authority statistical tests done over the last five years in Uganda, a one per cent increase in power tariff leads to a corresponding 2.7 per cent decrease in demand and vice versa.

Government should endeavour to bring down power tariffs so as to enhance effective demand because it would not help to have these lines all over the place and yet the power cannot be consumed. Therefore, the tariffs must be conducive for the people to consume this power.

xiii) 	Fulfilment of Loan Conditions: the committee observed that Government has been slow in fulfilment of loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt finance projects for rural electrification.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure speedy fulfilment of loan conditions of the financing agreement for this loan in order for the committed funds to be released on time to guarantee timely implementation. If it is implemented in time, we will be saved from paying the commitment fee which you pay because of redundancy in implementing the fund. This time it is 0.25 per cent. If we saved that, I think we would have more funds to invest in the sector.

xiv) 	The Electricity Connection Policy 20l7 -2026 sets a target for achievement of 60 per cent access by 2026, with REA as the key policy implementer. The policy emphasises the need for Government to subsidise the connection costs if we are to achieve national targets.

The committee recommends that Government should prioritise financing for connection initiatives if the target for access is to be attained. At least if the connections can be free of charge especially for the domestic consumers.

xv) 	The electricity rural network coverage in the country is still quite low, by international standards with only about 10.6 per cent in 20l4 according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) Census conducted in 20I4. However, under the Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan for the next ten-year period 20l3-2022, Government's plan is to increase the rural electrification access rate to 26 per cent by 2022 and to 51 per cent by 2030 and they hope to realize universal electrification by the year 2040. Government has also set out to extend clean and modern electricity to all citizens by 2040. To achieve this, it is planned that at least 30 per cent of all citizens should have access to electricity by 2020.

In order to avert the potential risk of the country having idle installed capacity of over 900 Megawatts by 2020 and in order to realise the Government target of social economic transformation through increased access to electricity, implementation of this project should be taken as a priority.

xvi) 	Local content; with high unemployment in this country and with redundant capacity we would have built over the so many years, the committee recommends that the contractor in this project should reserve at least 30 per cent of works to local companies since they are now capable of handling such contracts.

xvii) 	High dependence on consultancies; the committee observed high dependency on consultancy services in conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission lines projects by REA despite their successful implementation of several electricity projects. 

Although REA has created sufficient capacity building overtime, there has been slow progress in translating this success into building sufficient capacities within REA for consultancies. Over dependency on consultancies poses an agency risk especially where the consultant’s objectives end up not coinciding with REA’s objectives, which cause delays in project implementation.

The committee recommends that REA should scale up plans for building capacity of their staff especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing projects in order to cut down on the project funds spent on consultancies and to retain some of the dollars spent on these because many of these consultants are paid in dollars.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $212, 669,840.08 from the Exim Import Bank of China for the implementation of the project “Bridging the Demand Supply Balance Gap through the Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme” be approved subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair of the Committee of National Economy, and the members. Just a few comments before I hand over to the Members and I hope we can be brief.

First, honourable Minister of Finance, yesterday, we had a very bitter debate on the Floor of this House where the Minister was trying to bring a law to wipe out debts arising from failure to provide counterpart funding. Therefore, we want a firm commitment on that issue because this is what the chair is saying. We are going to approve but what about the counterpart funding? Therefore, we want a firm commitment on that. 

Secondly, honourable chair, I am excited about the local content but I wanted to propose an amendment that at least 10 per cent of that 30 per cent should be reserved for the women and the young people. (Applause) 

This is because in any event, the young people will be the ones to pay this loan but also if they are subjected to the same conditions as the other companies, they will not meet the bid security. Therefore, the bid security for the local content should be lower and affordable and we should see women and the youth visible in this contract because they are part of this economy. That is what I would like to request for.

4.22
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern is about the counterpart funding. I would like to find out from the Minister of Energy and Rural Development whether the 6 per cent- the $13 million is already secured because this loan is to benefit many of us.

However, Madam Chairperson, I have not seen an annex of the 83 districts and the 287 sub counties. We need this annex- let us have this information. It should be annexed before we approve the loan.

Thirdly, on page 2 of the report, I support the committee recommendation - they had a concern about having one contractor doing all this work in the whole country. I think this would delay the project and it would indeed compromise the quality of work. Therefore, let us think about having two or more doing the work because the area is too big. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you remember in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Project, there was one contractor who was given eight towns and it was a disaster. Do you remember USMID, the municipality roads? Why do we have one contractor - 

4.22
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support your proposal that 10 per cent should be given to women and the young girls. I hope everyone is in support of that. I rise to support this motion but to also caution Government that we are borrowing a lot and –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members, there is a Member on the Floor.

MS KYINYAMATAMA: We are not realising the results of these loans we usually borrow.

The honourable chairperson was talking about the shoddy works that are being done and cannot maintain all the projects or sustain them, for the years to come and a lot of money is being spent and it is a loan to be paid back. I am wondering what we are going to do as Government or Parliament to keep approving such loans that are not sustainable in the long-run yet we know that they are doing shoddy work and we continue with the same contractors. We all talk about banning them but they are never banned - you see them back all the time.

Therefore, I am concerned as a Ugandan and a Member of Parliament that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development might do its work but the implementation stages of these projects should be carefully done. Otherwise, we are going to lose out. Thank you.

4.24
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chair of the committee. I stand to support the loan.

The committee is spot on with the counterpart funding. The minister in charge of finance needs to assure us that the counterpart funding will be released right on time. 

This House must also pronounce itself on Rural Electrification Agency (REA); we must move out to other teams to reduce the compensation, especially on MV lines and low voltage lines because this is power for distribution. Our communities must appreciate that and that must be a condition for whoever gets power from REA.

Secondly, it is the issue of non-payment of levies. The distribution company today says that they do not pay money to Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL). The UETCL is supposed to pay 5 per cent of the money owed to it by Umeme, the distributor for levies. 

Today, the figure stands at Shs 60.1 billion, which is owed to Rural Electrification Agency. This hinders REA from doing its work. If this money was paid on time, we would not have a problem with counterpart funding.

Lastly, it is on the issue of connection. The distribution network belongs to Uganda but it is released to the distributor by Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL). You see how much loans we pass in this Parliament both for transmission and distribution? However, what happens in the bad agreements we have, the distributor is paid 20 per cent return in investments yet we are the ones passing loans for them. 

A caution to Cabinet; the distribution agreement is about to expire. This Parliament would move to advise Government, we have not got the Treasury Memoranda of the adopted report on energy passed by this House in the Ninth Parliament. The concession is about to expire but Ugandans have paid greatly because of bad agreements. I pray that we pronounce ourselves that nobody shall tamper with this until the terms are reviewed. I thank you.

4.27
MR RICHARD OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson and the committee for the report. I also express my support for the loan request because I think it is a right for every Ugandan to have access to power. 

However, we need to be consistent in the way we do things. I have this rural electrification project in my constituency and we even agreed here in the House that the wayleaves for rural electrification should not be compensated.

Much as we explained this to them and they gave in land freely, I am now seeing table 3, page 8, showing the project component. I am seeing here compensation for wayleaves $5 million. It is okay to compensate people but it is going to create problems. We agreed in this House that when it comes to rural electrification, the beneficiaries should give land freely and we explained this to our people. 

However, somehow we are seeing Government is changing its position and beginning to compensate others. What is going to happen is that these fellows who had already given in their land freely are going to start asking for compensation and this is going to be a problem. We need to be consistent. 

If we say that the wayleaves for rural electrification are free, it should be free. However, when we see that in other cases people are going to be compensated, it becomes difficult for us to explain to our voters whom we had told that it is for free. They may think that either it is us who have failed to represent them well –(Member timed out.)      
                    
4.29
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we passed the Budget last year in June, the theme was industrialisation and job creation. I do not see the logic of getting this loan to be taken to sub county headquarters; to do what? Our communities go to the markets where there is no power. Most markets end up with no lights at all.

Our schools in the rural areas are in darkness and they do not have power. What is the logic of this going to sub county headquarters?

In the last budget, we also agreed that we will set up 22 industrial parks. You do not see any arrangement for this power being taken to start up these industrial parks. How shall we attract investments there?

Much as we should extend this power to sub county headquarters, the main focus should be where the majority of Ugandans benefit.

Lastly, almost 60 per cent of their power is now going to be generated from Northern Uganda; you talk of Karuma, Ayago and Nyagak. Today, as I travel home, I see their pylons heading to Kampala and nothing is going to West Nile. I do not see any pylons going to West Nile or northern Uganda. I do not see this in this scheme of the loan.

Madam Speaker, let us have a rethink of this loan so that the whole country can benefit. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will explain the details.

4.31
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I thank the committee for the report. One of the challenges we have in this country, is that we are producing a lot of power which is not being utilised. Therefore, I want to first support this move by Government to have this comprehensive project. 

However, Madam Speaker, as earlier alluded, I would like this project to target production areas. We must have united planning so that all of the Government departments which are going to have similar programmes in all those centres, for example water for production or irrigation, are identified now. In that way, when this power goes out, all those areas will be catered for, because we shall not have another big project like this one. 

On the issue of wayleaves, we had agreed that in rural areas, people should give land freely. I therefore propose that where people agree to give land, the money for the land should be extended into longer lines for this programme so that it can work as an incentive.

On the issue of local employment and local contractors, we need to work with Government to identify the areas that can utilise local services so that we stop this haemorrhage of money going outside Uganda. I think that is why we have a lot of poverty now. There is no money that we retain as a country through such programmes. It is therefore up to us as leaders to sensitise our people to look critically at the project – (Member timed out.)

4.33
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. However, I am hesitant to declare my support for the report before I get clarification from the honourable chair of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I support hon. Kinyamatama’s proposal on the need to attach important documentation so that we can be sure of what we are chasing. This is a very big loan; we do not want to commit Ugandans and make a loss later.

Secondly, I would like to know about the determination of the 30 per cent local content. How did the committee determine that? Ugandans might have more capacity than you think. Let us give them an opportunity.

Finally, I would like to say that power is very expensive and even when we install wires in every village in this country, as long as we do not cut costs, the wires are just going to pass through the villages. We shall talk about power extension to the villages but no one will use the power. 

I therefore support hon. Baba’s proposal that as we take this power to the communities, let us target public installations. Our schools and other areas of concern do not have power. We still have health facilities where mothers are delivering babies with the aid of small lamps. Let us target those so that the community can benefit from the power. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

While ordinarily it would be expected that we have to support a loan request, I find it very difficult to support this particular one. I am saying this because as you may remember, in August 2015 this Parliament passed a loan request of US$ 100 million from African Development Bank for the same purpose -rural electrification. The areas covered by this particular loan included Kaliro, Tororo, Buyende, Serere and some other areas. This was in 2015 but up to date, we have no update on what is happening with this particular loan. In fact, I got information last week that it is even about to be cancelled – (Interruption)

MR OJARA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving me this opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, what my colleague is talking about is very true. We need to know the status of the past programmes that have been launched to take electricity to some of these subcounties. In Kitgum District, for example, I think the poles were laid in 2015 and up to now there is no single power connection in about three or four subcounties. Why can’t we first get information about the status of the implementation of the first project that was launched before going for a different level all together? This is the information I wanted to give this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what the minister said was that this loan is to complement the original one. There were 287 subcounties not included in the other project and she said she is now providing for the 287 subcounties. That is what I understood.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You were generous with your time.

4.38
MR MBABALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. 

My concern is about local content. When we talk about local content, most people think we are only talking about employment. We are talking about employment plus the actual contract. Therefore, it is very important for Ugandans to be aware that on any given contract, 30 per cent goes to the indigenous people. 

The Speaker said that we need 10 per cent out of that to go to women. I do believe that is a good move but for a start, let them work with the existing indigenous companies so that the companies gain experience as well. We should not pull them out completely but let them team up with local companies for the 30 per cent local content. 

With regard to 30 the per cent employment, we can allow the women to come in on 10 per cent basis so that the men take up 20 per cent. However this should be spread all over the country. Our people must be sensitised, especially the business communities, that there is business for them. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I only said that I wanted 10 per cent of the 30 per cent. The 20 per cent represents the others; the 10 should be for women and youth.

4.39
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This loan is brought in bad faith and bad taste (Laughter). This is a Chinese company called TBEA that came to Uganda, went to Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and said they had all the money to do rural electrification in Uganda and they only needed approval from Uganda. Rural Electrification Agency then mortgaged the entire country to this one company. Along the way, the same company alleges that now they want to borrow the money from China to do the work, after getting the contract to do rural electrification in the entire country. This is fraud. 

The committee is not being honest with this House. You should have tabled the contract signed between TBEA and REA before any request for the loan is made. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I would like to say without fear of uncertainty that TBEA has compromised REA, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and part of the Committee on National Economy. I can tender evidence. 

This report of the committee must be reconsidered by another committee guided by your discretion, Madam Speaker. There is no way we can mortgage the entire country to one contractor. This project will definitely fail -(Interjections)- You will have your time, honourable minister. In fact, you know what I am talking about. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the scope of the work was developed by the contractor, TBEA, and was only approved by REA. To make matters worse, 80 per cent of the inputs will come from China - the cables, insulators, transformers, conductors and others. This is just a deal to put us in a situation like the one with Umeme. The moment we approve this loan request without revisiting what the Speaker advised – A single contractor! If this report is fool proof, let us divide the project among eight contactors and you will see the loan collapsing because this is not what the Chinese company wants. 

Madam Speaker, I want to caution this Parliament that even if electricity is good – Actually, the committee was told, “electricity will reach all your villages”. That was the sweetener being used for the committee. However, the story behind the story is not the case. 

I would urge Members that much as it is good to support this loan request, let us put two conditions: One, there should be at least several companies that should be divided in the country, not single sourcing. For this one, they got the company and then REA wrote to Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) to clear the company to wire the entire country. Let us advertise and various companies apply and compete and the country be zoned. That is the first condition in support of the loan request.

The second condition is that there are companies manufacturing transformers in Uganda, for example, the company for this man who is in telecommunications. For us to approve a loan request and 80 per cent of the money goes to China would not be fair to this country. 

Madam Speaker, I support the loan request but these two conditions must be varied by this House and it cannot happen in this debate alone. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what hon. Otto has said is worrying. Is it true that we are going to import transformers and other equipment and we are going to have one contractor? Why should Parliament endorse that? (Applause)

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Madam Speaker, the prudent practice for any contractor is to get quality and cost-effective materials for any contract. Whatever is available here locally will be bought from here. This is being practised on all our projects, including Karuma –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had to go to the President with steel manufacturers of Uganda in respect to Karuma because the steel was coming from China. 

MR D’UJANGA: Yes, I remember that. However, Madam Speaker, initially, our companies did not have the capacity to produce the type of steel that was being used. However, now we have capacity to produce that quality of steel and we are buying all the steel from Roofings.

THE SPEAKER: In respect to this contract, will the transformers come from here?

MR D’UJANGA: The distribution transformers are now being manufactured locally –(Interjection)- Yes, one company is in Kawempe and the other is in Nalukolongo. 

THE SPEAKER: We would like to know, honourable minister, if that contract contains a component of importing transformers from China. That is the worry of the country.

MR D’UJANGA: We have stipulated 30 per cent for local content, Madam Speaker, and it includes the whole range of products within the contract.

THE SPEAKER: No; if that is the case, I think it is a raw deal for this country. (Applause)

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we need to make clarifications systematically so that we understand each other as a House as we debate this issue because it is an issue that was looked at by the committee and the House is being informed. 

One of the things that we need to know is that – and hon. Nandala you know this – we have a framework to deal with conditions from the Export Import (EXIM) Bank. The first one is now our policy, and I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because after a number of interventions, it is now our policy that all local materials produced here in Uganda are utilised by foreign companies working here –(Interjections)- The contract is here and that is number one.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR BAHATI: Hon. Otto, if there is an engagement, we cannot understand each other. It is important that we understand each other. Materials which are going to be used to construct the power lines and everything else, if they are available here they will be bought from here –(Interjections)- That is part of the contract. The second point –(Interjections)- We can check the contract - 

THE SPEAKER: The minister is explaining, honourable members. Allow the minister to explain.

MR BAHATI: The second point is that when we are getting loans from EXIM Bank of China, we deal with Chinese companies as a condition. That is at the point of acquiring a loan. At the point of implementation, like this one, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals has categorised this work into lots so that local companies can construct these power lines because –(Interjections)- Yes! The House should know this, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of law –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, you need to help me so that I make this point –

THE SPEAKER: Members, please, let us listen first.

MR BAHATI: This is a matter of law. You cannot have more than one company; for example, you cannot package 20 companies and you use them to go and get a loan. It is only one lead contractor and when they start, they subcontract the local content. That is how it is done –(Interjections)- It is law and that is the procedure –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister –(Interjection)- Hon. Bahati, you have to listen. I would like to give you information.

Hon. Bahati is right. What does EXIM Bank of China mean? It means “Export and Import Bank of China”. What China wants is to ensure that they export their items. One of the conditions they give, as you have said, is that before you do anything, they give you a Chinese contractor. That means there is no bidding or competition. If you are buying materials from the same person, it means it is also a cost because there might be an area where materials are cheaper but you have to buy them from China.

Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister is that the percentage he is talking about as the local component is in the labour sector. Out of 100 workers, 30 will be Ugandans who will be pushing wheelbarrows but the 70 per cent will be Chinese. It is exactly that. There is no way you are going to tell us –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, if hon. Bahati could give me a chance. You need this information because it is very important for you. 

We have seen this agreement with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the contractor. The contractor is the one who came up with the price. The amount he quoted is what you went to the bank to pick. –(Interjections)- How? You have just mentioned here that you first got the contractor and that was the contractor that was approved. Whom did you take? You should not change your words.

Madam Speaker, this is a raw deal. If we do not stop this, we are going to sell our children because of Chinese. Recently, the Chinese took over the ports of some country. They will soon take Uganda because of these few guys who sit here and use us. 

I would like to plead with you, Madam Speaker, that for the time being, this loan request should be studied thoroughly. All Members of Parliament should study it so that they understand it. Otherwise, if we make a mistake – (Interjection) - I know Engineer D’ujanga was the Managing Director of Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) and he is the one who caused it to be sold - (Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a very important loan request which would enable us to take power to the remaining 287 subcounties in this country. My old friend, whom I respect very much and I would not have raised a point of order against him, I think is going personal.

When we are in Parliament, as Members of Parliament I think we should discuss national issues. Therefore, is my honourable friend, the Member of Parliament for Budadiri County West, in order to go personal on this Floor?

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, we are not dealing with UEB; we are dealing with a loan request. So, he is out of order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are aware UEB was privatized because it failed to do rural electrification and the failures were brought about by the leaders who were running it.
	
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, concentrate on the loan request.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, cables are being manufactured here by Cable Corporation Ltd, Lugazi. However, in the contract, the cables are to be brought from China - (Mr Byabagambi rose_) - I am well informed; you cannot inform me. You were in the Ministry of Works and Transport and you failed. I have refused your information.

They have talked about transformers but what is of interest is where the project is going. Hon. Baba Diri, the ambassador – 

THE SPEAKER: He is not Baba Diri; this is hon. Baba. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I come from Bugisu; I apologise. Ambassador Baba mentioned a very important thing. These people will not be audited if they we are talking of a subcounty, but if a trading centre fails, people will complain. That is the reason they are taking the project to where there is less need or demand and less accountability.

Therefore, if we were serious, we would be –(Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the name “subcounty” is descriptive, and I can give an example. In the past, I think before my colleague joined us here, we used to talk of reaching at least the district headquarters. That does not mean that the line will go cleanly to the district headquarters. That is just descriptive.

Reference has been made to hon. James Baba; recently, we did rural electrification in his area. When we were going to Koboko District headquarters, along the way we also connected the trading centres. Therefore, the word “subcounty” is descriptive. It means that we will reach the subcounty but along the way – (Interruption) - There is no point of order here! 

THE SPEAKER: What rule has he offended? 

MR D’UJANGA: Along the way, we included some trading centres.  So, Members should not dwell on this subcounty issue. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is rural electrification, there is a programme for it and this programme has been running very well under the World Bank. Under this programme, power is taken to the villages and when it reaches a subcounty, it is taken up to the subcounty headquarters. There is therefore no reason why we should come with a specific project, which is different from the one that was designed as the rural electrification programme. If it is the same, we have the capacity to get money from the World Bank other than going to commercial banks. That is where the problem is. Why should we go for a commercial bank?

Madam Speaker, World Bank supports infrastructure development and one of the main items they focus on, which is a business - (Mr Kasule rose_) – Under which rule? This MP came from the Court of Appeal – [Mr Kasule: “Yes, but have decorum”] - What I would like to raise – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, we know there are global competitions but we do not want to subdue a loan because it is coming from China. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of the World Bank Forum in Parliament; it is understandable that he is pushing for World Bank loans. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to push for his personal interests against this big loan that is going to help many Ugandans and which we needed yesterday?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has passed loan requests from the World Bank and other institutions, so it is not an issue. There was no point of order there. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I know we need this electricity in all our villages but I think we should be mindful of the cost at which we are borrowing this money. In particular, we have substantially supported the economy of China for many years on many projects; all the money goes to China, employment is in China and what is left here is scrap.

Therefore, I would like to defer this matter to tomorrow so that I can look at the components, for example where the transformers and other things are coming from. We need to address that. Let us defer this matter until tomorrow. We shall complete it tomorrow so that we have time to look at the components - what is supplied under the loan and by whom. The 30 per cent is not enough; we want the other 80 per cent. We have also talked about the 287 subcounties. Can the information be supplied to the Members so that they know the 287 subcounties? It is not a secret. (Applause) 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. My only point of procedure upon which we may need your guidance is –

THE SPEAKER: Members, where are you going? Honourable members, can you come back to your seats; the House is still in session. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I have always thought about this. Well, there is only one sector that we thank the Government for not privatising, and that is the water sector. However, the whole energy sector is in the hands of a private company called Umeme. There is a time the President alluded to re-owning our resources like Bujagali but then still, we procure loans for this sector to make it better for a private company, which is takes all the benefits, and that is Umeme.

I am always at pains when we carry the burden of borrowing money to improve a sector that does not belong to us, where one hundred per cent of the benefits go to a private company. What will the benefit be of continuing to borrow such money to improve a sector, which is not in our hands? In a nutshell, I am a co-wife to another lady but I come and cook for that family and I even mop the house –

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem? Go straight to the point.

MR ANYWARACH: The point is: Aren’t we, as Ugandans, making double losses by procuring an expensive loan that we have to pay back to the people who have always lent us the money and yet we are not enjoying the benefits directly since we do not have cheap power for all Ugandans? The profits are all going to Umeme. How do we marry these two things - the loan whose burden we are supposed to carry and Umeme, which is a foreign company enjoying all the benefits of the improvement we are making in the energy sector? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can bring a motion so that we debate it substantively and take a resolution. Let us go to Item No.3.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. The finance minister presented Supplementary Budget Schedule No. 2 here and the Committee on Budget interrogated Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). On May 3rd, the House passed the supplementary budget. However, we have got complaints from some MDAs, which have not got the money, and yesterday, we got another Supplementary Schedule No. 3. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance to come here and tell us why we should go through the rigorous exercise of interrogating MDAs and passing supplementary budgets when they cannot give money to the MDAs and the needy agencies but instead just bring another supplementary budget? Should we continue to process this Supplementary Schedule No. 3 when actually, money from previous ones we have approved has not been remitted to the beneficiary MDAs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the supplementary request No. 3 has been sent to the Committee on Budget. You are represented there through the chairpersons of committees. If you have a complaint, start there. 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is: Wouldn’t it be right for the minister to come and tell us why the other schedule has not been executed? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what you should ask; instead of saying we should not consider the other one.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is true that we passed a supplementary budget three weeks ago. The day before yesterday, which was now into the second week, we received the resolution of Parliament in the ministry and we signed the warrant to release resources. Therefore, the process is going on.

When you approve money here, it does not necessarily mean that the following day it will be paid. The Ministry of Finance has got to wait for the resolution of Parliament stating what you passed. That resolution must then be captured by the Auditor-General and also approved by the Minister of Finance and the Accountant-General. I signed the warrants on Monday and the process is ongoing. Therefore, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)  

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I have not crammed these rules, but I would like to seek your indulgence. The minister – (Interjection) – My mother tongue is Ateso; I learnt this English later, so my pronunciation is not as thorough.

The minister is lying to this House. The minister is aware that they brought these supplementary schedules here and they were processed and approved. However, when the approved supplementary schedule reached them, they paid out selectively. He is talking about loading; yes, that process started but they halted it - the minister is very aware of this - in order not to pay the other supplementaries, which are not in line. They are only interested in paying out “classified” requests. They have not even accepted to pay the members’ personal money, which is their rightful money but it was taxed. 

The minister is well aware of the trick. Yesterday, they brought another supplementary schedule which they are interested in having us pass, claiming that they are going to borrow money yet they have not yet got it. Is he in order to come and lie to this House and not give the facts? 

THE SPEAKER: I cannot rule until I have got substantiation. What is happening to the supplementary schedule? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think we should not misuse the freedom we have in the House to taint people’s images. I am the one who signed the warrant for recurrent expenditure this morning and signed the warrant for development expenditure on Monday. I have sent for these documents from my office to lay them on the Table. I do not know what you will do to the Member when he gets different information. I am going to bring them now. In a few minutes, I will bring them here. I do not know what you will do, hon. Opolot, when they come here. (Laughter)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Honourable minister, justify the Bill.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2016; to amend the definition of a minor; to provide for the definition of betting intermediary and public lottery; to provide for additional powers of the board; to limit the interest payable on tax to the aggregate of the principal tax and penal tax; and to handle any other related matters in the Act. It is a simple amendment to make those clarifications in the current law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can our committee now report.

5.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018” and we are now ready to report back.

Madam Speaker, before I present the committee report, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the original report together with the minutes, which captured the proceedings of the committee in considering this Bill. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, because of time, I beg your indulgence not to go through the methodology and other introductory paragraphs. I would like to go straight to the observations and recommendations.

Observations

1. 	It is important for the National Gaming and Lotteries Board to conduct due diligence on new applicants in the industry. However, this cannot be done at the expense of the applicants. It is difficult for a company to pay for Government officials for their travel and per diem and then the officials give a negative report about the company. To avoid compromising the officials, Government should budget for this activity to conduct due diligence.

2. 	The betting industry is faced with a challenge of equipment that do not meet the minimum standards set by the regulator. The Bill proposes to seize, destroy and confiscate equipment or devices without recourse to courts of law. This provision may cause irreparable damage and liability on the part of Government where a serious financial loss may arise and the aggrieved parties have to be compensated after the equipment or device has been destroyed.

The operators in the gaming industry should be given a chance for a hearing before destruction of equipment, to avoid Government paying huge sums of money in compensations, which can be avoided. All equipment for gambling is cleared by the gaming board.

3. 	The Bill seeks to give the board powers to approve a franchise or an agent of a licensee before the licensee appoints the franchise or agent. However, there is a difference between a franchise and an agent. While a franchise is independent, an agent and a principal are one and the same. In the case of an agent, the board would be dealing with the principal and therefore, for any non-compliance, the principal would be answerable. 

The licence issued by the National Lotteries and Gaming Board has terms and conditions that the licensee undertakes to abide by or risk his or her business being shut down. The terms and conditions apply to the agent by virtue of deriving their mandate to operate gaming premises from the principal operator. The board should regulate the principal operator and not the agents since these already undertake to abide by all the terms and conditions stipulated in the operator’s licence. 

4. 	The Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board is currently comprised of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Internal Affairs and three other persons who shall not be public officers. Appointing civil servants on boards of other organisations affects the performance of their mother ministries and also compromises their supervisory functions that the parent ministry is supposed to have over these organisations.

All Government officials should not sit on boards of other organisations, to ensure proper functioning of the boards and to stop denying the ministries the availability of their staff to perform their core functions.

5. 	The Bill proposes to reduce the age of betting from 25 to 18 years to make the law conform to the age of the majority as provided for in the Constitution. The age was fixed at 25 years based on the age at which students will have completed their formal education from higher institutions of learning. Considering the risks associated with the business, the age should be left at 25 years. (Applause)

Our recommendations, Madam Speaker, are:
1. 	Government provides funds for due diligence to the National Lotteries and Gaming Board. 

2. 	All civil servants who are serving on the National Lotteries and Gaming Board should be removed. 

3. 	We recommend that the Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members. On the second recommendation and the fifth observation, how did the civil servants get to this board? Was it by virtue of the law? If it is, we have to amend the law but not just remove them.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, the civil servants got to the National Lotteries and Gaming Board through the law which we enacted in the Ninth Parliament. However, we have a proposal to amend that section and remove and replace them with people from the private sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the report. It has been signed by the necessary number of the committee members. Do we need to discuss this? Just for the Hansard, I am giving some members two minutes each to speak on this Bill.

5.21
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy with the report of the committee on this amendment. However, I have a question. 

They are talking about people experienced in lotteries as being the ones supposed to replace the civil servants on the board. I am wondering how the minister is going to get those people with experience in this business. I have a feeling that we should have upright people instead of having those with experience in this business of gaming and lotteries. Getting experienced people means we shall get people who are dealing in the same business yet this board is to regulate the same people -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Timuzigu, for giving way. The information I want to give you is based on the law itself. Section 6 (2) of the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2016, which prohibits and states thus: “A person shall not be eligible for appointment if such person is an employee or director of any company, firm or institution where such employment or directorship may lead to a conflict of interest.” Therefore, persons chosen by the minister must not conflict with this particular provision.

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you for the information. Now the question that rises is: Are we going to get those people with experience and are retired from the same business? I do not think we shall get enough of such people to take these places if we just limit it to those with experience in lottery - (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the report but we are dealing with a business that requires constant monitoring in order to avoid some mishaps. Why can’t we create an independent regulatory body to monitor the functions of these lotteries and games?

THE SPEAKER: But the board is the regulator.

MR KAFUUZI: Okay.

5.24
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. I support their recommendation for the removal of public officers. This is not only because of the interference with their duties but also public officers from the Ministry of Internal Affairs in particular are also supposed to be involved in regulating this activity. 

Late last year in Pader District, during the enforcement of the regulations, it was found that some of these people running casinos were not complying with the regulations. Some of the casinos were being run even at village level. However, when the district leadership, with the enforcement officers, swung into action, they were ordered by some officers from the Ministry of Internal Affairs not to interfere with those business people. Therefore, I support this recommendation. 

We should also put into consideration the fact that those who will be put on this board should not be from Ministry of Internal Affairs because during enforcement, we use police officers who are supervised by that ministry; they should not be victims of conflict of interest. That is my concern. I thank you.

5.26
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative Kumi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. I want to commend the committee for this progressive report. 

I remember the background to the enactment of this Act. It was based on the discussion of unregulated processes and interventions on this particular Bill. As a country, we have a young generation that is unguided. We also have a greatly unemployed generation and a population of young people. Therefore, the need to restrict the lotteries and gaming practices is very important. 

If we look at how this business operates, it is usually people maybe who want to waste money and those who maybe want to trade in illegal money who are involved. The practices associated with gaming and lotteries are also associated with other bad practices in our community like prostitution, drugs, selling of sex and related challenges and practices that are undesired in our communities. Gaming and lotteries also encourage laziness among young people. They will want to perhaps get money from somebody and run to a gaming place and get money for free. 

I want to commend the committee for coming up with the recommendation to restrict the age group. At 25 years, it is assumed one is employed or has at least understood the skills or principles of making money, so if they go to trade their money in such a way, it is their own money and not from a parent. Therefore, age is important. We need to tighten it further to ensure we preserve the morals of our society and train our young people in hard work and ethics of money making –(Member timed out.)

5.28
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the chairperson and the committee for a well-thought-out report. I have two comments to make. 

The proposal in clause 3 (k) is about the powers to collect express fines. Collection of fines should remain the mandate of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) rather than being desegregated to a board.

I also want to thank the chairperson for the proposal about age. Indeed, my view is that even 25 might be low because most of us completed school at about the age of 23, 24 and 25. At that time, you are still largely dependent on other people before you get into gainful employment. It would have been even better -(Mr Okot Ogong rose_) - There is no time; I have only two minutes. I thank you, honourable. 

Indeed, the age of 25 is only at least. Otherwise, the better age would have even been 30 years when people are now stable - (Interjection) - I am surprised; hon. Okot Ogong is always very composed. Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on one last issue –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, in this Parliament we also need to be very consistent with the decisions that we make. I remember some few months ago, we debated the issue of age limit and we agreed that it was discriminative, archaic and that it should not be applied in our country. We opened up that if one wants to be a President, they are eligible from 18 years and above. However, now on the issue of gaming – (Laughter) - you are saying that we should restrict the age. Let it be 25, 13; we must be consistent with the laws we make in this Parliament.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is it in order for Members of Parliament to make a decision on a very important point and after a few months, they now turn around? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that we do not overstretch the issue of age. We are in a very litigious society now and people are going to argue that we are excluding them from that industry. So, do not go beyond the 25 years of age - Honourable members, the majority age is 21.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Matters of age are beginning to be very interesting in Parliament. In the future, Members of Parliament may no longer declare their age.

On powers to seize, destroy and confiscate equipment, in my opinion we must always look at being fair and just. It is not right for us to have a board with the powers to seize, confiscate as well as destroy because it will be a prosecutor, judge and an executioner. Let us leave court to have the final recourse in destruction. (Member timed out)

5.33
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I will start with a complaint. Our microphones on this side disturb us so much. The technicians should do something. 

Madam Speaker, for purposes of gender and equity, the board members should be drawn from all the four corners of the country. One person should come from the north, one from the east, another from the central, and one from the west. The rest can be added according to the relevant law, for purposes of equity. 

Secondly, there was a concern raised about the costs involved in managing due diligence. I thought that would easily be solved though appropriation in aid. You can even put it right in the law so that nobody will say that there is no money for due diligence. As we earn the money, we can use it to do more work and we shall progress well.

Finally, last time when we were amending the Constitution on the presidential age limit, we said that we can now bring related matters. These slotting machines are disturbing the nation; can’t we do away with them? If possible, advise appropriately because these machines have become a headache; people are being cheated. Can’t we have proper standards for these slot machines? If this issue can be brought here as part of related matters –(Member timed out)

5.35
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal in the Bill to reduce the age for betting from 25 to 18 years. The committee’s justification of maintaining the age at 25 years is based on a presumption that at 25 years a student should have finished higher education. However, there are students of 28 or 30 years. I am 32 years but I am pursing some course somewhere. We need to keep this age at 18 because even students at 25 years and above are in institutions of higher learning and really, at 18 years are you - (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As national leaders we should be logical enough to guide the young people. Is the honourable member in order to bog down the 25 years age limit aimed at protecting our young people who are getting lost in betting and failing to pursue their studies and developmental issues? I feel that as leaders of this nation, we should not mislead the young people by arguing that there was the age limit debate and the Constitution says 18 years. We have the powers to guide this nation as we deem right.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already ruled on that issue. When hon. Ariko was talking about increasing the age I said that we should leave it at 25 years. Please do not entice young people to go and gamble.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I was simply supporting the proposal in the Bill and it is reported here.

THE SPEAKER: The committee has said that the age should remain at 25. Can I now invite the minister to respond to the issues raised.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the chairperson and members of the committee to maintain the representatives from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Internal Affairs for close monitoring of the operations of the board. This is because the chairpersons and the other two representatives are from the private sector. We have also provided for boards before where we have representation from ministries. 

The reason for this was that the Ministry of Finance, being the mother ministry, should be represented and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is key in monitoring these operations - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Bahati. I note that you have a very good point, but we have to give you some background. Members of Parliament also used to be board members but they decided to opt out because they were being compromised. One would be a board member in an institution like Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL), for example, and if a report was brought here, they would come and defend it and do the wrong thing the other side. It was therefore decided that for the performance of the MPs to improve, they should be removed from boards. 

I will give you another example. From the Ministry of Finance, the Secretary to the Treasury can be a member of the boards of Uganda Revenue Authority, Bank of Uganda, National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), National Social Security Fund (NSSF) and many others. That means that each time there are board meetings in those organisations, such a person will be running here and there; when will he be in the office to do the work of the Secretary to the Treasury. 

I see the Minister for Security trying to advise me. Even in security, we have former security officers who are better than those who are working. Pick one and bring him on the board. If you want a finance officer, look for those who have retired and put them on the board. Remember the mistake we made at Bank of Uganda when we took Bagyenda to the Financial Intelligence Authority and now see what she has done; instead of working on intelligence she became - Honourable minister, agree with us.

5.42
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have seen many different Bills and the different boards that have been established in the country. Almost all these bodies that we establish have representatives from the relevant ministries that are connected to them for two main reasons. 

The first reason is that those areas, which are relevant to the ministries, need to have the necessary policy, Government programmes and arrangements in relation to that to be given information. Secondly, there is the issue of guidance; for example, in the case of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is in charge of the management of that exercise, they should be represented so that they guide the members of the board who are in charge of that area on a day-to-day basis. 

Look at all the boards that we have; you will find that even some of the boards have Government ex officio members. We cannot make an isolated area where we have a different approach for those reasons. You need Government to keep in line with whichever business you want to do. Government must have a hand in it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what was the rationale?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I agree that previously we have been enacting laws and putting representatives from MDAs on boards. However, we are shifting to a more efficient approach of doing things. This should be a precedent so that in future even when we are creating institutions and giving them boards, we give them representation that can enhance the efficiency of the boards. 

Madam Speaker, we do not want a situation where people oscillate between boards – You are in the Ministry of Finance, Uganda Revenue Authority, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority and everywhere just earning allowances. We want representatives on the board who are able to do work. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  supervises agencies together with the boards; so, when you say a minister is responsible for the National Lotteries and Gaming Board, it means that under him is a chain of staff he works with who supervise the work of the board. Therefore –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to understand the mischief you are trying to cure. What is the mischief you are trying to cure? You are saying that they move around and attend too many meetings but I would like to know what the mischief is in this board. What is the failing that you are trying to cure?

MR MUSASIZI: The first one is compromise and conflict of interest, and the second is efficiency. These people are very busy and never find time to concentrate on the work of the board.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, gaming and lotteries is a new area. I do not know whether we have the capacity everywhere. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we took that approach because one of the anti-corruption methods, which are applied by the standards, is that you cannot be part of a decision and you supervise and implement it. That is why in the Local Governments Act, councillors who supervise the tenderers at the district cannot be part of the tenderer. 

The relevant ministry supervises the board members; they are the people who appoint them. When decisions are made in meetings, they are part of the decisions and yet they supervise them. Who will you ask? That is conflict of interest because they will say that you were part of the decision. How will you deny it yet you supervise them? How will you tell them that they did something wrong yet you were there? Therefore, if you want to be effective, perfect and accurate, that is the way to go. You cannot be a supervisor and you become part of them and you are efficient.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the board we are talking about is supposed to sit four times a year. We would like to reject some of the contributions about issues to do with compromise because you do not compromise representation of a ministry. A person is compromised as an individual, whether from the private sector or Government. So, that should not arise. 

On the issue of efficiency, there are advantages of having somebody, for example from the Ministry of Internal Affairs or Ministry of Finance, planning and Economic Development on the board. There could be issues emerging and you get real time information instead of the board moving up and down. 

Madam Speaker, when we go to the committee, I will respond to the wave of the arguments from Members of Parliament during the committee session. However, I would like to also use this opportunity, if you allow me –

THE SPEAKER: Before we get there, would it help, honourable members, if we said that two of the seven persons must be experienced in the issue of security or finance? We can get a person who has retired. Would that help?

MR BAHATI: We can make that amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall look at it later.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I would like to let the House know that earlier on, I requested that I would lay some documents on the Table, and also when I stand here, I take Parliament very seriously. Therefore, whatever I am saying, I say so in good faith and with truth. I do not come here to tell lies to this House. I said that I signed a warrant –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you had the opportunity to raise your issues; the minister is answering so let him do so.

MR BAHATI: On 22 May 2018, in accordance with Section 22 of the Public Finance Act, I authorised the withdraw of funds from the Consolidated Fund - up to Shs 9.2 billion - to support the statutory revision expenditure for the Parliamentary Commission for the financial year 2017/2018. This is signed by David Bahati, the Minister of State for Planning and also holding the portfolio. It is here dated 22 May 2018 - yesterday. (Applause)

On 21 May 2018, I signed a warrant of Shs 319 billion to cater for supplementary development expenditure budget for various votes. A resolution from the Clerk of all the development expenditures, which were approved by Parliament, is attached here. 

On 22 May 2018, I also signed a warrant of Shs 140 billion supplementary recurrent expenditure for a number of votes. 

The documents are here and the process is moving; next week, the rains should be fine. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to put the record straight. The reason the minister has given for the Shs 9.2 billion is not to support the activities of the Parliamentary Commission; let us be very clear on this. This is a refund of the money, which was wrongly paid –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, you are a commissioner, please leave that issue. 

MS OGWAL: I am speaking as - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, you are a Commissioner leave that issue, please.

MS OGWAL: Okay –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 208 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 by deleting paragraph (b).

The justification is that given the nature of this business, it is prudent that the persons who should be permitted to engage in it should be persons of not less than 25 years of age.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the various laws of this country, especially on criminal responsibility, it is at 16 years old. When you are 16 and commit any offense, you are liable; that is the law.

In our Constitution, a child is somebody who is below 18 years. Look at our Constitution and our descriptions; a child is somebody who is 18 years and below. An adult is somebody who is above 18. What is the definition of an adult in our Constitution?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Get to the point. 

MR OKOT OGONG: I am qualifying that statement that we cannot now come here and legislate against various laws that we have because when you try to restrict at 25 years, you are doing it denying all those laws that we have passed before, for example, the law on criminal responsibility - that when you commit any offence, when you are 18 years, you are criminally liable.

Our Constitution again defines somebody who is an adult and who is able to take decisions -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ogong, do you take your children to the casino? I just want to know.

MR OKOT OGONG: First, Madam Chairperson, the issue is not about taking our children to the casino but putting systems that stop them from going to the casino. For instance, why do we allow – last time we agreed here in Parliament that we should not allow gaming in villages. That was a good decision; that we should withdraw those gaming machines in the villages and restrict them to municipalities. That was a good decision. Therefore, I do not support putting the age at 25, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 3 and substitute it with the following:

(3) Amendment of section 5 of the principal Act. Section 5 of the principal Act is amended by:
“
    a) Renumbering the current provision as sub section (1)

    b) By inserting immediately after paragraph (g), the following paragraph -

    h) To seize and confiscate unlicensed equipment or devices;

    i) To enter and search any premises where gaming and betting is taking place with a search warrant;

    j) To direct the closure of any non-compliant gaming or betting premises;

    k) To levy express fines; and

    l) To designate an inspector of the Board.

(2) The levy imposed under sub section (l), (k) shall be collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority and remitted to the Consolidated Fund. 

The justification is:
    1. To remove the irregularity of legislation ousting the jurisdiction of court;
    2. To mandate the board to enter and search the premises with a search warrant; 
    3. Collection of levies and fines is a mandate of the Uganda Revenue Authority and should be left with the authority; and
    4. To enable the board to appoint persons who are competent to be inspectors of the Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question -

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A search warrant cannot be construed as a court order. Therefore, where you want the power to seize and confiscate, then you must be armed with both - a search warrant for purposes of conducting a search and where you want to seize and confiscate, you must have the powers given to you by court. Therefore, we shall need two court documents.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean the gaming Board must first go to court to apply for the warrant?

MR MUGOYA: Why not? Because we have had a nasty experience within the fishing industry; there has been total abuse within the fishing industry. Therefore, I propose that they seek a court order, which can even be got ex parte.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, with due respect, I disagree with my colleague. There are instances where you will find an offense being committed in flagrante delicto and you do not need to first obtain a court order to arrest the culprit or take necessary action. 

Let us allow these statutory authorities some degree of power - yes get a search warrant and if you find an offence being committed, confiscate but do not destroy until you obtain a court order. Therefore, I support the committee position on this matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause -

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, mine was on the issue of the slot machines. I discussed this with the chairperson and we said that it is okay; they can stay. However, we need to find a way of zoning them. These machines should not be all over the country and villages. We should define where they should be situated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we made a law; I think what is missing is implementation. We said the slot machines could only be in the municipalities. They cannot be in the growth and trading centres. I think we should now get implementation.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 5 
(i) By deleting the proposed sub section (3b) and substituting the following:
“(3b) The Board shall approve a franchisee of a licensee before the licensee appoints the franchisee.
 (ii) By deleting the proposed sub section (3d) and substituting the following: 
(3d) The board shall bear the costs of conducting the due diligence.”

Justification

1. 	Due to the principle of principal and agency, there is no need for the board to approve the licensee. And 
2. 	To avoid compromising situations, it is prudent that the costs of conducting the due diligence be borne by the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.)
Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

The title

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause 4 immediately after clause 3 to read as follows; and the Bill shall be renumbered:
“4. Amendment of section 6 of the principal Act. Section 6 of the principal Act is amended- 
(i) By repealing sub section (1) and substituting the following: 

6. Composition of the Board. The Board shall consist of:
(a) Seven persons appointed by the minister not being public officers, who are knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to the administration of casinos, gaming, betting and private sector management; and
(b) 	The chief executive officer who is an ex-officio member. (ii) By repealing sub section (3) and substituting the following: “The minister shall appoint the chairperson from among the members appointed in subsection (1)(a).

The justification is that the ministry representatives should concentrate on their duties.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we just recently made this in 2016. We have been working well with the board. Lotteries and gaming is a bit sensitive institution that we risked just handing it over to people from outside 100 per cent. 

We suggest that we have the presence of Government on this board, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as supervising institutions. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is to monitor and inform the board instead of waiting because they sit only four times in a year. If there is anything, the board is guided properly. This is what we have been doing in so many boards. I agree that there is merit in having people from outside with experts but also that one is already provided for.

All we are saying is that out of the seven people, allow two people from Government – Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I think we should have that compromise. It is a win-win given that the board is just coming in. We are building this institution and it is a sensitive one. We need to have faith in our own Government that we mean well; that people who work for Government mean well and not everybody who works for Government is bad and not everybody who works for the Opposition is bad. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the minister because the board is responsible for policy. They are representing policy making organs of Government which are the ministries. There is need for interplay of ideas between the private sector and Government. 

We need that hybrid of ideas between the two, to run lotteries and gaming in the country. For us to divorce the board entirely to the private sector, who are the players themselves, there is a huge risk in this undertaking. I would like to agree with the minister that we should have at least two ministers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is he a member of the committee? I think his contribution should be expunged. Let us hear from non-members.

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am lucky to have been a member and Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I remember this Bill was the hardest to be passed here in Parliament. All the Members did not want us to legalise gaming and gambling. I sweated on the Floor but eventually, we passed the Bill. We put in so many controls well knowing that this industry has highly been used for money laundering. 

We said we need an eye of Government to monitor this industry. That is the assurance we gave Parliament that Government shall always monitor this industry including terrorism financing. Therefore, it needs hands on. 

When we say, we need only gaming and gambling in municipalities, we need a Government eye to be everywhere because this is a regulatory committee. It has nothing to do with managing gaming houses.

Madam Chairperson, I beg Members and I can see the excitement. However, what they are unfolding is near to disaster. I thank you.

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My view is that Government already has the opportunity to appoint because we are not also asking the private sector to appoint the board members. 

Therefore, the minister is responsible for appointing the chairperson. We also have the chief executive officer, is he not a public officer? This board is supposed to report, I suppose regularly to the ministry. At that stage, they are able to detect issues and respond accordingly.

I think you need to leave the ministerial officials out of this matter. They have been appointed to work, let them work; they will be reporting periodically.

MS MUTUUZO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to allay the fears of Members; there is no person from Government that can seat on two boards - (Interjections) - they seat on one board.

MR NANDALA-MAFAbBI: Madam Chairperson, I think the President of this country must be worried if his ministers are not informed. I will give you examples; the Secretary to the Treasury is a board member in URA and also in Bank of Uganda. Your Permanent Secretary is a board member of NSSF and he was supposed to become a board member of Umeme but he was stopped. Is that one board? These people are on many boards and the earlier we removed them, the better for the performance of this country.

Is the minister in order to lie to this House? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think she had forgotten about those areas. Would you like to add some information?

MS MUTUUZO: Permanent Secretaries, because of their explicit expertise, sometimes appear on a number of boards. For other members, we have surely made rules in Cabinet that they should appear at least on one. 

I think, with gaming being a new field where we need to protect our young generation, let us ensure that Government is there if Parliament is not there. 

At least let the Government’s eye be on the board so that we are held accountable when we hold responsibility. You cannot hold the Government accountable when we do not hold any responsibility. We shall cure more problems and solve more irregularities when Government is a member of this board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to make an appeal. It was this House that only two years ago demanded Government to regulate that industry. The Government brought that Bill just two years ago. Have we really tested it and seen it failing? 

Honourable members, I know you want to do oversight and we want to be transparent and so on but I think we still need Government in this industry. We can wean it out after 10 years after evaluating. (Interjections) 

Honourable members, let us not just use our powers to change. I know you want policy change but let us move steadily. Where are you going to get these people who are experienced in this industry? 

Let me give you what the proposal from the chairperson is. He says, “People knowledgeable and experienced in matters of administration of casinos, gaming, betting” – who are those? Just give me 10 names.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the people are there. I will give you an example – (Interjection) – exactly! This is the only opportunity to create jobs for other people. Recently, Kiiza retired in finance. He was the director, economic affairs; he is capable. There are police officers. Recently, they retired Kayihura; he can be one of those who can work as a board member (Laughter).

We have people who have retired who can do good work and these ones would put in more effort than the other ones who go to work and then come to the board. We would like to plead with you, Madam Chairperson, let us start with this one. We can amend here so it says, “This person must be competent in security, finance" – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, thank you. Thank you, hon. Nandala for giving way. The chairperson has suggested that let us handle this process gradually. We are saying that we are increasing the number of members of the board from five to seven. We have accepted that let us have five from the private sector and have two from Government. That is not asking for too much. However, for you to just handle everything in the same – once to the private sector. Let us move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me conclude like this – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Jim Muhwezi and Kayihura can be part of the five.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, my colleague said it clearly. Government appoints the board and it is the one which has powers to approve and to disapprove. If they discover that they are not performing the interest of Government, they are free to remove them and take those that they want.

If we search world over, it is only in Uganda where there must be civil servants on boards. They are talking about good governance. Good governance means that somebody working there does not have undue influence. If I am in the ministry of finance and I am on the desk which handles rotary and at the same time I am a member on the rotary board I go and do it there; I come and do it here. Where are the checks and balances?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a delicate industry. Why don’t you want Government in it? Why?

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When the law says it is the minister with the responsibility, I think the law has already taken care of Government interests. It is the minister who will choose the seven and knows who will represent which interest of Government. 

I think the committee has guided us very well; that previously, we were working and leaving civil servants to come here but the committee is saying that moving forward, it is important we start considering the supervisors of the board. I think it is really not that our interest is to chase Government out of this. As legislators, we are saying that let us have things done well and things done better. It is the minister who has chosen the seven members, since they are reporting to him, if any of them – (Interruption)

MR ARIKO: Thank you very much hon. Nsamba for giving way. I would like to give information. There is a tendency of us driving ourselves from the clear understanding of a civil servant or technocrat and Government. Government is constituted by all of us. A civil servant exists to serve all the people within the country. 

The information I would like to give hon. Nsamba is that I was in the civil service for 15 years before coming to serve in this role. What happens is that the officer that is always designated onto these boards is a person who sits at the line desk of that specific sector. That means that if it is my day to day responsibility to oversee the performance, to look at the operations and also look at the regulatory issues; when I go to the board, which is supposed to be a policy framework organ that guides me, I will end up covering up on the failures that I have.

I would like to give the last example. Madam Chair, I sit on the Committee on Natural Resources and the Rural Electrification Agency is one of those kinds of bodies that are having a challenge because the entire board is constituted by civil servants, who have line supervisory responsibility over the agency. The chairperson is the Permanent Secretary in Ministry in charge of Energy. The Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a member and the same applies to the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Local Government. 

At the end of the day, how do they realign their sector responsibilities vis-à-vis their board responsibilities at REA? It is the reason –(Member timed out.)

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, as hon. Kakooza’s microphone gets on –

MR KAKOOZA: It is on now. (Laughter) Madam Chairperson, when you read the reports of the Auditor-General, since we give him powers to audit, he has been highlighting the conflict of interest in decision making and supervisory roles. He said that if you become part of the decision and you supervise, you tend to cover what is decided because you will be defending, not reporting. You will keep quiet and compromise the management of that agency. 

If you want to get away of corruption, I can imagine – if you are part of decision making and you are going to report to your boss but you made a decision that you are going to do A, B, C, D, how will you report? You will get compromised. The best way to go about it - they have introduced anti-corruption methods where they say you cannot be part of the decision, you implement it and you become a supervisor. The best way is for you to become a supervisor and you do not become part of the decision.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the minister has stated that the board meets four times a year purposely for decision making and for policy making. That is not the only place where you can take the interest of Government. Other mechanisms are there under which you can take care of the sensitivities that the minister is trying to talk about. Thank you very much.

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the proposal that out of the seven members, let the two be from Government because we run a risk of leaving everything to the private sector, yet we are saying –(Interjections)- Allow me make my submission –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Allow the honourable member to contribute.

MS AKURUT: It is my proposal that out of the seven members, the two should be from Government. I imagine that the five are already representing the private sector and we are saying we need a representation of Government here -[MR NZOGHU: “Point of order.”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under what rule? (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Tell me the rule first. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to bring the Member to order. The Government privatised Uganda Post and Telecommunication and Government is again bringing it back from privatisation. This means that Government now wants to take over Uganda Telecom. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to feel that Government should have interest because then Government will not be represented yet, it is the Government that privatised and is now trying to bring it back but they have not even managed what they want to bring back? (Laughter)

Isn’t it really that, therefore, Ugandans will keep rotating without necessarily knowing where we are going and where we are coming from? Is she in order –(Laughter)- to make Ugandans rotate because she wants to keep the interest of Government, which Government is actually failing on some key areas?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not see what rule she violated. There is no order there. (Laughter)

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for ruling over that. I think the point has gone through. We were actually making an emphasis that we need a representation of Government in this board. Just having two members out of seven is not any big deal. After all, we would have had five members representing the private sector. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What is puzzling me is that if somebody was a public officer working in Government – army personnel, police officer or permanent secretary and he retired tomorrow, how do we tap into his expertise? Does he cease being a reputable Ugandan? I really thought that this board must be constituted by reputable people with experience and who can oversee. They should really be eminent people.

Therefore, by not being a salary earner in Government, does it make me an enemy of Government or somebody who cannot protect my Government? In so doing, I would buy the committee’s idea. Maybe we can only improve on the phrasing in describing the personalities and persons who will be there to sit on these boards. We should let our civil servants do their work and not compromise. 

Even in terms of resources, it is public knowledge that they earn a retainer when they sit on these boards. If somebody retired tomorrow, it is really equity. I do submit. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, no one has said a retired police officer cannot be appointed among the five from the private sector. He or she is from the private sector. No one is saying they should not serve.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I think we are about to anticipate that if we do not have the executive arm on this board, it is going to be inefficient yet there is no scientific proof that if the ministries of finance and internal affairs are not represented here the board will not perform. I am saying this because the police are everywhere in our villages but we have these casino machines in the villages. Therefore, where is this Government we are talking about? (Laughter) 

What exactly are we looking for? If we are looking for efficiency of this board, let us bring people who are experienced and have the expertise to contribute but not just getting people who are going to be earning and at the end of the day –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, for the information of my colleague, whom I thank for giving way, the most important power is the power of appointment and disappointment. Who holds the power to appoint the board members we are envisaging to be appointed in this law? It is none other than the minister. 

Therefore, if you say that “Government is absent” in this board, I actually fail to understand what “Government” you are talking about –(Interjections)- It cannot be information on information.
Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg Members that maybe we could, as hon. Nankabirwa has said, improve on the wording that “in appointing these members, the minister should bear in mind the qualifications like security, finance and the like” but Government is represented. Let us adopt the committee’s recommendation and report. It is for the good of this country.

MR OGUZU: Therefore, in a nutshell, there is no evidence to say that those two the minister proposes must be present for this board –

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are already there by the law. These are trying to remove them. They are not coming in. They are already there –[Member: “We remove them.”]No, Just casually like that?

Honourable members, we need to bring this matter to a close. I would like to advise that we move consciously in amending these laws. This law is two years old and no one has brought a report here to say that the law has failed because the Government is there. Let us observe what they are doing and add more Members but we should not dismantle the board when it has just served for two years. We do not have any evidence to show that it is not working and I think it is not right. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, with your guidance, I concede.

MS BETTY AOL: I would like to seek clarification. Madam Chairperson, the principle of board is for checks and balances. I am aware we have civil servants who are ex-officios and serve on the board. They are not Members of the board. If they become members of the board, they can compromise a lot of things. The clarification I am seeking is, what about the ex-officios who serve on the board? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to break because of our colleagues. However, I would like to ask the Minister of Security, hon. Tumwine, to make a small statement.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

6.36	
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine) Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Rule 54, I would like to make a personal statement in relation to the report that was presented to this House on 8th of this month by the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

In consultation with the Speaker and on her advice - I will summarise the statement and lay at the Table the detailed copy of the statement. First of all, I would like to explain to this House that I have explained to the Speaker about the mis-representation by the media, which caused some concern. On my part as a Christian, I have forgiven those who were maligning my name.

The statement I am making in summary is about Nommo Gallery, in relation to what the committee stated here; on rent, ownership, management, appropriations and my role as an undisputed artist, art lover and art promoter.  

On the issue of rent, I would like to explain that rent can only be collected where there is an owner with a property, agreement, tenants, amounts to be paid and the period or duration. 

On ownership, which is more important, I would like to first of all, say that the facts are – this is very important for Members to know because I have been in this Parliament for quite some time. I know how parliamentary committees work, how courts work, how our traditional justice systems works and the best expression of our traditional systems is a Luganda proverb, which says “Tosala gwa kawala nga tonawulira gwa kalenzi” which means that you do not judge a case without hearing both sides.

 I want to put it on record here that in the report –(Mr Niwagaba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Which rule?

MR NIWAGABA: I am relying on rule 51(2) and rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, Gen. Tumwine is giving what he termed a personal explanation under Rule 54. Unfortunately, he happens to be a minister and I believe as a minister, his statement under Rule 51(2), must with your leave, attract debate. Is it, therefore, not procedurally right that he furnishes the statement to Members to enable us appreciate it with the view to participate in debating this statement? That is the point of procedure I am raising.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member is a UPDF representative and in the report, he was named as Gen. Elly Tumwine, UPDF Representative not as the Minister of Security. So, he is making the statement under Rule 53. (Laughter)

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was giving the meaning of “Tosala gwa kawala nga tonawulira gwa kalenzi” that you do not judge a case without hearing both sides.

The committee reported that they have never invited me and that is a fact. They have never visited Nommo Gallery to find out what goes on there and that is a fact. This matter appeared in 2013 but I was never consulted even then. When I waited and they did not consult me, I penned off a lengthy statement in the press. You can refer to the statement in the Daily Monitor of 25 August 2013 to explain the background, ownership and relationship of my being at Nommo Gallery.

On the ownership, Madam Speaker – and peace be with all of you – Nommo Gallery was first established by artists under the Uganda Artists Association in 1963 on Kampala Road. In 1967, after their gallery was demolished for development of the city, in compensation, the President of Uganda then, Dr Apollo Milton Obote gave one of the houses of Nakasero State Lodge to the artists. That house was being occupied by Francis Odida, who was the leader of the cultural troupe and on November 15 1967, the Nommo Gallery was handed over to artists by the First Lady, Mrs Miria Obote. Present at that function was Henry Kyemba, the Minister of Culture then, Prof. Adonia Tiberondwa, Francis Odida, Prof. Francis Musango Gwa Ntamu who was an artist, Prof. Nagenda as an artist and it was celebrated with an opening of an exhibition and handed over to the artists.

Over the period, when the artists who were running it ran away because of bad Government, the Ministry of Culture appointed an overseer called Mr Buluma with little pay and only allowed as an overseer. When we returned after 1986 and established stability, the artists – I was then the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the National Cultural Centre – appointed a Director –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that the honourable Gen. Tumwine would be telling this House the issues that the media reported. This House, at this juncture, is not interested in the history of Nommo Gallery because the committee has that information anyway.

Therefore, the point of procedure that I am raising is, isn’t it procedurally right for the hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine to focus on the issues that the media reported and then this House can be able to know whether what the media reported is actually true or not? Is it procedurally right to proceed in the way that he is moving?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I have got a chance to listen to Gen. Elly Tumwine, the UPDF Representative in an interview he did with CBS Radio. I have the audio. I have a transcribed version of the same by the Institute of Languages, Makerere University. I have a translation from the Institute of Languages, Makerere University and I believe as he comes out to explain himself, this information is vital before a decision is taken.

In the interview, he is belittling Parliament. He is belittling the person of the Speaker and I think it would be to the benefit of this Parliament that I lay this at the Table. We can then have a decision made from an informed point of view.

I beg to lay a translation of text transcribed from an audio recording by the College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Centre for Language and Communication Services, Makerere University. It is a whole interview. I wanted to read verbatim part of it. It was about Nommo Gallery and this is what he says partially:

    1. “Muhakanizi and Bigirimana are thieves. I told them point blank in their faces.” 
    2. “The Speaker does not know but we fight and we do not fight for talking like Kadaga. For me, I fight until I die.”
    3. When he is asked, “So, will you not vacate?” he says, “And who will occupy it when I vacate it? If they constructed it, let them evict me.” He says, “I cannot vacate what belongs to me.” This was after a decision was taken by Parliament, ordering the General to vacate a Government facility. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this translation and the transcribed version of the same. (Applause) I also have an audio of the same interview done on the General by CBS radio. I beg to lay this one as well. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, in light of the revelations by hon. Kasibante and what he has laid on the Table and has even read part of it; it is now recorded on the Hansard. Is it not procedurally right that in accordance with Rule 54, since the explanation by the Member is raising controversial matters, that this not be taken as a personal explanation but he actually be called upon to give a statement that would attract debate? In addition, for that matter, that he is directed to prepare a written statement, circulate to all Members and we get time to debate it? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish what he was going to say and then we shall take a decision. He has a right to be heard.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Member of this Parliament, I have - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Gen. Muntu - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course Gen. Muntu is our President. I would like to thank Gen. Elly Tumwine who has been around for long. He was the first person to go to Luweero and shot bullets; he came, took power and led Ugandans very well. However, in the process, he has even taken property. The property he took is Nommo Gallery. 

As Parliament, we made a decision. Madam Speaker, the ruling you made was after Parliament had debated and we had passed. We passed the following and we were sober:

    i) Gen. Elly Tumwine should vacate Nommo Gallery.
    ii) He should pay arrears of rent because he was using property, which belongs to the people of Uganda, not Gen. Tumwine as a person. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for us to continue to change our decision, which needs 50 per cent of Members of Parliament to change. The ruling was for him to vacate. I would have expected this gentleman to come and say “I have vacated and I am going to pay”. Is it procedurally right to continue listening to a man who has been using our property for the last 32 years?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the rule of natural justice requires that people be heard. So, let us hear what he is saying and then, we shall take a decision on how to handle what he is saying.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without the truth, whatever else is said, you wake up very early but the truth remains. The truth I am saying is that after the artists brought a director to manage their Nommo Gallery- That one small house is the one I am referring to. There were efforts by some people, for example, National Housing Corporation in 1990 went behind our backs as artists and got a title. 

As artists, after realising that National Housing Corporation wanted to sell our Nommo Gallery, we collected affidavits from those who were leaving, appealed to the current President of Uganda and explained our situation that Nommo Gallery belongs to the Uganda Artists Association. The matter was considered and Nommo Gallery was returned to the artists.

As an anniversary, on 15 November 2004, His Excellency the President opened the exhibition and we thank him for returning Nommo Gallery to us. We, as the Uganda Artists Association –(Interjections)– I am the patron of the Uganda Artists Association since 1988. We thought that since there are people who might grab this House, let us put it –(Interjections)– You know whatever you caucus, the future belongs to the organised. We thought that the best way to protect Nommo Gallery from being taken by anybody interested was to put the title in the hands of the Uganda National Cultural Centre. The Uganda National Centre is a Board of Trustees, which was made only for the National Theatre according to the Act that established it.

To ensure our property is protected under a trust, which has a relationship with our profession, the performing artists in the National Theatre and the visual artists said we put this title in the name of the Uganda National Cultural Centre in 2004, after we had claimed it from National Housing Corporation.

That is how the Nommo Gallery comes to be run by the Uganda National Cultural Centre. Gen. Tumwine, as an artist and a patron of the Uganda Artists Association, constructed a temporary artistic installation on the wall of the Ministry of Defence using the five anthills that were in the compound of Nommo Gallery because there was not enough money to clear the compound in order to create something that would beautify Nommo Gallery and which artists could use. That installation is still there and it is what houses my office, a classroom for artists and an extra exhibition place. 

There has never been a discussion or an agreement for rent. There has never been any concern on how Gen. Tumwine would earn money. Now, on the issue of management, it is managed by a director as I told you who is now paid by the Uganda National Cultural Centre. It is not as it was alleged by the committee that my company took over the management. My company has never taken over the management. The Director of Nommo Gallery is the one who manages the gallery. 

In addition, we improvised and created a restaurant there; it is an artistic grass thatched restaurant to attract people to the Nommo Gallery. We have made a build, operate and transfer arrangement with the restaurant owners. We agreed they would operate it for ten years and after which, they would start paying rent. After ten years, they started paying Shs 3 million per month to the Uganda National Cultural Centre so that the centre can pay salaries to the director and his staff at Nommo Gallery.

I do not know of any money that has been appropriated- I would be interested to know how much money has been appropriated to Nommo Gallery year by year as alleged by the committee. I would want it established who receives that money and who uses it.  I would support the Speaker’s directive that before the budget is approved, that accountability is done. It is because Gen. Tumwine has never received any money appropriated by this Parliament; not a single shilling. Instead, Gen. Tumwine contributes to the promotion of art and culture of Uganda, not only at Nommo Gallery. 

It is Gen. Tumwine’s initiative that established the craft village at National Theatre, the car park which was being grabbed by KCCA and the restaurant behind the National Theatre to generate income to the Uganda National Cultural Centre which was not being supported enough by Government. It is that source of income of Gen. Tumwine as an artist that has sustained the National Theatre, Nommo Gallery and the promotion of art in Uganda. I have no regrets or apology for it and no rent to be paid. Take it from me; there is no ground for rent. The ownership belongs to the artists association and I have the obligation as their patron to defend that ownership for the promotion of the visual art.

I am re-informing the House and the public that if anybody wanted to know about Nommo Gallery, they would have consulted me. In 2013, when this matter came up, I went and explained to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development then, hon. Karooro, and I thought the matter had come to an end, only to hear it in the House on that day with those sweeping allegations.

With those explanations, I pray, Madam Speaker, as I explained to you that for you if anything - First of all, in relation to the recording, I made the interview. However, the media did not explain fully what I said. I said the Speaker was ignorant of the full facts of Nommo Gallery but the recording only said the Speaker is ignorant and stopped there. I explained to the Speaker that it was the purpose of the journalists to always create disharmony where there is harmony. 

I have never been indisciplined in this House where I have stayed longer than all of you. I respect the authorities that are in place. I am a freedom fighter, a patriot and I sacrifice and contribute where there is a good cause.  I do not steal money from Government. I have never taken a single shilling from Nommo Gallery and I am making a statement that all those making allegations to spear my hard won credit, responsibilities and honour in this country, I forgive you.

If this has caused any misunderstanding, let it be put behind. Those are the facts about Nommo galley. If anybody wants further truth, I am available and I have told, Madam Speaker, that if you find I have taken a shilling from Nommo galley, I will take myself to prison. It still belongs to the visual artists and not Tumwine.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Tumwine, you do not sufficiently respect this House because in 2013, this is the House that made a report on that issue. You did not come to this House to explain anything; instead, you went to the press and wrote a long letter to the press and not to this House where the issue arose. From - no you are a Member of this House. The resolutions are of this House. However, you went outside to the press and wrote. From there you went to the minister. You never came to this House to say there is this issue.

Similarly, this time where did you end up? CBS. That is where you ended up. Can’t you speak here? Anyway, honourable members, this matter has got to be brought to its final conclusion by establishing the facts surrounding the Nommo Galley.

Therefore, I am instructing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to listen to those recordings, examine the records, invite all the stakeholders so that we can get to the bottom of this issue. (Applause) Thank you very much.

Honourable members, as I said, we need to leave our friends to go for the Iftar. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.03.p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 May 2018 at 2.00.p.m.)
