




Thursday, 21 May 2020


Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have one issue to communicate. I have received a petition from graduates of Bachelor of Clinical Medicine and Community Health, informing me that since they qualified, they have not been employed yet they acquired loans under the Higher Education Students Financing Board.

They also said that despite them not having any job, the Higher Education Students Financing Board is asking them to repay the loans. They are, therefore, calling upon Parliament to assist them and see how Government can ensure that they are employed. They ask that the Allied Health Practitioners Council registers and licenses them, so that they can repay the Government loan. I will formally transmit it to the Ministry of Education and Sports. I will also send a copy to the Committee on Education and Sports so that they can take an interest in this issue.

Secondly, there were some matters of national interest. However, a number of them are related to COVID-19 and the Prime Minister will be coming here to give us an update on the COVID-19 situation. I believe that many of the questions can be responded to after the Prime Minister’s address. I will, therefore, only allow a few, which qualify as matters of national interest; otherwise several them are constituency matters. I wish you could ask questions so that they are answered. I will now ask hon. Nabayiga to use two minutes.

2.46
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest concerning Kalangala District that has been cut off due to the poor road network.

Madam Speaker, Kalangala District has three inlets and these are, Entebbe, Nikiwogo to Rutoboka in Kalangala, and Kasenyi, which goes to other inland Islands in Kyamuswa Constituency. However, as I talk, due to the outbreak of COVID-19, the passenger boats that used to dock at Kasenyi, no longer do so. The ship that used to ply Nakiwogo to Rutoboka was taken for maintenance. So, the district has been left with only one inlet and outlet at Bugoma and Masaka, respectively. Currently, there is a stretch of two kilometers, from Bukakata to Masaka, which is impassable.

Madam Speaker, people are now passing through the water. The women pull their clothes up, while the men also pull up their trousers to in order pass through - (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS NABAYIGA: It is it is happening and I witnessed this yesterday.  We are a dependent district; we depend on Masaka District for food and health services. Kalangala District does not have a hospital. So, all the people who have been refereed to other hospitals cannot go because the roads are impassable. We cannot also get food because the roads are impassable. 

Actually, the lorry drivers who insisted on going through that stretch had their trucks fall off the road and the drivers taken to the nearby health centre in critical condition. The contractor is on site. I wonder why that contractor does not focus on the bad stretch instead of concentrating on the stretch of the road near Nyendo, in Masaka. 

Therefore, my humble request is that the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure that this stretch is fixed to enable mobility to the islands.

I also request the Ministry of Health to consider Kalangala District. We have only two health centre IVs; at least one of the health centers should be upgraded to a hospital. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nabayiga. Is the minister of State for Works and Transport here? Can you handle the issue of Kalangala District? Islands districts have special problems.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, I am going to report on the contractor who is not doing the work properly. However, for the ferry to Kalangala District, we are hoping to get it back in the next few days. It is being worked on; it is the usual maintenance that was being done on it. Otherwise, it should be back in the next few days. I will report next week, if it would not have started working but they promised that the work would be finished in two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, two minutes.

2.52
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kassanda County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise is about the Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) registration.

Madam Speaker, when the President made a pronouncement that schools with candidate classes should prepare since they would be opening within two weeks, some schools immediately sent messages to parents to prepare to pay this money or to prepare the amount of money they are supposed to pay.

This would not be an issue if they were informing parents to pay the right amount. However, they are informing parents that they are going to charge them a lot of money that is not even required by UNEB. For example, for P.7 candidates, UNEB is supposed to charge Shs 34,500. However, some schools – I may even mention some – A school called Mother Manjeri sent a message to parents that they should prepare Shs 80,000. Hormisdallen in Kamwokya sent messages that parents should prepare Shs 150,000. Golden Berry asked parents to pay Shs 139,000. Mukono Junior School sent messages that parents should prepare Shs 70,000. Seeta Boarding, which is a school owned by our honourable minister Muyingo, sent messages that parents are supposed to pay Shs 400,000 – (Interjections) – Yes, Shs 400,000.

Madam Speaker, our parents or Ugandans have faced challenges with COVID-19. Most of their businesses have been affected; they are not working. We, who have schools, are even worried. One wonders who is going to rescue us as Ugandans if even the minister’s school is trying to charge Shs 400,000 as registration fees.

My prayers are;
1. The minister should make an official statement to Parliament on how much money Ugandans should pay nationally, not only for primary school but also other national examining bodies like the Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board (UBTEB) and the Uganda Nurses and Midwifery Examination Board (UNMEB) so that Ugandans get to know.

2. Lastly, some of us who have private schools are sometimes compelled not to chase students when they have not completed school fees payment, most especially candidates, to enable them sit for their exams and we demand later. This is the right time for the Government to say, we know that our parents have been affected and they should not even pay this money. Government should pay this money. 
Government should not stop students from registering because they have failed to pay this money. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Education and Sports is expected to come here and update us on the conditions for the schools reopening. There were issues raised yesterday but I want him to also address this issue for the candidate classes when he comes back next week.

MR MAKUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a point of information in relation to my colleague –

THE SPEAKER: To who?

MR MAKUMBI: The submission of hon. Mbwatekamwa. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleague has rightly said, all Ugandans have been affected by COVID-19. As far as schools are concerned, we cannot, as a country and Government, advise parents to pay school fees at this time.

When it comes to exams, it is terrible. We have been running a programme referred to as the Universal Secondary Education (USE). USE has been sponsored by Government but the Government is in the final stages of withdrawing this programme. Most of these private schools cannot now conduct exams; they cannot run educational programmes for Senior Four and Senior Six students because they cannot collect money from parents.

I propose to the ministry and Government that this time round, let the Government also show its sacrifice because all of us have sacrificed. If possible, this year, let Government extend USE sponsorship to the private schools, which have been running that programme because they will not be able to conduct exams and teach these S.4 and S.6 students effectively. You cannot demand school fees at this time.

2.58
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to raise this issue. I know you are the only person among many here who has travelled to the islands.

Some time back, the Government of Uganda passed a budget of around Shs 15 billion to construct the Sigulu Ferry. I recall very well that last year around August, the ferry was complete. I came and addressed this issue here and the islanders were very happy. 

Madam Speaker, I requested the Minister of Works and Transport to come and explain why the ferry that was completed sometime back but is still in Jinja, Masese. Last week, we registered very many deaths on the islands. Now that they are saying that schools are going to open for the candidate classes, our boats have been destroyed; we do not know how we are going to travel with these students.

It is my humble appeal, Madam Speaker - it is even very sad that the ferry is complete - I went and saw it and almost a year down the road, it still lies in Masese. The Government should tell us whether that ferry is for tourists in Masese or it is supposed to go and serve the people of Busoga, Namayingo District and Sigulu Islands.

I would like the minister to come and tell us why the ferry is in Masese and when it is going to serve the people of Bukooli Islands. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the issue of the Sigulu Ferry is something that excited so many Ugandans because the islands finally have transport. However, we would want to know from the minister why the ferry is sitting in Masese. Why isn’t it in Namayingo? Minister of Works?

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, I am going to make sure that the ferry gets back to where it should be. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, it has never started. It is still sitting in Masese and that is the problem. When will the ferry actually start?

MS KABATSI: It will definitely start before the end of the lockdown. (Laughter) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for allowing me to seek clarification from her. Everybody saw how the people of Namayingo celebrated and praised the NRM Government when that ferry came. It is very unfortunate that after the ferry arrived, it was withdrawn and put at the landing site where it was not expected. 

The clarification I seek from the minister is, why was the ferry that once landed at Namayingo Landing Site pushed to Masese Landing Site where they had not expected it? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to be a bit more serious. The ferry being in Masese has nothing to do with the lockdown. We would want to know why the ferry never commenced. It was budgeted for and money was appropriated for it in this House. We were very excited when we heard it had been constructed. Therefore, we want to know why it has not gone to work in Namayingo. If you are not ready, come back with a better answer.

MS KABATSI: Madam Speaker, I will come back next week and inform you why. 

3.03
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance is about the fate of 124 Ugandans including Mr Sam Mugumya, who have been in imprisonment in Ndolo Prison in the Democratic Republic of Congo whose lives are under threat due to prison congestion and detected cases of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, the current report reviewed by the Minister of Health in the Government of DRC indicates that 41 cases of COVID-19 have been detected in the prison and the country has registered 572 cases. So far, five people have died from Ndolo Prison.

I pray that the 124 Ugandans jailed in Ndolo Prison in DRC be repatriated to their home country for quarantine care to save their lives. We know that there has been a mutual understanding between the Government of Uganda and the Government of DRC but since January, the whole process has been quiet. Therefore, we want to get information from the Government on how far they have gone. 

Secondly, I pray that the 124 Ugandans who are in Ndolo Prison should access justice. They have been in prison for the last six years and they have never been arraigned before the courts of law and the Government here is quiet. 

Lastly, we request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs to urgently take up this matter so that we can rescue our people who are suffering in the neighbouring country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is slightly more complicated. I do not know whether we have an extradition treaty, or whether the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Act we passed here covers DRC. In any event, I think the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should come and update the House about the fate of the 124 Ugandans who are in the Ndolo Prison in DRC. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should also explain to us, within a fortnight, whether there are any arrangements for return of prisoners to Uganda. 

3.07
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance relating to our children in Northern Uganda suffering from Nodding Disease Syndrome. I have been home for the last two weeks and this lockdown has been one of the most difficult times in the lives of our children suffering from Nodding Disease. 

I represent a constituency with the most numbers of children with Nodding Disease. We know that it is on record that we have 3,162 children with Nodding Disease both in Lango Sub-region and Acholi Sub-region but in Pader alone, we have 2,118 children suffering from Nodding Disease. I would like to report to this House, sadly, that we have lost most of these children during the lockdown because they could not access food. They have been suffering from hunger. 

We had NGOs that used to donate to these children but they have left. We had Good Samaritans that used to travel from all over Northern Uganda, Kampala and all over Uganda but now they cannot travel. As a result, we lost more than 500 of these children.

Madam Speaker, it is my humble request – if I can recall, one or two months ago during debate in this House, hon. Asamo said very clearly that we should consider vulnerable groups of people as we go ahead to give food to people in Kampala and Wakiso. I think no one took that as important. If you go to some places in Uganda, people are suffering. I saw it myself; it is a painful thing. 

I am asking Government, if they still do care, to go to the North. In Aruu North, it is not that I wanted to act as a purchasing officer; I will put this money back but I am asking the Government to go and save these children in the North. They are dying. Let them at least die in a decent way. We remain grateful. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we ask the Minister of Health to give us an update on the situation of children with Nodding Disease Syndrome in Northern Uganda and what plans they have to support them? We need an answer by Thursday next week. 

3.11
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand before you here with a very heavy heart. On behalf of the people of Pakwach, we rose this morning to a very sad situation. The land wrangle between the people of Jonam who live across the Nile in Nwoya District did not just start yesterday. The Parliament before and the one I am in have heard these issues. 

Madam Speaker, I personally brought this issue to you and I know how far you had gone to help us. We had amicably resolved this issue with our brothers and sisters across the Nile. However, on Monday, a group of people went with soldiers and started putting mark stones and burnt three huts. This morning, I was called by the LCI chairman of Obila Village in Nwoya District, telling me that there were about six soldiers who were shooting, burning huts and looting. 

I took it up and tried to reach my RDC and Gen. Otema and I told them that there was a problem in Nwoya and people were going to die. Hardly after one hour, Gen. Otema promised me that he would call the DPC. Later, I called him again and gave him the telephone contact of the LCI chairman - who talked to him and told him that soldiers were increasing in number and burning huts.

The last time I talked to the LCI chairman, 20 huts had been burnt. After one hour, I was called - when I was in a committee meeting - and told that we had lost three people. The UPDF soldiers had shot dead three people from Pakwach and the bodies are in the detach in Obila village in Nwoya.

Five more people were injured and one of them is in the detach and four were rushed to Pakwach Health Centre IV. We, in Pakwach, have not heard of any war in Uganda and have not heard of any rebel activity going on. Therefore, we believe that these are the UPDF and the LCI chairman is even able to call them by names. One is a detach commander called Mukiga and another one is Okol Omot.

Madam Speaker, we are Ugandans like any other person in Uganda. We wonder why our people are suffering at the hands of the Uganda army. These people were dressed in UPDF uniform and when I talked to Gen. Otema, I told him people would die - and they have died. Then he told me that he was getting in touch with the army commander in Gulu.

Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MR ONGIERTHO: Thank you, hon. Avur, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am equally disheartened because first, the Jonam people now believe that this issue is beyond the people whose names have ever been mentioned here. There must be bigger people who are only fronting these guys whose names are being mentioned.

And if there were no bigger people or bigger forces, why would it be that the previous Parliaments - particularly in the Eighth and Ninth - these issues were there and we have also raised these issues in this 10th Parliament and nothing has happened?

Secondly, the Jonam people also believe that whereas on their side they are looking at this as a matter of farmland, it seems there are people, particularly the so-called big people, who know the other potential there. They even openly speak about the potential for oil discovery there. That is why these people are chasing our people away.

Madam Speaker, from the time you had indicated that you will come and support us to resolve the matter, some of these people have been mocking us and saying, “Now bring your Speaker to protect you.” We still request that you need to find time and help us.

Finally, as I end, we would like to know, as Jonam people, who can help and protect us, if in this Parliament, we cannot be protected and helped? If even the Government cannot help us, we would like to know who will protect us. Thank you.

MS AVUR: Just to conclude. Madam Speaker, in one of the presidential directives during this COVID-19, he said farmers should go about with their work and many of these people that were shot today, injured and their huts burnt, are farmers who have been going about their work. They have crops in the garden and have harvested some. 

Madam Speaker, we wonder; is this to frustrate our people from going on with their work so that they can die of hunger – let alone the bullets we have received today. I would like to appeal that we are still part of this country. Why has Government not come to our rescue to-date even after raising this issue over and over again? (Interruption)

MR GUMA: Madam Speaker, the army has 10 representatives in this House; some of them extremely senior. Hon. Gen. Pecos Kutesa, hon. Gen. Ivan Koreta and others and even the Minister of Security.

Honourable members, this army has been here for more than three decades - from 1986. Why don’t you ask these Generals who are our colleagues to help you – (Interjection) – listen; do not yell at me. Let me make my point then you will come and make yours. 

Why don’t you engage the Generals who are members of the House who can help you to access the Chief of Defense Forces and even talk to the division commander of the area so that you sort our this issue? Must you come here on the microphone? There are several avenues.

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for your protection. That is another ex-general who is threatening me. Today morning I was told that if I use that route to Pakwach, I will be gunned down and here is another ex-general threatening me on the Floor of Parliament. I need to be protected.

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. This is something I raised last week regarding the excessive use of force by soldiers. As I speak, I have just received a message from a place called Kololo Teagoro where UPDF/UWA is chasing people from their gardens and houses and there is a lot of confusion right now. And it is the UPDF who are doing this.

Therefore, we need answers; our people are suffering. They are adhering to the guidelines of the President of staying home but how sure are we that these soldiers are safe and are not bringing disease to our people? This is the information I wanted to bring up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is wrong for one to say that if you want to see the army commander, you have to go through one of the army representatives. The members of Parliament are here and they listen but take no action.

Honourable members, first, this is a serious issue because we are supposed to be in lockdown. There is supposed to be no evictions or displacements but apparently, it is now a bonanza. I would like to ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to first of all examine the situation between Pakwach and Nwoya and give us a report on Tuesday about what is happening in this area. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that the issues related to COVID-19 will be handled by the Prime Minister. Let us have the first reading.

3.22
Mr Michael mawanda (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the first time. It is Bill No.12. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill is not accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications but I can report that the Clerk to Parliament did communicate to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 10 February 2020 that after the expiry of the 60 days as per the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is deemed to have been issued. I am, therefore, proceeding against that rule and I beg to move. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Bill satisfies the conditions required for first reading. It is now sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

Ministerial statement ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS

3.23
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister has been in the field. He requests that he makes his statement next week.

Mr katusabe: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of devastating floods in Kasese is a matter of life and death. Right now, and as you might have watched in a video clip transmitted by Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), the people are now in my constituency, Bukonjo County West, Kitolhu, Ihandiro and Nyakiyumbo. Five people were covered by mudslides. Three rivers burst the banks and 14 people were swept away. Right now, the police and the citizens are on the search to recover the 14 bodies.

This does not only affect my community but the entire district. It cannot be business as usual. We want a comprehensive response from Government. What is it going to do between now and tomorrow because we do not know what the weather again has for this community?

Mr nzoghu: Madam Speaker, I have just returned from Kasese this afternoon. I can practically tell you that the situation is terrible. There are more than 10 camps for people who have been displaced. So many areas have been cut off in terms of communication and people cannot even access facilities like health centres. People do not have sources of livelihood like food, particularly in the sub-counties of Maliba, Bugoye and Nyamugasane in Kisinga and Kyarumba.

Yesterday, the President was in Kasese and there was some sense of hope that possibly something positive would be communicated today. The question that I would like to ask is, why is this crisis in Kasese and Bundibugyo being treated as if it is a normal situation?

Mr gafabusa: Madam Speaker, I rise to speak with a heavy heart because this matter has been on the Order Paper for some days. It was there on Tuesday, yesterday and today and we expected the minister.

Today is exactly 14 days since we had this phase of ravaging floods in Bundibugyo and Kasese. Today, the people who were affected by River Lamia at the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)are staying in classrooms at some primary school. There are over 50 households, which when the river changed its course, were left on the side of DRC. They are not allowed by the Congolese to access their gardens because the Congolese believe that the river is the boundary. 

We expected the minister to come and tell us how all these situations are being managed. As representatives of the people, we are under pressure. What is the Government doing? 

Like my colleague said, yesterday His Excellency, the President, was in Kasese but still the people of Bundibugyo do not know what is happening. Maybe the ones of Kasese got an answer from the President. When are we getting a message of hope from Government? Maybe now that the Prime Minister is here – and given that the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is not here - he should probably tell us. Today, we should have an answer that we will give to our people. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are glad you have come. The issue of Kasese and Bundibugyo is extremely painful because everyday, the Members from there keep seeking answers. I hope you can give them some comfort.

3.29
The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the tragedy that befell the people of Kasese, Bundibugyo and by the way, many other areas of the country, is very well known to us. 

As colleagues have rightly said, His Excellency, the President, yesterday visited some of the devastated areas in Kasese and both the responsible senior minister and the minister of state have been in the area. They also accompanied the President.

The Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Musa Ecweru was there immediately after that tragedy occurred. I have met the honourable members of Parliament from Kasese on that subject matter. They know that some immediate relief, in terms of food, was made available. It may not be adequate but this is a quick resuscitation effort by Government.

Therefore, a statement will come. By the way, what is critical is not the statement but the content and actions on the ground being done. This statement by the honourable minister will take into account what has happened, the visit of His Excellency, the President, and the more comprehensive actions that Government is taking over this very serious matter and over what the country has suffered from for the last two or three weeks.

A statement will come next week. Some of the ministers were travelling today from Kasese. Give them time to arrive, write their statement and come to present it. Tuesday would be the most logical day when this statement will be made by Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Ministerial statement ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO ENFORCE ADHERENCE TO BUILDING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS ON THE NUMEROUS ACCIDENTS OCCURRING AT BUILDING SITES, STATUS OF COMPENSATION OF AFFECTED FAMILIES AND STEPS TAKEN TO STEM THE REOCCURRENCE OF SUCH ACCIDENTS

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, the Building Control Act, 2013 came into action in 2018. Last year, the Building and Construction Board came into existence with its committees. Part of their functions is to monitor building developments to ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities, for which the public is to have access, caters for persons with disabilities. Many other sections are to be worked on by this Board and the communities. 

However, due to this lockdown, nobody is able to move and criminals are now quickly putting up buildings and some of them are getting into problems. We can speak with confidence after lockdown because that is when this Board will take control of their work – (Interruption) 

MS MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Honourable minister, your recent Circular No. 1 of 2020, dated 11 May 2020, summarises the problems as low levels of compliance and building laws and regulations. 

Honourable minister, in place we have the Building Contract Act 2013, the National Building Codes, 2019 – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister was making a statement and you have not allowed her to finish. 

MS MBABAZI: I am giving her clarification – 

THE SPEAKER: No, let the minister finish her statement and then you can come in. Minister, please complete your statement.

MS KABATSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The National Building Review Board with its committees was appointed last year. Honourable members, what I am trying to say is, with the lockdown, the Board cannot operate and the committees cannot move around to check on what is happening. 

Therefore, if there are buildings coming up in a rush and being put up by some criminals, we must wait and have our engineers in place. After the lockdown, we can deal with these issues. Members, I pray that you genuinely look at the problem we are in – (Interruption) 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the minister to mention the word “criminal” is something very big. I imagine how our Government in power with police and LDUs can see criminals committing offences and they sit down to wait for COVID-19 to end. A fully-fledged Government is watching criminals doing dubious activities.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is it in order for a minister to come here and become mean with facts and say, they cannot deal with criminals at this time? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the Ministry of Works and Transport closed? 

MS KABATSI: We are working with skeleton staff; we are not fully at work. Madam Speaker, most of our workers do not have a way of coming to work until we are done with the lockdown – (Interruption) 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of concern here is the way the minister is making us more scared than we thought. The minister should assure us that using the different systems within the Government, we can be able to work despite the challenges at hand. This is because we are not sure when COVID-19 is going away; it might take a year. 

Therefore, going by her statement, it means that they are waiting until after COVID-19, which also means that we are in trouble. We need more assurance from my minister on how best Government is going to use the various possible means, through our systems, to make sure that we put a stop to the culprits that are going to lead us into trouble. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, don’t you consider that collapsing buildings constitute an emergency for which your ministry should take action, arrange for the engineers to move and go to the sites? Is it not an emergency, in your view? Do you want to wait until lockdown has ended? 

MS KABATSI: Madam Speaker, these are very technical things, which need all the engineers to go and check on these collapsing buildings and the committees – (Interruption) 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have sat down and I think this is the third time you are picking the State Minister of Works and Transport to respond and the House will attest to this; it looks like our State Minister of Works and Transport is not in charge of her ministry. 

This is not the first time that these houses are collapsing because there have been several of them; numerous houses and buildings collapsing. We expected her to tell us the owners of the buildings, the number of people that have died and the measures they are taking as a ministry and she is talking of a lockdown. 

Madam Speaker, the ministry is working fully and I wonder what she is trying to say. I think another minister should come and answer this question if she is not ably ready to answer. Thank you.  

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the State Minister of Works and Transport, through her submission, in front of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, demonstrates the capacity and level of ministers that we have in this country.

Prime Minister, Ndugu Rugunda, you have built your good profile but I think whenever the State Minister of Works and Transport is called here, she is off topic. For example, today she is totally off topic. Honourable minister, I am sorry that you are embarrassing your boss when you can stand in front of the august House, the cream of leadership of Uganda and you call investors, who are building houses and creating jobs in our country, criminals. It is a shame!

Madam Speaker, I therefore say that we are not proceeding well because the minister does not understand why she is standing in front of the august House. With this, the minister must take political responsibility for the people who died because she does not know what she is doing in her docket.

THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from the former Minister of Works.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect what the minister is saying but I totally disagree with it - I am sorry. Madam Speaker, she is talking about things that are not on the ground. For example, the committee she is talking about - in Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), there is only one building inspector in a division. That automatically cannot work -(Interjection) - I worked in this thing and I know it. 

I was there for over a decade but no single building collapsed in Kampala -(Interjection)- yes. I know some of you do not know the boundary of Kampala well; things happen in Namasuba and you think they are in Kampala. However, in the boundaries of Kampala, when I was in charge, no single building collapsed.

Madam Speaker, I suggest and advise my colleague the minister to ask for permission to come back later and give a reasonable and sensible response to this because what she is saying is totally of no use to us here. She is just wasting our time. Thank you.

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem we have is that we take everything to be an emergency. The collapse of buildings in this country is not happening for the first time.

Therefore, for the honourable minister to come here and tell us that after the lockdown, we are going to find solutions - we have all these regulations in place; what measures have you put in place to make sure that people follow these regulations so that they do not die? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I am not the minister responsible for that sector, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, I was concerned at the collapse of a number of buildings and I did take an initiative to interact with the Executive Secretary of the Building Control Board.

Madam Speaker, during that interaction, the lady told me that whereas the board was established a year ago, the funding they have is only meant for their wages. They do not have funds for operations.

I would like to thank this Parliament for one reason, that when we were considering the Appropriation Bill for the next financial year, we made provision for Shs 6 billion to assist the board to operationalise their activities so that in the future we do not have buildings collapsing and all these accidents happening. I thought I should make that point, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Honourable minister, I think if your engineers are in their homes, you have the capacity to send them stickers so that they can come, meet you, and help you to deal with this situation. Please do that and come back next week.  Let me invite now item 4(4).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON WEEKLY UPDATES ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON COVID- 19

3.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, let me update you on the most talked about subject matter and rightly so by society, Parliament and the world.

The burden of COVID- 19 continues to rise globally, with over five million confirmed cases and 330,000 deaths being reported globally, as of 20 May 2020.

In Uganda, as of yesterday, we had 264 confirmed positive cases, majority of whom are truck drivers from the neighbouring countries. 

As the Hon Minister of Health has been regularly informing this House and the country, out of the 264, positive people, the truck drivers form the majority, that is 191 (72.3 per cent), while travellers, contacts and alerts constitute only 73 (27.7 per cent).

Madam Speaker, because of the high risk that truck drivers are posing to the control of the pandemic, we have had to take additional measures to allow into the country only those truck drivers who test negative. We have also instituted rapid testing measures at various border points to fast track the process.

To-date, 65 patients have fully recovered from COVID-19 and have been discharged from various hospitals. Currently, there are 80 COVID-19 active cases admitted at various hospitals across the country, and all are in stable condition. Fortunately, the country has not had any COVID-19 death.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that since 18 March 2020, H.E. President Yoweri Museveni announced 35 directives and guidelines aimed at preventing and controlling the spread of COVID-19 in the country.

The President later announced a total lockdown of the country effective 01 April 2020. The purpose of the lockdown was to suppress transmission by reducing the number of positive persons who were not detected.

The science behind a lockdown is to ensure that each confirmed person infects less than one person - on average. This interrupts the spread of the pandemic, also known as “flattening the curve” and controls community transmission.

I am pleased to inform this august House and the country at large that the lockdown measures have served and continue to serve the above objective. Our curve remains relatively flat, and if you exclude the cases of truck drivers, it becomes even flatter.

I would like to thank our frontline health workers for the tremendous work they are doing to track, test and manage the cases. I thank the law enforcement officers for ensuring public adherence to the directives and guidelines. I also want to thank the public for exhibiting a high level of compliance. The results we are witnessing in this fight are a collective function of very many stakeholders. These - apart from those I mentioned - include religious and cultural leaders, the Red Cross and other civil society organisations, the media, development partners and many others.

I would like to also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the strategic leadership in this fight. I also want to thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of this august House, for the different roles you have played to support this fight. By the way, the struggle continues. 

Let me also thank members of the National Taskforce on COVID-19, the district taskforces and the members of the National Response Fund for COVID-19, for the commendable work they are doing.

During the lockdown period, Government has prepared 3,200 isolation beds and 378 Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds to handle the pandemic at the current rate of spread. The general breakdown of the above assets that have been assembled is as follows:

    1. Mulago National Specialised Hospital has 900 beds, 36 adult and 27 paediatric ICU beds. 
    2. The Mulago Women and Neonatal Hospital has 35 adult and 30 paediatric ICU beds. 
    3. Sixteen regional referral hospitals each have prepared 30 isolation beds giving a total of 480 beds. 
    4. Each regional referral hospital is also being equipped with l0 ICU beds. 
    5. Fifty general hospitals will each provide 20 isolation beds. 
    6. One hundred sixty-four (164) health centres IV will each provide five isolation beds.

In the lockdown period, Government has also enhanced the capacity of the district taskforces to provide leadership and carry out surveillance and public awareness to ensure that the presidential directives and guidelines are adhered to.

In addition, in order to build capacity, the Ministry of Health conducted an emergency recruitment of an additional 447 staff to support the response in the districts. Government is also providing personal protective equipment for health workers. They may not have reached everywhere but it is a process going on.

We have also intensified identification of imported cases through the land border crossing for both inbound truck drivers and the illegal crossings across porous borders, like people walking from neighbouring countries.

Government is undertaking a rapid assessment to determine the possibility of community transmission, which is a much more serious phase of this pandemic. 

During this period, His Excellency the President has initiated special support for Ugandan scientists to enable them provide local solutions in the areas of developing a vaccine, diagnostics and drugs and treatment. In addition, we salute Ugandan entrepreneurs who are locally producing items that are needed in control of this pandemic, especially now masks, protective clothing for health workers and many other things are locally being produced, reducing our dependency on imported things. We can actually - with political and administrative support - produce many of these items. Sanitisers are now being exported from Uganda to a number of neighbouring countries.

Regarding funding for the COVID-19 response, I would like to thank Parliament for passing the supplementary budget for this exercise. Different agencies of Government are currently utilising these resources and are expected to provide full accountability for these funds.

Regarding provision of relief support to individuals and families most adversely affected by the lockdown measures, I am pleased to inform you that Government has so far delivered food to over 1.5 million people in Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono, and hospitals and orphanages across the country - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, there may be gaps but we will be more than happy to receive feedback so that these gaps can be closed.

We had hoped and planned to have this exercise completed much faster but initial logistical, procurement and distribution challenges caused some delays. 

I would like to state that the provision of relief food has saved lives for very many people because the reports we are receiving are positive. I thank all the people who are involved in this exercise for the good work they have done.

Madam Speaker, some concerns have been raised in some circles regarding the quality of the food relief that is being distributed. I would like to inform this august House that Government takes this issue very seriously. It was precisely for this reason that Uganda National Bureau of Standards was brought on board to test and certify food before Government procures it from the suppliers to ensure it is indeed fit for human consumption. 

Where reports and allegations of poor quality food supplies have been received, Government will and, in a number of cases, is already investigating such reports.

Madam Speaker, on 8 April 2020, His Excellency, the President Yoweri Museveni announced the establishment of the National Response Fund to Covid-19. It is led, at the political level, by hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, the Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister. The team, which comprises respected Ugandans, is chaired by Mr Emmanuel Katongole, the Chairman of Cipla Quality Chemicals Limited, which you know is based at Luzira. 

To-date, the Fund has received donations worth Shs 28 billion both in cash and in kind. The in-kind contributions include assorted food items, medical supplies and some non-food items. The target of the Fund is to raise Shs 170 billion and ten motor vehicles for each district.

In addition, 65 vehicles have so far been donated to the Fund, with 45 of these already deployed in various districts. For clarity, the breakdown of the donations so far made is as follows:
    1. Cash Donations - Shs 15 billion;
    2. Goods in kind - Shs 13 billion; and
    3. Vehicles – 65. 
The assorted food items have been utilised to respond to distress calls from different groups in dire need, including hospitals, orphanage homes and homesteads while medical supplies have been delivered to the Ministry of Health for distribution across the country. His Excellency, the President, has guided that he will soon meet the Fund committee to agree on the utilisation of the funds so far collected. 

The principal focus is strengthening the capacity of health systems and the health sector. The Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister will, at an appropriate time, present to this august House, a more detailed statement on the Fund.

Madam Speaker, I want to salute this team for mobilising Ugandans and all people of goodwill to respond to the President's call to support the fight against Covid-19.

I would like to thank Ugandans and friends of Uganda for the generosity they are showing to this fundraising drive. This drive has demonstrated the solidarity of Ugandans for a cause that unites all of us. I salute all those who have made donations and appeal to many more to support this just cause.

I would like to assure all Ugandans that the donations will be put to the right cause. Every shilling will be accounted for and information will be readily available to the public.

Madam Speaker, on the matter of Ugandans stuck and stressed abroad in different countries due to the global lockdown, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is working with our missions abroad to explore ways of handling this issue. The modalities are complex because of the global lockdown and closure of many airports and airlines around the world. A detailed presentation on this matter will be made to this august House by the responsible minister.

As His Excellency, the President, announced two days ago, we are continuing to move towards a cautious easing of the lockdown to enable Ugandans go back to work, while observing the key preventive measures such as hand-washing with soap, maintaining social distance, avoiding crowded places and the compulsory wearing of face masks and sanitising.

As the President communicated, the move to manufacture face masks is now on course and there is commitment to provide Ugandans above the age of six with masks. Many companies – small and big – women’s groups and youth groups are now deployed and busy manufacturing these masks.

Madam Speaker, to ease the procurement process and requirements, it has been agreed that the Ministry of Health provides guidelines on the approved face masks, so that Ugandans can buy their own face masks from manufacturers and people who are selling the authorised ones. Once individuals have their approved masks, they can start using private vehicles, effective 26 May 2020, as His Excellency, the President has already announced. 

The driving of private vehicles shall follow the other standards and guidelines, including not being more than three people in a vehicle. The reference on the use of private vehicles excludes the border districts for reasons already given out by His Excellency, the President.

On education, the responsible ministry, working with the Ministry of Health, is developing standard operating procedures to guide the next steps, so that when our children in finalist classes resume school, they are properly guided on how to travel and behave.

As the President communicated, easing of public transport will come at a later stage on 4 June 2020. We will use this period to continue monitoring the situation.

Madam Speaker, as we look forward to the post-lockdown period, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come to this august House to make a statement on the economy. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again for your continued support in this fight. I would like to thank the honourable members of the House as well. We are making good progress, let us keep up this momentum. Together, we will defeat COVID-19 and all its effects. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister, for that update on the COVID-19 situation. We shall have a few comments. However, yesterday, a matter was raised here that the people on the landing sites from Ntoroko up to Pakwach have been asked to leave tonight. First of all, there is curfew tonight and we also do not know where they are going.

Therefore, we would like to appeal to you to halt that exercise of forcing people to move at night during curfew to a place we do not know. We are hoping for a ministerial statement next week but the people have been asked to leave today in the evening. I do not know how they can move during the curfew and where they are going.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this must be in connection with floods in certain areas or refugees. Let us get more information and then we will answer that matter –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Twinamasiko, who raised the matter, is here. 

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, Government made a decision to displace 68 villages right from Ntoroko up to Pakwach; those people who stay near the landing sites. The reason the Government gives for the displacement is that they are trying to avoid cross border intrusion from the Congolese who enter Uganda along Lake Albert. 

Government gave an ultimatum of 48 hours, which are ending tonight. As we talk, soldiers have already been deployed along Lake Albert to begin the operation tonight. People have nowhere to go. There is no package arranged to help them as they are being displaced. There is no arrangement, we are all in darkness. These are villages, which exist legally with stamps. They have local council leadership and Government institutions, including schools and health centres. 

Yesterday, I prayed that Government halts this operation until there is a clear position given and a detailed explanation regarding the displacement of people. The reason Government gave is that they are stopping Congolese from entering Uganda because of the coronavirus pandemic, and yet Government could actually deploy soldiers to guard the borders. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, that is the situation. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is an important matter that requires better understanding and more information to see where this directive came from and its rationale. This is a matter we are taking seriously and we are going to take appropriate measures depending on what we find out. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the Prime Minister is on the matter my colleague raised. The member said that these people are going to be displaced this evening. We appreciate that the Prime Minister may not have adequate information and therefore, he is going to get information and probably, he will guide us on how to go about it. However, how about the imminent displacement of today? I would have expected the Prime Minister to tell us about the imminent displacement. Are you stopping that displacement as you get more information on where the orders came from? Where are the people who are going to be displaced today going? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Also, why should they be evicted during the curfew? Where are they being taken during the curfew? 

4.15
MS JESCA ABABIKU(NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the update. I have an inquiry on the issue of the border districts. We got a clear instruction that even when the lockdown is fairly lifted in other parts of the country, my district shall be under total lockdown. Is there special consideration for us? If I remember well, this total lockdown is going to affect 40 districts in this country.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister talked about guidelines on masks, which are going to come out. Mr Prime Minister, many initiatives have taken off. People are already producing masks by injecting in the little they have. I implore you to handle this very fast so that people do not waste their money in producing masks, which will not meet the standard and as a result, waste money that they can use in other areas.

We are happy that Adjumani District was given a vehicle but up to now, we have not received it. We would like to know why the delay. Also, regarding the food given to orphanages, we have four orphanages and those orphanages have not received food. We need clarification on this and urgent attention.

Lastly, regarding special interest groups, I propose that religious institutions be considered. For example, in the Catholic Church, there are leaders who are not allowed to be with their families. They are at the Catholic Missions and now there are no – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ABABIKU: Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that all the Catholic Missions be given food support. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo and then hon. Mulindwa. I do not know whose face that is. I cannot recognise your face. (Laughter)

4.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, Mr Prime Minister, for updating the country on what is going on. I have a few issues that I would like you to clarify or comment on. 

The first one is, you have given us the status; that we have recorded 264 cases. You have also told us that 65 of these have recovered and we have got 80 active cases. I would like to know what the status is for the 119 cases that are not accounted for out of the 264, if we have 80 active cases and 65 people who have recovered. 

My second point is on food distribution. When we were approving money for this food, we were informed that food distribution of six kilogrammes per person would be for 30 days. I believe that the 30 days have since elapsed. The intention was that since these people are not working, they must survive. Now here we are and the 30 days are over and the presumption is that even the food is over and it must have been over before the 30 days. What are you doing to ensure that people get the second phase of supply of the food?

My third comment is on the approved masks you talked about for people using private cars. Government should consider a situation where private cars can be used if it is only one occupant with a mask; because if I am alone in my car, what is the danger in that? It is like someone who is riding a motorcycle.

Therefore, Government needs to ensure a situation where, we may get approved masks and not even in time - (Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, before the approved masks come, are you going to arrest us for wearing other masks?

4.21
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister for your update. The information I would like to start with is the list of the people you responded to where you distributed the food, you said orphanages and those other people.

I would like to remind you that there are also other special interventions where you responded to us and gave us 21,000 kilogrammes of maize flour. You can add that on the list, because you may forget. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday I returned my Shs 20 million to the district. And they asked me on whether they can spend the Shs 20 million from the source. Section 29 of the Public Finance Management Act, order 2020, it reads “collection and deposit of revenue and retention of revenue” clause 3 “a vote state enterprise or public corporation shall retain revenue collected or received where the revenue is a monetary grant exempted by the minister.” 

Under this, can they spend the Shs 20 million at source given that they are closer to the people on ground? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.23
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Friday, I was in our district meeting and I have this to tell our Prime Minister. Our people are getting a lot of problems from refugees and when they are found crossing from Sudan to our country here, on arresting them, UNHCR does not like them to be quarantined, which I believe they have not yet understood fully because this is done for our own safety. 

Therefore, my request to you is perhaps you have to call upon the UNHCR representative sitting here in Kampala so that you explain how serious this matter is and once those people are arrested, they should be allowed to be quarantined. 

Apart from that, I am wondering if these people have come here for safety simply because their place is not safe; I wonder why they should continuously rotate here in our country and on the other side. The law regarding that is very clear that if there is an indication that the place is safe enough to be habitable then they should be repatriated.

Secondly is the issue of food distribution. I do not know how you look at it because it is like we have two different categories of refugees. There are those refugees who obediently stay in places they are taken to, gazetted settlements; and there are those who stay across and when they hear of food distribution, they come back with their cards. How are we going to handle this? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have two issues that I would like to raise. First, is that you know that I represent a border constituency and to be specific is Malaba which is the main entry to this country.

As I speak, the measures that were instituted by Government of testing the drivers at the border are good for all of us. However, the congestion that has been caused there is so unprecedented that all roads are now chocked up. And we thought that this was going to take a short time for drivers to be release, but it is so bad that the drivers are interacting with the community and I want to be very specific on that. 

And all we should expect right now is for the community to be torched up and I would like to assure you that if we do not take extra measures, we are going to be in a big mess.

Secondly, -(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to inform the country, according to what my colleague has said, that the border districts are receiving the same budget like other districts. Moreover, our quarantine centres are receiving a big population being on the frontline. We need Government to address that matter.

Secondly, all the people who are being taken to quarantine centres in Tororo are carried on police pick-ups as if they are criminals. Where are the vehicles? In fact, Kenyans laugh at us when they watch on NTV, when we are carrying people on the pick-ups to the quarantine centres.

Then the food given to the quarantine centres is the same food like that they give to Iganga with only two people in the quarantine centre, moreover in Busia, we have close to 150. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let me take this opportunity to inform you that the people in Busia market, the food that was for sale is still in the market like beans, sorghum and everything is rotting. Why don’t you allow our people to get out their food and sell or eat it?

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much for smuggling in what I had wanted to say. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need a special package for very busy districts and border points in terms of security facilitation, they are overstretched.  

In terms of the general budget that is being given to the rest of the districts, our people are overstretched. We are forced to sometimes even supporting the police in helping them to fuel the motorcycles to improve on the surveillance.

Secondly, we need food for the communities, our people are anchored on cross border trade and now that everything has come to a standstill; let us avoid the sex workers from going back to interact with these drivers and other people which will cause us more problems. Let food be given to those people to avoid interactions that will lead us to more problems. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope you will not be arrested for acting like a purchasing officer in buying fuel and other things.

4.30
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you for your statement. I also would like to thank His Excellency, the President, for guiding us well and protecting us like a father and leader.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have one major issue. I come from Koboko, a border district. It is one of the 40 districts, which are still under complete lockdown.

Our biggest worry is the chaos in South Sudan right now. I happen to farm in a parish called Nyambiri - right at the border with South Sudan along River Kaya.

Every night, we hear heavy gunshots across the border from people who are possibly fighting. South Sudanese are trying to come to Uganda. The security personnel are also trying their best to prevent them but the borders are very porous.

The attention in South Sudan now is not so much about COVID-19. Their worry is about how to defeat the fighting there. Therefore, the people are exposed to this pandemic. Nobody knows the numbers. 

Our biggest fear is that all these efforts the Government is making to protect Ugandans may be annulled if we have an influx of infected people from South Sudan coming to Uganda.

My prayer is; can we have more security placed at the border and a regular rollout so that soldiers are changed after every three days or often so that they are not – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have had more than three minutes. Hon. Kibalya, one minute please. No preambles.

4.33
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The nurses at Jinja Regional Referral Hospital have threatened to go on strike. It is good the Minister of Health and the Prime Minister are here. The nurses may be going on strike today or tomorrow over payment. They have said that since COVID-19 started, they have not been helped.

Secondly, I wish the Prime Minister could pick interest in the police officers’ payment in Kira since COVID-19 started. I stay in Kireka. Whenever I move around, I interact with those officers. From the payment that we passed in the supplementary budget, they got half of what they were supposed to get. The Prime Minister has said that they are going to – (Member timed out.)


4.34
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came back from Lamwo yesterday. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the report that he has given us.

Last week, we had clashes in Lamwo where clans rose up against each other. There was burning of houses and hacking of people because of land conflicts. Right now, 250 homesteads have no homes and food because their huts were burnt down. 

Last time, I raised the issue of homes that were washed away by floods. Now we have an additional 250 families that have nowhere to sleep and nothing to eat – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS LANYERO: I am requesting for food and tents for the 250 families that have nowhere to sleep especially during this rainy season. Thank you. 
 
4.36
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister told us clearly that schools will reopen after new guidelines are made. To my surprise, on most of our phones, we are getting new guidelines talking of August. Now they are saying that primary seven or other classes will have a dead year. Can we get clarification about that?

The last issue is about Koome people, most of whom are submerged in their areas. They promised that the Prime Minister’s Office is going to visit Koome but to-date, there is not even a message and neither has the district COVID-19 taskforce ever responded to – (Member timed out.)

4.37
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year in August, this House passed a resolution about the impediments, which are making Ugandans poor. They are very many. The situation has become worse. 

One of the areas that were looked at were the mining leaseholders who were prevented from exporting their products because of export permits. These are employing more than 20,000 artisans. Most of them are young people who have become very poor with the coming of COVID-19.

What is the position of Government on these companies, which have not been exporting for all the period that COVID-19 has been in place? Thank you. 

4.38
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Prime Minister for the achievements so far the national taskforce team has made.

However, Oyam District is at crossroads. The national taskforce has requested the district for help to go up to Elegu to evaluate the COVID-19 cases. We have only one ambulance in the district, which is being shared by the COVID-19 cases, expectant mothers and other patients.

Kamdini is also a centre where many of these truck drivers are intercepted. Even yesterday at around 10.00 p.m., a COVID-19 patient was intercepted there. Due to this tension, the patient remained in Kamdini up to this morning. It brought a lot of tension and anxiety – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Members, you should just be quick.

MS ALUM: My request is that we need the ambulance to handle these COVID-19 cases which are being transferred to Lira treatment centre. Thank you. 

4.40
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister for the statement he has made. 

We passed Shs 59 billion to buy food for Ugandans. Madam Speaker, I remember earlier on you had stopped the distribution of food until they could make some organised way of distributing it then we heard that the Government had started on the process.

Madam Speaker, I do not come from Wakiso, Kampala or Mukono; I come from Nakaseke. Are the people of Nakaseke excluded from the food distribution? Aren’t they Ugandans? I only hear the Prime Minister and his team talking about Wakiso and Mukono; maybe even Kamuli, where the Speaker comes from. Aren’t the people in Nakaseke, Ugandans? When will they receive food because they are also supposed to benefit from the 59 million Parliament appropriated? 

Secondly, when I heard the scientific numbers of the recipients of food that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister read, I did not think that the food had been distributed to such a number. There are very many Ugandans, including those in Kampala, that have not – (Member timed out.) 

4.42
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for his statement. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would have loved to hear you tell us how the food, you claim was given to the hospitals across the country, was distributed? This would enable Members of Parliament from those districts to help you in doing the oversight role. 

When you say that food was taken to hospitals yet, for example, I was in Abim Hospital a week ago and didn’t see any food, then, it means the message is for “to whom it may concern.” 

I am happy that the Parliamentary Committee on Health is in Abim today. Right now, they are communicating to the people through the local radios in Abim and they will bring facts on the ground – (Member timed out.) 

4.43
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to inform the Prime Minister that Manafwa is not one of the border districts. It was, before Namisindwa District was curved off; now it is Namisindwa that shares a border and not Manafwa. 

Secondly, hon. Kibalya talked about Jinja Hospital and there is a video on social media showing how bad the situation there is. We are proud that we have not lost anybody but the information being shared on social media shows that we may lose our people because of the nurses not being remunerated well. An ambulance was brought; they called the nurses and you can even hear what they said in the background. A collective response from the nurses indicates that they all said that they would not go there to die for nothing. They were promised Shs 80,000 per day but they have not received this money. They refused to attend to that patient. Therefore, the situation is not as simple as it looks. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.44
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you for the statement and for what Government has done so far. 

However, I would like to know whether the minister received the letter we wrote from Kabale District, particularly in Kabale Municipality, concerning the landslides that happened there. This is because most of the families lost food in their houses when the mudslides hit. Some of the houses were hit by the landslides and people do not have where to sleep. They also do not have food to eat in areas of Rukyakyi, Rushoroza and my own home area, Bugongi. The people are seriously suffering. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we would like to thank you because there is some food relief you brought on your own and not by Government; and we other politicians did bring in some food as well. However, it is not enough. People do not have food to eat. Every day calls keep coming to my phone, which has turned into an automated machine. They keep asking me to give them something to eat all the time; even today yet I no longer have money to keep giving them. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we would like this relief food to also reach Kabale – (Member timed out.) 
4.46
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of the 164 health centres IV that will be provided with five isolation beds each, there are districts with only one health centre IV. I would like to call upon Government to consider some health centres III, like in the case of Amudat District, for example, which has only one health centre IV.

Also, of the 447 staff recruited, there are districts with low staffing levels. For example, Amudat District is only at 25 per cent. My appeal is that consideration should be given to districts with low staffing levels to help them have some medical staff on standby. Thank you

4.47
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement he has presented. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my request is - and I will just get to the point - you talked about cars being given out. I wonder why Rukiga District, being at the border, never got a car. Due to the heavy rains, it is now impossible to use the roads there. If one isn’t using a four wheel-drive car, driving to a place like Kamwezi, for example, is impossible. You know being a porous border many people from Rwanda keep coming into our country. My request is that kindly provide a car to the people of Kamwezi. 

We have heard that candidate classes are going back to school but there is one question I am asking myself: we have students from different countries. How are they – (Member timed out.) 

4.48
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been anxiously waiting for the Prime Minister to specifically tell us how much, both in terms of cash and the number of vehicles and other items, has already been received by the National Taskforce so that we know what gap we have in our budget for managing Covid-19. 

Secondly, I expect the Prime Minister to give us guidelines for the procurement of the masks. We are now left with 10 days to the supply date for the masks to all Ugandans. Yesterday, the minister could not convince us that, within the next 10 days, the masks will be ready. What is the procurement procedure? How much is each mask costing? Where are the specifications for those women groups in Dokolo that would want to participate in producing those masks? 

Finally – (Member timed out.)  

4.50
MR PATRICK OKABE (NRM, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the National Taskforce is busy raising money to buy four-wheel drive vehicles for each district. Are you aware of the priorities of this country? There are no ambulances in the district hospitals. There are not enough beds in the hospitals and women are delivering on the floor. Could the money that we are raising be used to strengthen and improve the healthcare system of this country instead of buying four-wheel drive vehicles? These vehicles will be carrying goats, bricks, and grass for cows. Please, let us be aware of the priorities of this country. Can you explain why you are raising 10 vehicles for each district? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you deal with the vehicles, on behalf of the island districts, I would like to know whether there is any boat ambulance. With the money you are collecting, I think you need to address that and give the islanders transport.

4.51
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is related to the one of hon. Okabe. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have told us that so far, you have received 65 vehicles, which have been given out to some districts. My question is: what criteria are you using in giving out those vehicles? In Rukungiri, for example, we requested for three vehicles and you promised that you were going to give us those vehicles. However, up to now, we do not have any vehicle and yet Rukungiri is one of the districts within the borders of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the country would like to know how much has been budgeted for the masks because when we are planning, we budget. How much are we going to spend on masks, as a country?

Secondly, even as we open schools, the parents have been under lockdown for the last two months, is there any arrangement where the Government is going to support parents and even institutions? When candidate classes go back, schools are going to request for registration fees for Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) and other tertiary institutions. Is there any arrangement on how the Government is going to support parents so that students can be allowed to continue - (Member timed out.)

4.53
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that a number of teachers are losing jobs, especially in private schools? From what you have mentioned here, schools are not going to open soon except for candidate classes. 

What programme does Government have to help teachers in private schools to ensure that they can earn a salary or even half a salary, or maybe provide them with food? 

They are at various schools and they are suffering; their employers cannot afford to pay them because they pay them when they have earned from school fees. Now that the lower classes are not even going to open soon, how is Government considering helping this category of workers? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Zoom in on hon. Lucy Akello.

4.55
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope you can hear me. 
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I was in Amuru attending the district task force meeting and one of the issues that came out very strongly was the issue of the 24 Ugandans who are locked up in no man’s land between South Sudan and Uganda. What is the plan for these people? If they are going to be picked from there, where are they going to be quarantined? Amuru District does not have the capacity to quarantine so many people because of the many cases that are coming up.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate Government for giving us some vehicles that are helping with transportation of samples from Elegu border to Entebbe. Madam Speaker, the question I have for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: when are they going to give additional support in terms of transportation so that work is made easy and secondly, when is Elegu getting the mobile testing vehicle that was promised by the Ministry of Health?
	
Otherwise, I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I pray that he continues doing work for everyone in the country. I have people who are asking for food, especially the clergy; what plans do you have for them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the feedback. 

I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. As a sub-committee of Parliament, we have gone around the whole country and we gave a preliminary report. Yesterday, when the chairperson was laying this report on the Table, you told us that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would comment on it. I have been told that this report was submitted to the national committee. 

The report raises a lot of fundamental issues and our intention was to be complementary. We did not want to raise debate here but to see that these issues are fed into the national response.
There are a lot of gaps on the ground. We moved to most of the health units and we saw a lot of gaps. We thought that there would be a response to guide us so that we do not have a fully-fledged debate. 

Madam Speaker, how are you going to guide us? We have a lot of issues and gaps, which we thought would be resolved so that we can be of use in terms of support to the response. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know why the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has not commented on it; perhaps he will let us know. However, I think you should also come and bring the matter here when you complete your report. Come and then we will discuss it.

4.58
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 4 June 2020, public transport will be rolling out at half capacity. Are you triangulating the cost-push inflation that would arise out of the cost of public transport going up because of operational capacity? Are you considering parents taking children to school at a doubled cost of transport, for example by considering the cost of fuel that will go into the raised cost of transport?

Secondly, when we raised money for food relief for Kampala and its surroundings, we were looking at other urban centres other than Kampala that have the same problem. This is because the same issues that engendered relief to Kampala apply to other urban centres like Masaka City. Are they a forgotten lot? (Member timed out.)

4.59
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, I think we should draw lines and be able to recognise where the Government has failed. We hear complaints of police not receiving allowances and the same applies to nurses. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who are the people you are paying?

About food, the deadline for distribution has passed but food has not reached Obongi and other rural districts, yet you need to give round two in Kampala. When do we know that the Government has failed and we get alternatives for people to take over? Madam Speaker, there must be milestones to measure success and failure. Rt Hon. Prime Minister – (Member timed out.)

5.00
MR JAMES WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is on food relief. People who live at landing sites, especially in Mayuge in Bugoto, Musubi and Nabyama landing sites, were hit by a three-wave tragedy. One, they were hit by the effects of COVID-19; two, the effects of the rising levels of Lake Victoria which forced many families out of their homes; three, their boats were destroyed by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) amid this COVID-19 pandemic. 

Madam Speaker, my request is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister considers this category of people who live at the landing sites, especially Bugoto, Musubi and Nabyama. Thank you.

5.01
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, the Budget Committee gave Shs 59 billion and many donations have been given in terms of food. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what have you used the money for?

Secondly, Lira District seems to be having the highest number of patients of COVID-19 in the North. To date, we have 12 patients but we do not have ambulances, especially those dedicated to picking COVID-19 patients. I would like to therefore know from the Prime Minister when Lira District shall receive an ambulance.

Thirdly, I wish the Prime Minister could relax the guidelines for the resources that they have sent to the districts. The nurses that are treating COVID-19 patients are being stigmatised in their homes. They need to be isolated for some time so that they can be accepted home. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that money was sent with guidelines on how to use it and they cannot utilise it to help the nurses. Can you say something about that?

Madam Speaker, the LCs I are the first point of contact but they are not being facilitated; there is no airtime and transport for them. What can the Prime Minister say about this? Thank you.

5.03
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for updates on COVID-19. However, on the matter of the displaced people of Ntoroko, you told us that you were not yet aware. Now that you are aware, why can’t you tell them to stop moving people without knowing where they are going, so that you plan and organise to get them a place to settle?

Secondly, since I qualified in 1990 as a teacher, I have been teaching in private schools. I know that the teachers in private schools are suffering. Now that the lockdown is going to be eased for the candidate classes only - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you said food distribution has been done in hospitals across the country. Agago District has not yet received any such food. When are you taking the food for Kalongo Hospital and Patongo Health Centre IV, which caters for the two counties in Agago District?

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Education and Sports said learning materials would reach every pupil or student in all villages across the country by last week, but I have not seen them. When are the learners going to receive these materials, since it is only candidates that will – (Member timed out) 

5.06
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. My district borders South Sudan and we are overwhelmed by the movement of refugees from South Sudan to the settlements in Uganda; they keep moving to and from South Sudan, yet security deployment there is not sufficient. 

Can the Prime Minister ensure that more troops are deployed at that border; from Koboko up to Elegu, the deployment is not enough. We are worried that we might be overwhelmed with this COVID-19 pandemic. What can be done to arrest the situation?

Secondly, people are suffering because they cannot work. They have finished everything since it is a planting period. Can the Government give them some food because the people are desperate? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the update.

Madam Speaker, I sit on the national task force on your behalf and we have so far toured about four border points and border districts. There are three key issues, which the Prime Minister should respond to, in regard to facilitation of the security teams at the border points 

In Mutukula, they raised the requirement for vehicles and motorcycles. The same issue was raised in Mirama; the whole of Mirama does not have a vehicle. In Kanungu, the Ishasha border point has no vehicle or motorcycle assigned to it. Madam Speaker, these are all porous borders. The security teams, particularly the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) who chair the district task forces, raised these concerns, which the Prime Minister should respond to.

The second issue – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We are using one minute. Okay, use one minute to conclude since you represent us on the national task force.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is the issue of testing truck drivers and getting results first before they can be allowed to come in. You will realise that not all the border points have received the GeneXpert machines. We are told that the cartridges that are required to test COVID-19 samples are not yet in the country. Can the Prime Minister assure us when these cartridges will be available so that all the border points test the drivers’ samples and give them results within an hour, before they are allowed to proceed with their travels? Thank you.

5.09
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO	 (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the whole of West Nile has borders with other countries. That means that in the whole of West Nile, there will be no public transport even when that restriction is eased. I am concerned particularly about our children who are in primary 7, senior 4 and senior 6. When the time comes for them to go back school, how are they going to travel?

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are we admitting that our security forces cannot control and maintain the borders to the extent that we can weed out people from outside, so that our transport can also be eased?

5.10
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you mentioned in your statement that the Ministry of Health is going to give guidelines on the masks. We needed these guidelines yesterday because our small entrepreneurs are already producing masks but they do not have guidelines and there is no consumer protection. So, we need them. Since the Minister of Health is here, we will be happy to hear when they are going to bring to us the guidelines.

On the COVID-19 response fund, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in my district, Kibaale, out of the 13 subcounties, seven do not have any health centre - not even a health centre II or health centre III. Why can’t we use part of this money to address such critical health needs in our communities? I will appreciate.

Lastly, on the production – (Member timed out.)

5.11
MR CLEMENT ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM), Kalaki County, Kalaki): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request that –

THE SPEAKER: Members, observe social distance as you queue.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: I request that you give special consideration to Kalaki District. It is a new district without an ambulance and with only one vehicle in good working condition. The district has no RDC. The only RDC we have is the one we are sharing with Kaberamaido and he has no assistant; he works alone.

Kaberamaido Hospital is the nearest hospital to Kalaki and the road from Bululu to Kaberamaido has been totally submerged. There is no access to hospitals and people are dying. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Byandala and then after that, we Zoom in to hon. Mutebi, before hon. Mbwatekamwa comes.

5.12
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the Prime Minister. The first issue is on the social distancing of four metres. I have seen, internationally, the distance is two metres - even here. There is no vehicle in Uganda which is four metres wide. Can’t we follow other countries and say the social distancing should be at two metres and not four metres?

Secondly, when they locked down, there were people who were waiting to apply to university on private sponsorship but they went to places where they have no connection with the universities. Those universities now say they have closed applications. Can the Prime Minister tell us what is going to happen to those Ugandans who had not yet applied because of the lockdown?

Lastly, we have not yet got the vaccine for COVID-19. Is the Government – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Zoom in on hon. Mutebi, as hon. Mbwatekamwa prepares. We are with hon. Mutebi on Zoom. Please speak.

5.13
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the update that he has given. However, in Buikwe today, we have registered the first two domestic cases of coronavirus and we also have an eminent threat from drivers who are coming to Lugazi Sugar Factory to pick sugar.

I would like the Prime Minister to come up with some intervention to find the best way of managing these drivers who are coming in and at times staying overnight before going back. Otherwise, the problem may escalate because we have got the first two cases today. I thank you.

5.14
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we know, we are in a lockdown and we have been encouraged to have our students study from TV and radio lessons. However, I wish to bring it to the attention of the Prime Minister that children of police officers, mainly in Nsambya, are not studying. They are not studying because power is cut off from 7 o’clock in the morning and it is put back again at 7 o’clock in the evening. So, why are we disadvantaging these poorly paid officers? I thank you.

5.15
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Government for the work well done on handling COVID-19. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I come from a hard-to-reach district called Kagadi, and it is a border district. So far, we have over 200 households in a subcounty called Ndaiga that have been displaced. I am wondering what plans we have for such people who are bordering the waters. What plans do we have, so that they can get out of this situation?

Another question, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is about the private teachers. There are teachers who teach, even in Government schools, but they are not on the payroll. They have not been paid since January and have not been categorised under vulnerable people. I would request that if we can also get - (Member timed out.)

5.17
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is about distribution of food. I have a community of people living at the shores of Lake Albert and they are starving. They depend on the lake but they were stopped from fishing. I request for some distribution of food.

Secondly, as you distribute vehicles, I request that you give priority to border districts because we are more locked than other districts. Thank you.

5.17
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I come from the border area of Namisindwa, where His Excellency hid during the bush war and they almost got him. It is a porous border with so many people coming from the other side and they have relatives. Some of them are even locked down on the other side.

The only request I have is that I need some food from the Office of the Prime Minister. Landslides are now threatening the people. The good Samaritans whom you asked to accommodate their friends or relatives have accommodated them for a long time now and you can find 10 people in a house. Those who were supposed to go to Bulambuli to be accommodated – (Member timed out.)

5.18
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank, first of all, the Prime Minister for the report he just submitted to this House. However, I would also like to know whether he has got a plan to roll out what he has done in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono to the rest of the country. When is he submitting that plan, so that we can reach out to the rest of the country?

Secondly, people in Galilaya are actually at a loss. There is a parish called Ntimba which has been completely cut off by the floods. They cannot access food; it is a fishing community but fishing was stopped, so they cannot fish. The COVID-19 pandemic has come in and they cannot move out of their homes, and now the floods have also come. What plans are there – (Member timed out.)

5.20
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like clarification on the following: You have 3,200 isolation centres and we have people who have been quarantined in Kandege Island without food. They are calling us to go and help them. What is your plan for the areas you have gazetted as quarantine centres on the islands?

Secondly, the President had said that areas within the islands would be considered during food distribution. What is your plan towards fulfilling that?

Thirdly, the water levels have risen. People’s houses in Singila, Gorofa, Kandege and Hama islands have all been destroyed. The people are now gathered together in groups of 200 and 300. Since this can become an easy means of spreading the disease, what is your plan to help the 20,000 people in those areas?

Lastly, I only want to say what the Speaker – (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, there are many people who were referred from different districts to the regional and national hospitals. They were brought by ambulances and after recovering and getting discharged, they cannot go back to their homes. We have challenges managing them. 

Relatedly, the President said that when the candidates go back to school, Government will find a way of transporting those from the 40 border districts. Are they going to be transported with their parents? How will the parents go back to their homes after delivering those children back to the respective schools, since there is no public transport in the 40 districts? Imagine a P7 candidate who is 13 years old - you cannot take this child back to school alone without the parent(s). So, how will these parents move from their districts to the schools and back?

5.22
MS ROSETTE MUTAMBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in your statement, you said that at an appropriate time, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is going to give guidelines on how to rescue Ugandans caught up in lockdown abroad. My question is: how soon is that going to be - remember we are talking about Ugandans in distress?

The second point is an appeal to the national task force to give out more public information on how to wear face masks. 

Lastly, I would like to add my voice to the voices of others that have spoken about the issue of teachers in private schools. Mr Prime Minister, these are also people in distress. It is not like some private schools – (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the issue of Gulu Referral Hospital is urgent because what was budgeted for has been exhausted, given the fact that its current capacity has been exceeded. When shall we get more resources to ensure that Gulu Referral Hospital is properly equipped so that it can serve the entire northern region and receive some of the emergency cases coming from Elegu border point and part of South Sudan?

5.24
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to talk about the triple tragedy - coronavirus, floods and starvation. My community is at the Mpondwe-Lhubiriha border. We have Bwera Hospital but it does not have a car. The people managing the surveillance, and isolation and screening units are supposed to move from their homes to the hospital but they do not have a car. I am just wondering; we have five major borders in the country, how did Bwera Hospital miss out on the 45 cars that were distributed? What was the criterion used? 

Madam Speaker, we need to be rescued as soon as possible, even as we wait for the report from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Thank you.

5.25
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister for giving an update. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on record we have those people who have been laid off during this lockdown. They come from different places and they were working in various industries in Kampala, Jinja and elsewhere. These people now have no food. When it comes to time for them to go home, they will have no means of transport. Are you aware of such people and the challenges they have?

Secondly, in Lira, I have already received a list of over 50 people who were arrested. Some of them were beaten, their cases went to court and they were then taken to prison. This was after the presidential declaration of lockdown – (Member timed out.)

5.26
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, what plans do you have for the Kenyan students who are in candidate classes in Uganda? 

Secondly, and this is a request, Busia traders who deal in cereals are asking the Government to buy their maize and beans because they are rotting in the stores, yet the new harvest is almost here.

Lastly, Busitema University students are dying of hunger. As you distribute food, please consider the students of Busitema University or else allow us use the Shs 20 million we are handing over to the district task force to buy food for them. Thank you.

5.27
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, at the onset of COVID-19, one of our concerns was the availability of water for people to wash hands. We raised this concern and the Ministry of Water and Environment wrote to the district saying they should repair the boreholes. The repair of the boreholes had majorly been shouldered by Members of Parliament.

However, to date, the districts are saying they have never seen any money sent by the Ministry of Water and Environment for that purpose. The people cannot repair those boreholes and they are still asking us to repair them up to this time. Mr Prime Minister, may you tell us whether the money was indeed sent to the districts to repair the boreholes? People need to get water to help them fight the disease.

Secondly, the subcounty task forces, to date, are saying they have never got anything out of the Shs 165 million that was sent to the districts. Madam Speaker, can we know from the Prime Minister whether that money was also meant to facilitate the subcounties or not?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, 49 Members have contributed to this item. We have taken quite a bit of time and it is almost curfew time. Let me, however, see whether the Prime Minister has anything to respond to, very quickly. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me salute the colleagues for raising very many serious issues, clearly demonstrating deep interest in handling coronavirus related matters that confront us. I will endeavour to respond to quite a number of questions. Those that I may not be able to cover will be covered by my colleagues either now or at a different time, depending on what is available in terms of time.

I am very happy with the issues that have been raised. They are going to be very helpful to us who are directly managing this. Some of the main issues were concerning food; for example, hon. Luttamaguzi asked why Nakaseke is not part of Uganda. A number of other colleagues also asked when this exercise is rolling out. 

Indeed, Madam Speaker, as you may remember, from the very beginning, even before the exercise started, this was a subject matter for all of us. The distribution of food has not been a very easy exercise. Fortunately, it has helped people to overcome some of the challenges. Nevertheless, food will continue to go to specific areas of the country that have been assessed to be in dire need. 
 
It is also true that when I made reference to food being distributed in orphanages and hospitals, this is an exercise that is still going on. Therefore, for those who have not been reached, you have not been forgotten; you will be covered in due course.

Regarding the question of the quarantine and support for people in quarantine centres, a number of colleagues said that they are not being catered for and assisted. It is true that the Ministry of Health is endeavouring to make sure that all quarantine centres are supported so that none is left without support.

The question of masks – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 12. It is something related to what the Prime Minister is saying.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you allow the Prime Minister to complete his response? Please.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of masks is a major subject. The Ministry of Health has already given guidelines to those who are manufacturing but the ministry should publicise them widely, so that whoever is involved is making the masks as required. This is so that we do not have fake masks being sold to the population.

The suffering of religious leaders because they are not having church services and therefore collections is a legitimate point. Actually, in a way, we are looking at them as people who also deserve and need support.

The question of money - can the Shs 20 million be used? The answer is definitely yes. I have discussed this matter several times with both hon. Matia Kasaija and hon. Bahati. All one needs to do is to have the accounting officer at the district get simple clearance from the Accountant-General or people in finance and it is a straightforward matter. The money is meant to be used to support the population and bureaucracy should not delay usage of this money.

There was the question of refugees from South Sudan and the problems they may be causing, including coming only when there is food distribution. Really, those who just come on the day of food distribution are not refugees. In my view, this is a matter that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Government will sort out, because refugees should be in camps, in recognised urban centres or in their residences where they have been given some piece of land to survive.

There has also been a point raised that security should be made available, especially in some of the areas near our neighbouring countries like South Sudan where there is more concentration on internal conflicts and perhaps less concentration on the fight against the pandemic. I am glad that hon. Baba raised this matter; he is both a diplomat and a neighbour of South Sudan. Some of your contacts and communication may be helpful in this respect, hon. Baba.

Hon. Kibalya raised the issue of nurses threatening to strike. The question of payment by the Ministry of Health has been an issue for some time. However, the Minister of Health has also wanted to ascertain the actual people and their details. I hope that if it has not been sorted out, it will be sorted out as quickly as possible so that these very deserving people who are at the frontline should, without any delay, have their little monies paid.

Madam Speaker, the honourable member from Lamwo raised the issue of 250 people displaced and requiring some food. Yes, we have agreed that we will discuss the subject in detail tomorrow morning at 9.30 and see what can be done.

Guidelines to students - The Ministry of Education and Sports, working closely with the Ministry of Health, is going to give clear guidelines on how the students, both from the border areas and the rest of the country, will handle this issue of travel. I better let that to be handled by the authorised ministry; they will come out with details.

There was a question on export of raw minerals. Hon. Sabiiti will know very well that His Excellency the President said that Ugandan minerals should be processed so that we can get value out of them. This position is still standing and, by the way, when people invest here in processing minerals, that will create even more jobs for our people.

To the friends who raised the issue of ambulances and them not being taken care of, I did say that only 45 of the vehicles have been given out. We have another 20 to be given out. However, the guidelines are given by the Ministry of Health. It is the Ministry of Health that is conversant and familiar with these problems and challenges. It is advisable that colleagues should raise their concerns with the Ministry of Health, which is the line ministry responsible.

On the question of supplies to Abim hospital and a number of other hospitals, as I said, supply of food and some essential items is still continuing. If your hospital or orphanage has not been reached, it will be reached.

My Member of Parliament for Kabale Municipality, hon. Aja, did raise issues that Kabale should not be left out. I agree that it should not be exempt, that it should be treated like any other part of Uganda.

Hon. Kamusiime, from Rukiga, also raised the issue of a vehicle being availed. This matter will be handled by the Ministry of Health.

My sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, did raise a number of issues. On   the question of masks, fortunately, it is going to be solved relatively quickly because the big manufacturers are already active. The small women, youth groups and other small manufacturers are all involved but guided by the Ministry of Health to make sure that they are producing good quality masks and to the appropriate standards. I believe that this matter is going to be sorted out quickly.

The Rt Hon. Speaker was one hundred per cent right on the question of boats as ambulances or means of transport. Among the people who have suffered most because of this situation we are in are those who live on islands or by the shores of lakes Victoria, Kyoga and other lakes. This problem is very well known. Every effort is being made to ensure that they are supported.

Every effort is being made to make sure that people are paid their money. It is of grave concern to us in Government. We have already discussed the matter with the responsible ministry with an assurance from them that they are expediting the payments.

On the question of teachers losing jobs, this is again a problem that we know, especially teachers teaching in private schools. All of a sudden, they are not being paid and they are living in desperate conditions. They are among the people we are looking at when we are dealing with food distribution. The other issues are being tackled by the ministry responsible for labour.

The Speaker: Rt Hon. Minister, it is a quarter to 6.00p.m. and there is a curfew. 

Dr Rugunda: In that respect, Madam Speaker, in another couple of minutes I will conclude. 

On the issue of Elegu and testing facilities, I must say that the testing facilities at our border areas are improving every day. The different border areas will be reached and supported.

We have been advised by the Rt. Hon. Speaker that we should be law abiding; curfew is in the vicinity. I do thank the colleagues who have raised many issues – (Interjections) - I did not pretend to have answered all the questions; I was merely responding to the Rt Hon. Speaker’s point about time.

What I also propose - I need to be guided by the Speaker. I still have a pile of questions to respond to. I have no problem coming back in the course of next week to respond to some of these very legitimate questions. I will be advised by the Speaker because she is the one who knows the issues of time.

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, the issues raised are important. It is important that you get the feedback from the country through this House. We shall give you 30 minutes on Tuesday. We shall start with you and complete this.

Dr Rugunda: I will be more than happy.

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, the displacement of people is happening tonight. I wish he could respond to that matter and probably halt the operation of displacing people from the 68 villages. 

Dr Rugunda: Madam Speaker, I can make a comment on that. Government does not work in such a mechanical way. I have received this important information. After this session, I will contact the ministers responsible and then Government will take a position on that matter.

The Speaker: Prime Minister, can you also take a position on the issue of food, which is rotting in the markets in Busia. The stores are full and traders of non-vegetable items are not allowed to sell.

Dr Rugunda: On the Busia issue, I have already discussed it with honourable members. It has also been discussed in other fora. It is a matter we are looking at as a Government. I think the honourable member should wait for a response from Government on the matter. It is already well known.

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, we have waited for almost two months. The maize and sorghum in the store are not waiting; they are rotting every day. That is why we are requesting that you give us even a day so that the business people who secured loans to buy their produce remove it and keep it in their houses. Give us even six hours of the day to remove it. The more we wait, the maize which is rotting and the beans will not wait. 

Dr Rugunda: Madam Speaker, the hindrance is that this is a market shared by two countries. You can easily have mingling of people and you know what mingling and closeness will produce. Therefore, let us give it proper consideration. Your point of urgency is well taken.

Mr katusabe: Madam Speaker, this is urgent too, given that there are six people that were buried by the mudslides and are feared dead. The people in my community are helpless because the rivers burst their banks, so police cannot cross over. 

I was wondering whether the Prime Minister can explore the possibility of dispatching a police helicopter to evacuate people that are trapped on the other side, given the fact that the weather again is threatening to drown those that are still trapped on the other side of our community.

Dr Rugunda: Madam Speaker, that is why His Excellency President Museveni and the ministers were in the area, in order to assess and do the needful to support the population. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, the last one was from hon. Nabulindo. She is asking, why doesn’t the Government buy that food, which is going to rot in Busia market, and save the people the trouble of taking it from place to place? 

Dr Rugunda: This will be one of the possible solutions. Let us look at the various possible solutions. What we are interested in is getting a practical solution.

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, is there a possible evacuation of people in Kasese 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, what about the possible evacuation of people in Kasese; we have not heard a report from there and we do not know what is going to happen. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I think because you are properly clad, the words are not coming out as clearly – Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the honourable member is asking whether there will be any support to go and retrieve the people that have been buried by the boulders in Kasese. 

DR RUGUNDA: This is something that we should meet and discuss with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is our national problem. We are at your disposal. As the Rt Hon. Speaker closes, we can go and address it. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, go and work with the Prime Minister. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the work done. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 26 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)





