



Thursday, 28 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. According to the plans of the Business Committee, it had been our intention to prorogue the House today. However, having looked at the Order Paper, there are items which are important for the country, which need to be addressed. 

These are the continuing cases of COVID-19 in Uganda, the need to repatriate Ugandans who are caught up outside the country, the need to address the issue of the floods - the Minister of Works and Transport is supposed to address the country on the situation of the floods. The Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness is also expected to come and address the House on the management of disasters throughout the country and a number of other items.

Therefore, in the circumstances, we shall continue working and reconvene on Tuesday at 10 o’clock in the morning to handle those statements and at the close of business, we shall be able to prorogue. I thought it important that Members discuss those matters before we go for recess. Therefore, today, we shall mainly concentrate on the Bills which are partly handled so that we can complete them.

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday I informed you about a complaint from one of the Members of this House that his signature has been forged on a motion. Today, I have another letter from another Member making counteraccusations in relation to that same motion. So, I am also sending this second letter to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to examine it together with the other one so that we can be advised on what to do.

Having said that, I want to encourage Members not to rush motions before they are cleared by my Office, the Office of the General Counsel and the Office of the Clerk; it is very important that they are studied and their implications noted before they are rushed to the Floor of this House. So, please oblige and handle issues in that manner.

As indicated the other day, there continue to be petitions from the public about the Post COVID-19 management; I have letter here from the Kampala New Generation Traders Association Limited. Their appeal is as follows: 
“As good combined business groups all under this association, Kampala New Generation Traders Association would like to request you to extend our appeal to all city tycoons owning the closed shopping malls and arcades in the city centre, dedicate this period covered as lockdown as a donation to their tenants in this trying moment of COVID-19 struggle and suspend rent arrears since businesses are fully locked and honestly inactive. 

We furthermore request, if possible, that you also help us let landlords revise rental fees since all businesses are affected already during the COVID-19 crisis.”

I had a meeting this morning with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and informed her about this petition and I do hope that the Cabinet will sit and advise the country on what to do.

Honourable members, today we shall not have matters of national importance; let us focus on the Bills so that we can finish them. Let us go item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Uganda Communications Commission Regulations, 2019 in accordance with section 93 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 as amended, as follows:
    1. The Uganda Communications (Equipment Type Approval) Regulations, 2019.
    2. The Uganda Communications (Film, Documentaries and Commercial Still Photography) Regulations, 2019.
    3. The Stage Plays and Public Entertainment Rules, 2019.
    4. The Emergency Response Team Regulations, 2019.
    5. The Uganda Communications (Intelligent Network Monitoring System) Regulations, 2019.
    6. The Uganda Communications (Text and Multimedia Messaging) Regulations 2019.
    7. The Uganda Communications (Emergency Response) Regulations, 2019.
    8. The Uganda Communications (Universal Service) Regulations, 2019.
    9. The Uganda Communications (Universal Service and Access Fund) Regulations, 2019.
    10. The Uganda Communications (Consumer Protection) Regulations, 2019.
    11. The Uganda Communications (Interconnection and Access) Regulations, 2019.
    12. The Uganda Communications (Pricing and Accounting) Regulations 2019.
    13. The Uganda Communications (Centralised Equipment Identification and Register) Regulations, 2019.
    14. The Uganda Communications (Content) Regulations, 2019.
    15. The Uganda Communications (Quality of Service) Regulations, 2019.
    16. The Uganda Communications (Competition) Regulations, 2019.
    17. The Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) Regulations, 2019.
    18. The Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) Amendment Regulations, 2020.
    19. The Uganda communications licensing regulations, 2019.

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker and colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members are now informed that all those regulations are available for your perusal.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You had asked me to lay some papers on Table concerning examinations or work given to pupils. Would it be procedurally okay since the ministers are around that I lay them on Table, so they take keen interest?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you had undertaken it.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the first one is a document by the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) – “Parents Boost Guide” that was provided to all sub-counties. However, it has a lot of issues. Given the levels of illiteracy in this country, I do not know how parents can use these papers to boost learning of their children. In Kalungu, I do not have many old women who can manage reading this. 

Madam Speaker, this self-study material is given to Primary One. The learning materials that were issued by both the Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) are not applicable to primary schools. Teachers in primary schools like me are meant to teach any class. What was given to these children does not match those standards. Even the font used cannot work.

As I conclude, I would like to give to the ministry some copies of papers that are given to Primary One pupils. They do not read for themselves and so, at least teachers must be around to give them guidance. What is given by the ministry is totally contradictory to what is taught in schools.

I beg to lay these documents. Madam Speaker, it will be in your wisdom to decide where they can be taken. I am laying them to show that they need to be retrieved from the districts. Otherwise, we are killing our children. I beg to lay.

The Speaker: Thank you. Is the Minister of Education and Sports here? 

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, this one, which is the recommended, is an examination asking Primary One pupils to count and write. This is from Makindye Division and it deals with general knowledge. They can look at it and compare with what they gave out using the New Vision newspaper. This is for the thematic curriculum and it does not match what they distributed to learners. They can use that to determine whether there is work going on or whether it was a hoax.

The Speaker: The Minister of Education and Sports – he is from that ministry.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS)(Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, let me first salute hon. Ssewungu, for the documents he has laid, allegedly and reportedly distributed for remedial studies by the Ministry of Education and Sports, through NCDC. 

I would like to confirm that the ministry has distributed between 20 to 25 per cent of the learning materials for remedial studies to the districts of Uganda. Specifically, on the document laid by hon. Ssewungu and subject to your guidance, as a ministry, we will undertake to crosscheck.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have a number of people who are fond of doing counterfeit in Uganda. As a ministry, we have the latitude to crosscheck and ascertain whether the documents laid by hon. Ssewungu are the right ones circulated by the ministry. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, maybe you were not present the day the undertaking was made. This arose because your counterpart did not agree that the materials supplied were beyond the capacity of the Primary One pupils. 
Hon. Ssewungu said, “I shall produce the materials, which are supplied. Clearly, they are beyond the capacity of the children.” That was the argument. Are they beyond or not?

Therefore, take and study them; do not just dismiss them.

Mr obua: Madam Speaker, I have undertaken, in very clear terms that as a ministry, we will crosscheck the material laid by the Member – (Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the honourable minister, who is my good friend, in my preamble, I said that these are learning materials that were given out by the National Curriculum Development Centre, which is under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Indeed, all these papers I have laid read, “National Curriculum Development Centre.” They also bear the national logo of the country. Is the honourable minister in order to differ what I have laid without taking time to look at them? To make it more useful, let me give him more learning materials; he will use all of them to prove what I am saying. This is English Language for Primary Five. These are self-study materials for Primary Seven and Primary Three. I beg to lay so that you get more work to internalise what we are saying rather than kill the children as we look on. 

The Speaker: The materials have been laid and are available for examination. Let us go on to next item.

Hon. Members: Matters of national concern!

The Speaker: There are no matters of national importance today. I will give you an opportunity on Tuesday to speak to COVID-19 issues, floods, disaster and energy. We shall start sitting in the morning from 10.00 O’clock for the whole day.

BILLS,
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

Clause (14)
The Chairperson: Honourable members, yesterday we had gone as far as clause 13. We had not quite agreed on the text. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, yes, we had gone up to clause 13 and there were two contentious issues. The first was whether we should give notice before a license is revoked. The other was 13 (h), which we had already agreed upon. We agree that a notice should be given. 

Mr okupa: Madam Chairperson, the other thing to which I had made a correction, and I think the chairperson will agree to it, was about the days. It should be immediately after the 30 days.

The Chairperson: We had agreed on that yesterday.

Mr musasizi: Madam Chairperson, yesterday we had agreed with him. The only remaining issue was what the minister has just conceded to.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 15 by substituting for sub-clause 1, the following:
i. A licensee shall pay a fee prescribed by the Central Bank.
ii. Under sub-clause (2), delete the word “annual”. 

The justification is that uncertainty of fees every year breeds uncertainty and affects planning and growth of the sector. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you therefore abandoning the words “on or before the 31st day of January every year?” What do we do about those? 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson of the committee is bringing an amendment to remove the word “annual” yet the mover of the Bill had proposed an annual fee.

Madam Chairperson, I intend to differ with the chairperson that when you prescribe an annual fee, people who are going to use these systems plan. You make budgets, provisions, income and expenditure; you know what you are going to spend and what you are going to earn.
 
When you leave it open that they will be paying fees as prescribed by the Central Bank, they can always come up with any fees at any time. When they have hit a shortage somewhere, they say, let us put up this fee for these people to pay so that we can meet our fees. If they want to come up with any fees, let them wait for the year to end, they bring the justification for the new fees and then it can be entertained.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I support the position of the ministry and request that the chairperson concedes such that we do not disorganise the businesspeople. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I asked whether you are interfering with the words, “before the 31st day of January”. Are you interfering with that? “15(1)(a) A licensee shall pay an annual subscription fee prescribed by the Central Bank on or before the 31st day of January of every year.” In your amendment, you have not touched it, so I am asking whether it is still there or not.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the reason behind this was that when we use the word “annual”, it means there is only one specific licence fees paid once in a year. However, there are times when the bank may want to charge fees not necessarily on an annual basis. We thought our proposal would give a bank the leeway to charge licences, not necessarily annually.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I sincerely beg the chairperson to concede. You see, if you delete that particular provision of “annual” then you are literally doing away with the entire clause 15 and certainly it requires -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in this regard, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16
MR MUSASIZI: On clause 16, we propose to substitute for “may” the word “shall”. The justification is that the regulatory framework is required to support the innovations under the sandbox system.

The Central Bank needs to establish this to support innovation testing. This, therefore, should not be discretionary. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend sub-clause (1) by deleting the words, “or order an external auditor of a service provider.”

The justification is that engaging the external auditor of the participant operator is likely to result in conflict of interest and may not be in line with international practice.

We also propose to delete sub-clause (2) and the justification is that auditors are legally and professionally bound by the duty of secrecy. This duty can only be waived by the client. The provision breaches the international code of conduct of auditors.

Three, delete sub-clause (3). The justification is that the one who appoints the auditor should pay for the service. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22
MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 22, the head note is, “Inspection of operators of payment systems, etc” I would like to know what “etc” is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the mover tell us what the “etc” is?

MR BAHATI: Sorry, Madam Chairperson. Our Attorney-General had moved out so I had to rush to the technical bench. However, I have been informed that this is a standard way of legislation. It could involve other things and I would like – For now, that is the information I have but the Attorney-General could add on to guide the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This would be the first time I have seen “etc” in a Bill. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, we cannot legislate “etc” because it can also be a subject of abuse. We should just delete it.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, the term “etc”, whose full abbreviation is etcetera, is supposed to mean items in the same family. However, as far as legislation is concerned, it is true that it might prove risky because it may allow room for other things to be imported. It would be better to specify. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the minister going to specify or should we delete the “etc”?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, now that the person who legally approved the Bill has conceded, I am following suit that we delete “etc”. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the marginal note be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23
MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 23 as follows: Substitute for the words, “a payment service provider or a payment systems operator”, with the words, “a person licensed under this Act.”

The justification is that this would include every person licensed under the Act including the participants. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mover, do you have any problem? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 28 by substituting for the references to “liquidator” and “receiver” with the words “Central Bank or insolvency practitioners”.

The justification is that this is in line with the language used in the Insolvency Act. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.


Clause 39
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 39 as follows: 
i. Under sub-clause (1), substitute for the word “hold” with the word “reserve”. 
ii. Under sub clause (2), substitute for the word “participant” with the words “collateral provider”. 

The justification is that the word “hold” in this context is confusing because it is not clear whether “hold” means to possess collateral that has been received, or to reserve collateral that has to be provided for the payment systems. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 40 as follows:
i. Substitute for the word “transferred” wherever it appears in the section with the word “granted”. 
ii. Under sub-clause (2)(b), insert the words, “for the purposes of holding collateral” after the word, “opened”. 
iii. Under sub-clause (3)(b) and (c), substitute for the word “creditor” with the words “collateral provider.”

The justification is that since this clause is intended to refer to both title transfers and security interests. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 41 as follows:
i. Delete the phrase “shall take effect immediately”.
ii. Insert the words “the terms of” between the words “with” and “that” in the third line.
iii. Under paragraph (a), delete the words “creditor” and “debtor”. 

Justification is that it appears to cause a statutory close-out netting rather than allowing the close-out netting provisions of the agreement to operate. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 41 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend in sub clause (1), by deleting the word “guaranteed”.

The justification is that no actual guarantee is required. I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: I beg the Chairperson to reconsider his position because the word “guaranteed” is used there as a verb to make meaning to the entire statement. Removing it would literally kill the intention of the clause. I beg that he abandons the amendment.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 42 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend sub-clauses (1) and (2) by inserting the words “be entitled to” immediately after the word “shall”.

The justification is that it is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend sub-clause 6 of clause 49 by replacing the word “consumers” with the word “customers”. This is to correct the nomenclature for holders of such accounts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55
MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 55 in sub-clause 3 as follows: 
“(3) An electronic money issuer (EMI) who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 

The justification is that since most electronic money issuers are not natural persons, it is important to increase the fine as the imprisonment sentence may not be applicable. 
I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed to amend clause 56 but after consultation with the mover of the Bill, we think the provision, as it is, is good enough to serve the purpose. Therefore, we withdraw our proposal to amend the clause.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, the Bill has provided for special accounts as per clause 51. Clause 56 is talking about different accounts but they have not provided for active accounts. By “active accounts”, I mean – because we are going to clause 57, where they are going to talk about “dormant accounts” and that will be the end with the accounts. 

I would like the committee chairperson and mover of the Bill to look at a person who dies when his account is active and has money; how will his or her estate be able to access the money? 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Mawanda. I believe the issue you are talking about will be covered in the transitional provisions because this Bill is not going to talk about matters that happened before but only matters that will happen after the coming into force of this Bill. In respect of those companies that have been operating such accounts, anyway, we will only consider it in clause 74 on “transitional provisions”. Therefore, I request you to rest your case until then.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.


Clause 61
Mr Musasizi: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 61(4) as follows: 
“(4) A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.” 
The justification is that since most EMIs are not natural persons, it is important to increase the fine as the imprisonment sentence may not be applicable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing natural persons contravene it, what happens? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is about the issue of one thousand currency points. Honourable members, we are talking about very rich companies. One thousand currency points is very little money. Therefore, I propose that, for it to be a deterrent measure to those errant companies and the virtual people he is talking about, we increase it to a minimum of three thousand currency points – (Interjection) – That is my proposal.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, you asked for clarification. I think the wording here on the justification is the one which is not very straight. Electronic money issuers are not natural persons - these are companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 61 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 68 by replacing the words, “a payment service provider or a payment system operator” with the words “an electronic money issuer.”

The justification is that only electronic money issuers hold customer accounts. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 68, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to substitute sub-clause (1) with the following:
“(1) The Minister shall, in consultation with the central bank, by statutory instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect of this Act.”

The justification is that the power of issuing regulations should be vested in the minister not the Central Bank.

We propose further to insert a new clause sub-paragraph (g) to read as follows: “(g) Prescribe anti-competitive practices.”
The justification is to encourage fair competition among payment service providers and operators.

We also propose to insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “(4) the regulations made under this section shall be laid before Parliament for information.”
The justification is to give information to Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that Clause 72, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73
THE CHAIRPERSON: Who has an amendment on clause 73? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 73 by substituting for the word “Parliament” with the word “Cabinet.”

The justification is for consistency with other Acts of Parliament where amendment of the currency points does not require Parliamentary approval.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 73 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 74 by substituting the words, “five hundred currency points” with the words “one thousand currency points.”
The justification is that the proposed fine is not deterrent enough. I beg to submit.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Clause 75 is a transition provision. You recall that we stood over clause 1, on the commencement date so that we first determine clause 74. My view is that we delete clause 74 and maintain clause 1 so that we can have one legal regime.

If the minister defines a commencement date and then you give 12 months within which those companies that have been operating, should operate in the old law and then you subject the new companies to the new law, how will you supervise and regulate two legal regimes? 

I, therefore, propose that either we abandon the transition period and they all start at the same or the minister decides on the commencement date such that after the enactment of the law and after six months, the new law comes into effect such that we have only one legal regime that can be supervised by the Bank of Uganda. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are dealing with clause 74. How will the commencement affect the existing obligations? What are you going to do with the existing obligations? 

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, if the minister, for example, says that the commencement date is tomorrow and there are already existing payment systems, they will continue working under the old law under the guidelines that were given by Bank of Uganda for 12 months; and then when you subject the new companies to the new law, that means there will be two legal regimes. How will you regulate and supervise institutions using two legal regimes?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wish to disagree with my colleague, hon. Mawanda. I maintain that we do not only need clause 74, but we need to even strengthen it more. Otherwise, the existing companies are operating not under an existing legal regime because there is no law in force but also if we delete clause 74, we will leave the existing customers in electronic money transactions vulnerable.

If anything, we would have made a provision to adopt the provisions of clause 57 to ensure that the companies operating now, after the coming into force of this law, make a report to the Central Bank on the existing accounts, particularly those of the people who have since died and are no longer operational. 

We really need clause 74 to be strengthened; it should not be deleted. Therefore, I propose that we adopt the wording in clause 57, particularly sub-clauses (5) to (7), which would now be renumbered as sub-clause (3), (4) and (5), to cater for the existing accounts, before the coming into force of this particular Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that we amend clause 74 by adding sub-section (3). We should also adopt the wording in clause 57 (5), (6) and (7) to cover the existing accounts held by companies, which are going to be licensed under the Act so that they report to the Central Bank on the accounts they hold after the coming into force of this particular Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you formulate it?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, we say clause 74 (3), which will provide that the electronic money issuer shall, within five working days, after -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think he was proposing that we lift clause 57(5) and put it at clause 74. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wanted to seek clarification from the shadow Attorney-General. On the implanting or re-engineering of clause 74 by bringing clause 57(5), I would like to know from you, hon. Niwagaba, what is the mischief? Clause 57 is already part of the law.

Now, from what hon. Mawanda – Bank of Uganda mover – said, I would buy into reducing from 12 months to six months because that is the spirit in clause 57 and it would take care of the existing transactions. What is the danger? What do you want to cure? Why are you not comfortable with a reduction from 12 to six months and then we move on and leave clause 57 as it is, my other shadow Attorney-General?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, my honourable chairperson, of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. My intention was actually two-fold; that we save clause – (Interjection) – Be a good student and listen to me. You asked for clarification.

One, that we save clause 74. Two, that we look for a way of saving the existing customers of mobile money transactions. However, if those existing customers can be covered under clause 74 then what we will only need to do is, when it comes to a clause on commencement, we do not provide for this lengthy period of 12 months. Instead, we provide that a commencement date will be immediately after the presidential assent and then all of us would be covered there.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, I would like to respect the position of my shadow Attorney-General.

However, without mincing words, I think clause 74 is complete in itself and actually, we should not even reduce it to six months. The reason is, you have companies or persons who have been operating money payment systems under the old regime of the law and now they need to come in conformity with not only one requirement of dormant accounts. 

When you look at clause 58, it is on audit trail. That could have not been a condition precedent to operation of payment systems under the old law. You are then coming to customer due diligence requirements. You are going to liquid assets requirements. I think all these things, in the wisdom of the technocrats who have advised us on this law, would require not less than a year. Clause 74 is complete in itself. Actually, what we needed to do is we should have come out very clearly under clause 74 and reinforced the punishment, which the chairperson did, to one thousand currency points so that nobody can fail to comply; those who have been operating the payment system under the old law.

Members, let us maintain clause 74 under the old regulations that have been operating. One year for me is just good enough and the position here is excellent.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with the reasoning of hon. Anywarach because we have not had any law or regime under which these companies have been operating. Therefore, when he kept referring to the old law, I do not understand. 

There have been problems because there were no regulations or law. That is why we are coming up with this law. There is no need for us to allow these companies to continue for another 12 months to operate in the way they have been operating. We need to regulate them. That is why hon. Niwagaba is bringing amendments and that is why I also agree with the chairperson’s proposal of increasing the penalty to one thousand currency points. 

By the way, even one thousand currency points is less for these companies because one thousand currency points is about Shs 20 million. It is too little for these companies, which have been making a lot of money. It should have even been more than that but I would concede and still go with what the chairperson has proposed.

Madam Chairperson, I agree with the proposal of the chairperson but also the amendment pushed by hon. Niwagaba because these companies have not been operating using any law. We must be able to make them operate under the law we are making now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to know - Is this approval of the Central Bank for one month, three months or four months? I imagine a licence will take one year. If I am given one year now, why should you interfere with it? I need to run for my 12 months. Why should you interfere with it?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, if you say you give a transition period of 12 months for the companies that are now operating illegally – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether it is illegal.

MR MAWANDA: Well, they might not be operating illegally but they are under certain guidelines. For example, when people put money on their platform, they open an account. For example, MTN has a licence from UCC but has MTN mobile services. MTN mobile services gives financial services, which are not regulated by either UCC or Bank of Uganda. It collects money from people, lends it out, gains interest and takes that interest alone without sharing it with the customers.

The new law says, open a trust account. Disclose the owners of the accounts and the balances such that when you invest this money, the interest that accrues or that you earn, share it with the customers. You are telling the new companies to do so but the old company continues to work; collecting money, earning interest and eating it alone.

Therefore, my concern is on those two legal regimes. You are very strict with one and you are telling another one to continue eating money for 12 months without sharing it with anybody. How do we take care of that, Madam Chairperson?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, you requested for clarification on clause 74 regarding the existing companies that are getting written approval from the Central Bank to operate. For how long has this been? 

Normally like the licences of other commercial banks, we have been giving these licences and approvals in perpetuity. You don’t say you renew a monthly or yearly licence. We give you a licence to operate. If something goes wrong then we revoke it or do something. I do not know whether hon. Mawanda and the shadow Attorney-General could agree because we could reduce the period of 12 months and give these existing companies six months to finalise whatever they are doing and then comply with the new law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, according to this proposal, these 12 months are for this person to apply for a licence under the new law. Why do you have a problem with that? You can use one to five months to apply, but you must not go beyond 12 months.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Bahati has just been mean with the truth but when you look at the new law, it is creating a trust account. What has happened before is that these companies bank in commercial banks and it is them to declare to Government what they have as collection.

The art of this Bill, in my opinion, is the trust collection account because if it is Bank of Uganda and all the parties have interfaced, all the loopholes which have existed from the time of inception of these companies will be closed. Therefore, if we give them 12 months to continue with the flaw, which is the justification of the Bill? We are saying that 12 months is a lot of time for them to continue operating.

Madam Chairperson, it is these companies which have been disclosing their collections to Bank of Uganda. These companies have even no business holding onto this money even for a minute. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I asked how long will this written approval last and the minister said that it is in perpetuity. When they give you, you just go on.

MR BAHATI: That is the current situation, Madam Chairperson. I do not know whether hon. Mawanda has an operating company, which can prove otherwise, but what we have been giving as Central Bank is that when you come to apply, we give you permission to operate. We do not say operate for only one month or a year. But, if something happens, we can come back.

Madam Chairperson, the issue in this clause is about how long we can allow the existing company to operate. I had moved for 12 months but after consultation, I was proposing six months after listening to the members. Now, if members are not making any proposal, it is important that we now put the question so that we decide on the matter.

MR OBOTH:  Madam Chairperson, you had guided and we should not lose the import of clause 74. Hon. Niwagaba said, rightly so, that there are some presumptions that we do not have any law. It is not even an assumption but a fact. This is the first law to regulate the sector.

Madam Chair, you indicated that the 12 months being provided for here is a leeway for these companies to apply. Now, the offense is created that if after 12 months you have not applied for license, you commit an offense. Why are we members having difficulty in this when we could either after the commencement of this law of six months, then they will all run around. If the relevant minister has stated that after consultation, they can handle the licensing process or the application within six months after commencement, I would invite members to go with this position. Thank you very much, for listening.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the intention of this law is to bring order into the sector. Therefore, let us go with six months and put pressure on the operators to move towards the law. Is that okay?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the proposal of six months. However, I do not want us to lose the amendment which the chairperson had put up on clause 74 of one thousand currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That one is a given.

MR OKUPA: Is it? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 74 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10
MR ANYWARACH: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, we propose a new sub clause 9 to cater for -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Are you coming back to clause 10, we stood over it.

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, clause 10, a new sub clause 9 to provide for recourse to court to any aggrieved party who is denied grant of licence under sub clause 8. Madam Chairperson, this is how the proposal should read: “Any applicant aggrieved by the decision to deny grant of license, may appeal to the High Court within 30 days from the date of the decision to deny grant of a license.”

My justification is that recourse to court is a given, it is a party’s right who feels that he is aggrieved to go to court. Therefore, we should not hold the hands of the applicant. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable member, I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced under clause 10 as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, there is something we overlooked; the spirit is that all penalties are now being harmonised to one thousand currency-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not put the question on the amendment. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 as amended do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask your good office to relook at the penalty under clause 65(4) that, “A person who contravenes the provision of sub section (3) commits an offense and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 350 currency point.”

In the committee report they harmonised it and said that for the purpose of this law, the offence should attract one thousand currency points. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have already passed that clause. If you are interested, do a re-committal; you cannot alter it now.

MR NIWAGABA: It does not require us to do a re-committal. We did pass as Parliament the Law Revision Miscellaneous Provisions Act, which provides the guidelines on purposes of fines and imprisonment. Therefore, they intend to rhyme. You do not simply come in and say we want it like this; they must rhyme with what is provided in that law and I believe the Bill put into consideration that particular law.

Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any changes on clause 2 for interpretation? Where is the chairperson?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we had made some changes on clause 2 but after further consultations with the mover, we agreed to leave clause 2 as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1
MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We stood over clause 1 until we determine clause 74. Clause 1 suggests that instead of giving the minister powers to pronounce himself on the commencement day of the statutory instrument, I propose that it should be immediately after assent by the President such that we do not leave it with the minister and other people and wait for the date in perpetuity. Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Mover.

Mr bahati: Madam Chairperson, I have been on the opposing side with hon. Mawanda but on this particular one, I agree with his proposal. (Laughter)

The Chairperson: Hon. Mawanda, restate how the proposal will read.

Mr mawanda: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. “This Act shall come into force immediately after assent by the President.” 

The Chairperson: If he does not assent, we activate it from our side.

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, looking at section 74 that we passed, it is creating an offence from the date of commencement by giving six months. What kind of notice would these operators or service providing companies know? Probably, I was thinking that the statutory instrument here was to give notice to people. 

We can harmonise that; otherwise, we are creating an offence from the date of commencement. If you default after six months, you will have committed an offence. Yet here, the commencement takes immediate effect after the assent. That is how many legislations have been made. The Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda could guide us on this matter. 

You are creating an offence by the commencement date of this Bill. On clause 1, you are saying that the commencement shall not be by the minister because ministers shall take forever – that is according to them. I know you are very – the Learned Attorney-General, how best can we harmonise this?
 
Mr byaruhanga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think hon. Oboth is suggesting that it would be superfluous to talk about presidential assent whereas within the same law, the time of six months is given. Is that so? I find no contradiction because immediately the President assents to a Bill, it becomes law. Therefore, that six months will be effective.

The Chairperson: I do not want to complicate this further but the law becomes effective after publication. Its assent and then publication. Do we need to say anything about this?

We can delete clause 1. Once the President assents and it is published, you move forward.

Mr niwagaba: Madam Chairperson, under the Acts of Parliament Act, a law is published in the Gazette and that is adequate notice.

The Chairperson: So we can do away with clause 1.

I put the question that clause 1 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Schedule, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

Mr anywarach: Madam Chairperson, did you propose that clause 1 should be deleted?

The Chairperson: Yes, because under the Acts of Parliament Act, once the Bill is assented to and is published in the Gazette, it becomes effective. We do not need to talk about it.

Mr anywarach: Isn’t there need of stating that?

The Chairperson: Once it is published in the Gazette, it becomes law.

Mr anywarach: Thank you. 

Mr byaruhanga: Perhaps the member is saying that as a result of that, you do not have any article 1 if you delete it; unless you are saying that then the clause on “Interpretation” becomes clause 1 and you go on.
 
The Chairperson: The people drafting it will handle that.

Mr byaruhanga: If it is consequential then the “Interpretation” becomes clause 1.

The Chairperson: They will handle the sequencing of the sections.
 
  
Motion for the house to resume

4.05
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding_)

Report from the committee of the whole House

4.06
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

Motion for adoption of the report of the committee of the whole house

4.06
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING
THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

4.07
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A bill for an Act entitled, the National payment systems Act, 2020

The Speaker: Title settled and the Bill passes.(Applause)
I would like to thank our Committee of the whole House for the work done, the minister and honourable members for completing that part of our responsibilities. 

4.08
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your leadership upon passing this Bill and also the members for the support you have given us.

I would like to single out the chairperson of the committee and the members and also the member who put enormous pressure on us, hon. Okupa Elijah. This is how we should work together. I am very grateful that this has passed. Now our systems can work - the mobile money and all the others systems - so that we can serve our people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us move to next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you know, this matter was partially handled. We had gone as far as part 7. I do not know whether the Attorney-General can recap for us where we are and how to move because we are supposed to go to part 8.

4.11
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you may all recall, on 17 March 2020, the Speaker adjourned debate on the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 to let the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs as well as our Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to harmonize some proposed amendments under part 8 on the retirement benefits relating to the grounds for retirement of judicial officers, disqualification for receipt of retirement benefits, the quantum of the monetary benefits and payments of retirement benefits to the dependants of deceased and retired judicial officers, which at that time, Madam Chairperson, I had sought to move in the Committee of the whole House, under Rule 133 (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, prior to that, the House had made significant progress on the Bill debating and passing all clauses of the Bill with the exception of the long title, clauses 1, 21, 23, 24 and 27 as well as schedules to the Bill.

Subsequently, we have harmonised the amendments and we would now like to proceed with the second reading. I am confident that with this new position presented in our harmonised amendments, we ought to be able to pass the Bill. 

We hope this can ensure that a comprehensive provision is finally made on the function institutional, operational and administrative independence of the Judiciary as well as retirement benefits of judicial officers. That is what I would like to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, as indicated, what was pending was clause 1, which we shall do last and so, the active ones for now are clauses 21, 23, 24 and 27. 

Clause 21
4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth Oboth): Madam Chairperson, on clause 21, I think the Attorney-General and team have proposed amendments as we went out to harmonise. What he reported is true to the record that yes, we discussed and agreed on some of the pending issues. If you can permit him to move the amendments; we do not have any amendments to ourselves.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson. We want to appreciate the efforts of the parties that revised these particular clauses. However, I think it is prudent for them to read out the harmonised positions for us the outsiders also to get to hear what they agreed on. We would not be happy to just put the question and we say yes or no.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that is why we are sitting here. So, I expect that the movers are going to present their harmonised position.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I go straight away to clause 21. This clause refers to the retirement benefits for the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice. We are proposing the deletion of the words, “in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution.”

The justification is that this is in order to expand the provision to take into account instances where a Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice may retire from office before attaining the mandatory age of retirement, for example, on medical grounds. The other justification is the amendment is for uniformity and consistence.

Madam Chairperson, I request you to guide whether I can go through all the harmonised clauses before we go to the schedule or –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go, clause by clause.

MR BYARUHANGA: We go clause by clause. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal to delete some words in clause 21. I think he has explained that the Chief Justice may retire on grounds other than the ones under Article 144.

I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson clause 23 is expected to tackle the retirement benefits for Justices of the Supreme Court and the Justices of the Court of Appeal.

We are proposing the deletion of the words “in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution.”

The justification is to expand the provision in order to take into account instance where a Justice of the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal may retire from office before attaining the mandatory age of retirement again, for example, on medical grounds; it is for uniformity and consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 24
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 24 is expected to address the retirement benefits for the Principal Judge and the Judges of the High Court.
There we are proposing the deletion of the words, “in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution.”

The justification is to expand the provision in order to take into account instances where the Principal Judge or/and the Judge of the High Court may retire from office before attaining the mandatory age of retirement again, for example, on medical grounds; it is for uniformity and consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 27
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we propose insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 25; a new clause 26, which will provide for retirement on other grounds.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Present.
 
MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, retirement on other grounds, under clause 26, would state, “Notwithstanding sections 2l to 25, a judicial officer is entitled to the retirement benefits granted under this part if -
(a) he or she retires on medical grounds with medical evidence to the satisfaction of the Judicial Service Commission that he or she is unable to perform the functions of his or her office, arising from either infirmity of body or mind, and that, that infirmity is likely to be permanent;
(b) he or she retires from the Judiciary Service -
(i) in the case of a Chief Justice, a Deputy Chief Justice, a Principal Judge, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of the Court of Appeal, a Judge of the High Court, a Chief Registrar or a Registrar, with the consent of the President, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission; or
(ii) in the case of a magistrate, with the written consent of the Judicial Service Commission.”

Our justification is to provide for grounds for retirement, outside the grounds set out under Article 144, for example, on medical grounds.

MR OKUPA: On that new clause where the Attorney-General talked about the terms based on medical grounds to the satisfaction of the Judicial Service Commission, I wish you had mentioned the Medical Board because you are saying, “...medical grounds to the satisfaction of the Judicial Service Commission.” I thought the Medical Board is a competent authority to determine issues of health. If you could rephrase it and have the Medical Board captured in one of those - 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarity from the Chair and the Attorney-General as to whether what you are proposing here is common practice in other sectors. 

If we allow people to draw benefits based on medical grounds, what is happening in other sectors? Is it the same? I think that is very critical. We need to have consistency across the public sector. Is it so in Public Service? Is it a common practice in Parliament, in State House, in President’s Office, in Ministry of Works and Transport and the entire Executive? Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the Minister of Public Service can give us information on that. 

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Chairperson, it is indeed possible in other sectors for a public servant to retire on medical grounds. It is not strange at all. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I think there is a point raised by hon. Okupa. Can I just go to Case Clinic and they say, you can now retire? Who is competent to say that I am retiring on medical grounds? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Okupa, I concede to that. I agree that the amendment can include acting on the advice of the Medical Board and the Judicial Service Commission. I concede to that. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You had also talked about the issue of the Judicial Service Commission and the President. If the rationale is to look for the independence of the Judiciary, I think the issue of including the President in the retirement of the judicial officers is uncalled for here. 

The right phrase should be, “Retirement on such grounds to include medical incapacitation as approved by the Medical Board of Uganda and the Judicial Service Commission” but nothing to do with the President. If you are sick, you are sick. You don’t need the consent of the President.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who finally releases you from the service? Who finally says you can go? Isn’t it the President? No, the Medical Board cannot release you, you are appointed - 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, it is the Judicial Service Commission that finally gives you consent to leave the service.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we don’t need the President.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, if we really want to have independence of the Judiciary, whereas the President appoints and Parliament approves, from the recommendations of the Judicial Service Commission, when it comes to retirement, it is true, like we have all agreed, that Government concedes to this, if we want to promote independence. 

Just imagine if I made a decision that is not in favour of the President. Even with all those recommendations, you might find the Head of State withholding my retirement in order to delay my benefits.

Therefore, since the whole House, in a bi-partisan manner, agrees that it is the Judicial Service Commission that takes care of the conduct and wellbeing of its members and it is based on the recommendation - 

MR OBOTH: Hon. Nsereko is a member of the committee but I would like to share this. I know he knows that from the position of commissioners in Government - and I thought the Minister of Public Service was going to allude to that - they are appointed by the President on the advice of the relevant service commissions.

Therefore, the one who appoints can also release you on advice and the phrasing here is “on the advice”. However, what we needed to concede to, together with the Attorney-General, was about the involvement of the Medical Board and Judicial Service Commission and it would be just a formality. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there are two things. In the proposed 26(a), that is where you retire on medical grounds but on this other one, maybe you are just tired and you want to leave. That is why you need the Judicial Service Commission and the President. There are two legs.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with retirement on medical grounds. However, I would also like to agree with the committee chairperson on the issue of the consent of the President. This is because there are some of these judicial officers – the judges – who are seconded to work in other commissions, for example, the Electoral Commission and others. When they go there, they have to go with their package. If we miss this point – I think that during their retirement, they will also enjoy their retirement benefits as judges. Maybe the Minister of Public Service can clarify this to me. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On this one, he cannot act alone. He has to be advised by the Judicial Service Commission.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to give my opinion that it would be good for the Judicial Service Commission to be in charge instead of the President, for the independence of the Judiciary. I had a contrary view that, okay, it may be good to allow them to retire on medical grounds but they are already privileged enough to work beyond the mandatory Public Service retirement age. If the House feels that there is need, then it has to be approved by the Judicial Service Commission. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am concerned about whether the proposal being mooted is not actually unconstitutional. The Constitution has given us the ground, that after the age of 60, a judicial officer may retire at any time. For us, we are saying even if the judicial officer is at 42 or 43 years but has a medical issue –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: The information I would like to give to my younger brother from Kaliro is that not all the judicial officers retire at 60. Sixty would be for Public Service. There are those who retire at 70. Therefore, it is not uniform.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, my brother. Madam Chairperson, Article 144 says a judicial officer may retire at any time after attaining the age of 60 years and shall vacate his or her office and, in the case of a Chief Justice, it is 70 years. At that age, you must vacate your office. You may retire at any time after attaining the age of 60 but there is a mandatory age at which you must vacate your office. A judicial officer “may retire after attaining the age of 60” but there is a cut-off age and the moment you attain that age you must vacate office. 

My point is that, in this case where we are providing for medical ground, if a judicial officer is just 45 years old and he has medical issues and we are saying they can retire, I think that maybe what we are doing is not in consonance with this particular provision of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we hear from the committee chairperson?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. About what hon. Lubogo is saying, I think he would know that this is an exception – when the law is providing for other grounds other than the one in Article 144. This is when the medical condition you are in, at whatever age, cannot allow you to perform the activities and functions of that office.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, we know that the Constitution is the supreme law and we cannot use a legislation to amend the Constitution. The Constitution has already given us a stipulation that on attaining the age of 60, a judicial officer may retire but in the case of a Chief Justice, if he attains the age of 70, then he must go. Okay? However, as long as he is above 60, he may retire. What we are trying to do here is to use an Act of Parliament to amend the Constitution. Is it in order for us to  use an Act to amend the provision of the Constitution?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lubogo, are you saying that if I am 50 and I want to go, I cannot go because you want me to reach 60 years?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, there is a provision – someone can resign from office. There is a difference between “resigning” and “retiring”. It should not be a question of retirement for you to benefit from what has been created. I think a person who is like 42, 43 or 45 years should not retire. If he is unable to perform the duty, then he should be relieved of his duties. A person can be relieved of his or her duties because of incapacity based on health or other grounds.

MR NIWAGABA: I think hon. Lubogo needs to know that what the law does not prohibit, it allows. The constitutional provision you have read does not prohibit retirement before 60.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you. In my opinion, we have agreed that somebody can retire because of a medical condition. Secondly, I think now that the President is the one who appoints and disappoints, it would be proper for us to keep him there because he is the one who appoints and disappoints. Therefore, whether you are 60 or 65, so long as it warrants the involvement of the President, in my opinion, it is okay.

Thirdly, Madam Chairperson, about what we are talking about here – like what my colleague has been reading – the word “may” means “it may or it may not”. I thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the discussion but I think the committee and the Attorney–General should help us in interpreting that word “may” in the Constitution. 

Secondly, we could refer to Article 144(1)(c), which also gives the mandate to Parliament to come up with a prescription that is fitting. I think the committee and the Attorney–General could help me.

However, I am concerned about a judicial officer – whether judge or whoever and at whatever rank – retiring after fulfilling the conditions which we are prescribing now by virtue of age or ill health. Can we put a clause which would bar any judicial officer who is retired in accordance with this law and thereafter acquires another contract of service? 

There is a possibility, as prescribed here, that a judicial officer retires, he or she gets a very handsome retirement package but after that, he or she is allowed again to be engaged by other agencies within or outside the country. Can we find a way of safeguarding against such unscrupulous behaviour? We can never rule out some of this. Is there any way we can safeguard against this? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ogwal, if I complete my judicial work in Uganda and the Kenyans invite me as a consultant, do you really want to stop me from getting –

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am making reference to jobs within the country. It is the same Consolidated Fund that the retired judicial officer will be drawing money from, within the country. Is that allowed or is there any mechanism that we can use to stop that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall ask the Minister of Public Service to advise us.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, if the officer has retired, indeed he or she has retired. However, if the officer has a skill that is required, certainly there is nothing to bar that officer from providing the service on contract. (Interjections) I do not think a law should be put in place - (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, once someone is adjudged to be unfit to serve, I do not think that person can continue to work. If Uganda Medical Board has checked someone and found that such a person should be retired on medical grounds, why should you come and tell us that you can come back again and say that you are working on contract?

Madam Chairperson, I, therefore, tend to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We must put a valve to check on this kind of behaviour because it can happen.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, within this Bill, we have already passed provisions for a retired judge to be contracted. It is there. Obviously, if you are sick –

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with what Members are proposing as well. This is a judge who has retired and is going to stand in Kalungu West as a Member of Parliament. If he is voted by the people, he will come to Parliament and get paid from the Consolidated Fund just like me. So, let us not just – (Interjections) – Yes, he may even be appointed the Attorney-General. He will have come to Parliament through another channel. These things are happening.

Secondly, he or she may get an accident and has their leg amputated and then later gets healed and goes to contest or gets another job. I do not think you can control a person to that level. It will be against the Constitution - (Interjection) - It will, and I think we can look at those provisions.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, you had given me an opportunity. 

I think we had a serious debate when we brought the law on the older persons’ benefits. There were civil servants who had attained the age of benefitting as senior citizens. At first, they were segregated but we said they should not be segregated as this is for their benefit as senior citizens and if they have their pension too, that is their business. 

I would like to agree with the honourable chair that we should bar people who have retired either under mandatory retirement, as stipulated in Article 144, or under the provision we are proposing, where there is infirmity of the body and mind, from later working. I think it is unacceptable.  

Madam Chairperson, what is in contestation now is whether or not the President should be included in requesting for retirement or approval for retirement under ill health or infirmity of the body or mind. My position would be that the President is the appointing authority, therefore even the process of consulting with the Judicial Service Commission is up to the President accepting or refusing and is in itself a check and balance on whether the person retiring is really retiring for a justified medical ground. This, therefore, leaves us with the question of whether Uganda Medical Board should be involved. That should be at the preliminary stage, when the person is applying for retirement. 

Therefore, to me, we cannot capture it under the law because the law is capturing the principle under which you can retire, and here we are saying on medical grounds. Whether the medical grounds are provable by the hospital or Uganda Medical Board, that will support you to apply for retirement. Whether you will be granted the retirement is now administrative. You go to the Judicial Service Commission and with the consent of the President as the appointing authority. For me, the mover of the amendment, as a new subclause (26), takes the day. I would like to therefore convince Members that, that is the right position. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you agree with the mover on both (a) and (b).

MR ANYWARACH: Absolutely.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, we have Members of Parliament who are earning pension from where they worked but they are also earning here. So, I think we should not – (Interjection)- They are there. Like hon. Ssewungu explained, if judges also come in that way, we should not bar them – (Interjection)- I will give you time for information later.

Secondly, the issue of the Uganda Medical Board should be really brought here. Since he has conceded, it is okay.

Lastly, if you are an appointing authority, then you are an authority. If you are not anywhere – This business of appointing people and then they do not perform according to your will –(Interjection)- I will take information from hon. Kahonda and from the Member from Kalungu West.

MR KAHONDA: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, this is not the first time we are having such a scenario. In the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), under the UPDF Act, there is mandatory age for retirement. If you are a captain, for example, and you are supposed to retire, and you have attained the age of 40, you qualify for pension and you can retire. 

There are also circumstances under which you can qualify for pension under medical grounds. If you served in the UPDF for a period of nine years and you retire on medical grounds, irrespective of the age - before attaining the age of 40 – definitely, you qualify for pension. 

I think this is also the same scenario where we are considering judges - Under medical grounds, even if you have not attained that mandatory retirement age, you qualify for your retirement benefits. Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you. Finally, I will take information from the Member for Kalungu West and then I wind up.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, in our districts, most of the chairpersons of the district service commission are retired officers. In Masaka, we have Justice Kibuuka, we have the chairman of the district land board; all these people are serving. The chairman of the district service commission is the only one mandated to get a salary among all the people who are appointed.

Now, when you bring this kind of clause, you are creating a problem in such areas. This man comes home and within the Masaka, Kalungu area, he can serve. That is the information I want to give.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you. Finally, I would like to request Members to go with the proposal from mover so that we can take this thing through. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I just want to allay the fears of those who are saying that the President should not be involved in the retirement. He is part of the appointment, together with Parliament and the Judicial Service Commission. The proposal is that it is the Judicial Service Commission, which will advise him about someone’s need to retire. Having received the advice from the Judicial Service Commission, then he can take action.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the learned Attorney-General that the ground relating to medical was ably handled by the framers of the Constitution, still under Article 144, and I invite those with the Constitution to critically look at Article 144, clause (2), paragraph (a). 

After prescribing the age limit, the Constitution went ahead to also prescribe other circumstances under which a judicial officer may be removed from office. Such a judicial officer may be removed from office for “inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind”. That exactly settles – (Interjections) – Allow me to finish. 

In my view, the practice in all sectors of the public service is that where one has a problem relating to the capacity of their body to perform the function for which they were contracted to perform, then the medical board is mandated to give them that permission, by prescribing the nature and extent to which their health cannot permit them to perform the duties for which they were contracted. Once that has been done, they are then discharged and paid what is due to them in terms of retirement. This has happened to the majority of the judicial officers that we have had, who have left because of medical reasons. For that reason, I would implore and invite the honourable members to take the proposal as presented by the learned Attorney-General positively.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, before hon. Baba Diri comes in, I just want to say that I am getting confused with what the Member was saying. When he quoted the Constitution, he talked about removal, yet we are talking about retirement. Can we separate the two.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the retirement on medical grounds, and I am happy that the preceding speaker mentioned it. 

Quite often, when people see someone who is sick or disabled, they automatically recommend for their retirement, which I say should not be the case unless they prove that that person is unable to perform their duties. That provision is there in the Constitution and I would like it to be lifted into this Act, so that they do not forget it. Quite often when they see a person who has gone blind, they say they are unable to perform their duties, yet they can still perform their duties. So, that should be put there in the Act.

On the issue of the President, since he is the appointing authority, I think when the medical board and the Judiciary have already proved that a person is really incapable of doing their work, it is important to inform the President. It is important to inform him so that he knows that such and such a judicial officer is no longer there and he maybe thinks about replacing him. Thank you very much.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much indeed. Honourable members, the new clause proposed by the Attorney-General and agreed on by the chairman of the committee foresees a certain situation. In addition to the age mentioned in the Constitution, if a judicial officer cannot perform the job they are assigned to do and the reason, as spelt out in the proposed clause, is infirmity of body and mind, - and that infirmity is likely to be permanent since it has required the approval of the medical board - how could you not allow this person to retire? By holding this person and not consenting to his or her retirement, what would you be doing to the service, because there is infirmity of the mind and infirmity of the body?

Secondly, I would like to comment on the proposed clause 26 (b) (i). I think there is sometimes a misunderstanding. We have bodies specified in the Constitution. The Governor of the Bank of Uganda is independent but, Madam Chairperson, the other day, he was appearing before a committee of Parliament. The Auditor-General is also independent.

Now, there is a misunderstanding about independence of anything. Independence in this case means, in performing your function, you are not directed; therefore, you are independent in your work. However, if independence is taken to the extreme, then the Chief Justice should not be appointed by anybody; he should just come from heaven and become the Chief Justice. 

The moment you agree that the Chief Justice should be appointed and you agree with the appointing authority to appoint the Chief Justice, surely and logically, when decisions are required for the Chief Justice to retire or leave, the consent of the authority that appointed him cannot be questioned as undermining the independence of the Judiciary. It cannot be - (Interjections) – Yes, it cannot be. It cannot be that you accepted to be appointed but somehow, you think you would be undermining your independence if you seek from the authority that appointed you to leave. How else can you run an institution?

So, I would like to appeal to the House to agree with the proposal tabled by the learned Attorney-General and amended by the distinguished colleague, hon. Elijah Okupa, by adding the medical board to ensure that this infirmity, which is the reason and for whatever reason which is not age, is indeed verified by those competent to do so. The authority competent to justify retirement on medical grounds is the medical board. Once these two are there, there is no ground to fear this being provided in the law. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern regards those that will be retiring, under any grounds, before the age of 60 or 65 years. Our concern here is that as somebody retires, he or she will be going with a salary. 

There are conditions that may not be easy for any other person to prove. For medical grounds or many other grounds, somebody can have his or her reasons put on paper and eventually, they will retire that person. When somebody retires and is aware that even if they retire at 45 years, they will go with their salary, somebody will leave and continue earning a salary while she or he begins another project since they will be earning – (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. I just have brief information to give. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my brother is that the amendment we are proposing is rendering Article 144(2)(a) redundant because we are already creating a situation that as long as you are unable to perform medically, you can opt to retire. Therefore, we are making the removal of a person on the basis of infirmity redundant in the Constitution. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed and amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27
MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, on this specifically, I would ask for your indulgence to prevail in guiding us and especially the Attorney-General should provide clarity. We have seen Chief Justice Odoki who was reappointed to that office. The date of the commencement of benefits, if a judge who has attained mandatory age is reappointed - Can that enjoyment of the benefits of retirement start after the expiry of the date of the reappointment?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if I have retired and I am entitled to my benefits, why do you want to postpone it? No, that is not right. If I have retired and I am given a contract, the contract is separate from my other life.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, there is a numbering issue here. In the Bill, we still have clause 26, which we have not dealt with. Those were new clauses. When we left clause 25, we went straight to the new clause, which was inserted, but in the Bill we still have clause 26, which is not dealt with, and it now comes to clause 27.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I told you that what was outstanding was clauses 1, 21, 23, 24 and 27. The others are already done.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Oh! Madam Chairperson, I do not know how I can seek clarification -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We finished that in March. Honourable members, just go back to the Hansard of 19 February 2020. That is when we passed clauses 1 to 36. So, that is a settled matter.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Article 27 is a provision on disqualifications for retirement benefits. 
“A judicial officer who leaves or is removed from the judicial service under any of the following circumstances shall not be entitled to retirement benefits under this Act -
    (a) where the judicial officer is removed from the judiciary service in accordance with the Constitution; or
    (b) where the judicial officer absconds from duty.”

Madam Chairperson, our justification is to prescribe the circumstances under which a judicial officer does not qualify to receive retirement benefits under the Act.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification on clause 27. The honourable minister seems to be introducing either an amendment or a new clause because we have subclause (3), which I have an issue with -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you referring to the old clause 27?

MR OTHIENO: Clause 27 in the Bill. Do we have a different Bill? What I would like to find out from the Attorney-General is whether his amendment does away with the original text of clause 27 in the Bill. If the answer is to the affirmative, then I rest my case. I would like to find out if you are entirely replacing this with what you are reading. Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, from what I recall, I think the honourable minister was deleting the old clause 27 and replacing it with this -

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The honourable Attorney-General has proposed two conditions for one to be disqualified from retirement benefits. One is the Constitution and the other is abscondment from duty.

Madam Chairperson, may I seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General. The Constitution gives wide latitude; which particular provisions or circumstances under the Constitution is he referring to? Abscondment from duty is understandable but in the Constitution there could be a lot of provisions where, as we are legislating, we need to be clear in our minds that if a judicial officer breaches these conditions, he or she stands to be disqualified. However, he has put it in such a manner that it is so wide and it may get lost along the way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want him to state the particular Article?

MR SSEKIKUBO: The exact provision within the Constitution - the Article and sub-article that he is referring to. Otherwise, the Constitution is such a wide and huge document that we may not certainly know. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, my honourable colleague, whom I refer to as my president. The particular provision in the Constitution is Article 144. However, because we change our Constitution quite often, it would be risky to make reference to that particular provision in this Bill. Therefore, allow it as presented by the Attorney-General.

Mr ssekikubo: Madam Chairperson, I take the guidance of the learned Attorney-General Niwagaba and concede.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I want clarification from the Attorney-General. This is the marginal note of the old clause 27 in the Bill: “Disapplication of the Pensions Act, Cap. 286”. I do not know whether you would like us to put the question to that old one and then you add this new one on qualification for retirement benefits.

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yes, this is an insertion.

The Chairperson: Is it additional to the old clause 27?

Mr byaruhanga: Yes. That is why I said at the beginning of the amendments introducing the new clauses that we are inserting.

The Chairperson: Let us put the question to the old clause 27. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, agreed to.

The chairperson: I now put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: I put the question that the new clause do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General should have moved to insert an additional clause 28. I think that is what could give him opportunity. I hope that is the last insertion.

The Chairperson: We had already dealt with clause 28, so it cannot be a new clause 28. Say that you are inserting a new clause and then we shall renumber it. Did you repeal section 46 of the Judicature Act?

Mr byaruhanga: No, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: Are you deleting clause 28 and inserting this?

Mr byaruhanga: We are inserting this in clause 28.

The Chairperson: What are you doing with the old clause 28, which we passed? Just say that it is a new clause but now you are insisting on clause 28. How many clauses 28 do you have? 

Mr byaruhanga: We have one.

The Chairperson: Is it the old clause 28 or the new one?

Mr Byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing an insertion in clause 28 itself.

The Chairperson: Why don’t you just insert a new clause?

Mr byaruhanga: May I proceed, Madam Chairperson?

The Chairperson: Yes.

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you. Under clause 28, we are inserting –

The Chairperson: Just insert a new clause.

Mr byaruhanga: Okay.  
“Payment of benefits to dependants 
(1) Where a judicial officer dies while in service, the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of the deceased judicial officer shall be entitled to - 
(a) a one-off lump sum retirement benefit granted under paragraph 2 of the schedules; and
(b) the monthly retirement benefit granted under paragraph 1 of schedules 2, 4, 5 and 6 of this Act for a period of 15 years from the date of the death of the judicial officer.

(2) Where a retired judicial officer to whom a monthly retirement benefit has been granted under paragraph 1 of schedules 2, 4, 5 and 6 of this Act dies during retirement, the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of the deceased shall be entitled to the monthly retirement benefit for the unexpired period of those years.

(3) Where a judicial officer to whom a monthly retirement benefit is granted under paragraph 1 of schedules 2, 4, 5 and 6 of this Act dies after receiving the benefit for 15 years, the payment of the monthly retirement benefit shall cease.

(4) For the avoidance of doubt, the retirement benefits granted to the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of a deceased judicial officer under subsection (1) or (2) shall be limited…” –(Interruption)

Ms ogwal: Madam Chairperson, the information being given to us by the Attorney-General is very fundamental to this Bill. However, we do not seem to have the amendment at hand and it is not even uploaded. Can we get the amendment so that we can internalise it and find out where you are coming from? The information you are giving us makes this Bill more complicated. We have given you the good will, but now you seem to be making it complicated. Can we have the details of that amendment?

Mr byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, all the amendments have been uploaded; there is evidence here. Perhaps, what may appear to be confusing, as I had asked in the beginning, is that when we were making these amendments, we had not yet gone to the schedules. That is why I was asking if we could make individual amendments and then go to the schedule and discuss, because the schedules are the ones that hold the specifics. In making this particular insertion, I am assuming that it shall abide whatever shall be agreed on in the schedules. I hope I have helped.

The Chairperson: If they are already in the schedule, why did you bring them here?

Mr byaruhanga: Madam Chairperson, you remember that as I was proposing the amendments of the Chief Justice and the Supreme Court judges, I did say that the details were in the schedule.

Madam Chairperson, you remember that the issue, which was subject to debate, was the item in the schedule that referenced the retirement benefit and the quantum that these judicial officers would be entitled to. If you recall, when we last adjourned, the issue was the quantum - was it 100 per cent or otherwise? I was thinking that if we did not discuss the schedule then, we can discuss it now, but this particular insertion would abide it.

The Chairperson: Are you proposing that we stand over this and go to the schedule?

Mr Byaruhanga: I am quite fine with that, or we can go with it and then – Madam Chairperson, you had guided at the beginning that we shall go to the schedules after we have agreed on the amendments. If you say that we stay this over and go to the schedules or we complete this and we agree that they will abide the schedule - I would like you to guide, Madam Chairperson.

Mr okupa: Madam Chairperson, at the beginning, the Attorney-General said he had harmonised with the chairperson of the committee and the team. May I know from the chairperson whether this is the harmonised position the Attorney-General was referring to in his opening remarks?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the answer to hon. Okupa’s query is in the affirmative, and this is after consulting around to see what the practical situation pertaining now is - the legal regime - when a public officer passes on in service. What happens? We found out that when a public officer dies while in service, the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of the deceased public officer - in this case, judicial officer - would be entitled, including in this Parliament.

Therefore, whatever is here is really for - In public service, they call it “survivor’s benefit”. Usually, we do not look at the things but this is the reality; when you go, it is not an absolute sad situation - (Interjection) - I will take information from my friend, hon. Niwagaba.

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to inform the chairperson that clause 27 actually repeals, in effect, the provisions of the Pensions Act. That is why we need a new clause, which is being inserted, to refer to those other benefits that used to apply under the Pensions Act.

MR OBOTH: That is why I chose you as my friend because you are intelligent. (Laughter). That is exactly one of the reasons. You cannot disapply the Pensions Act and leave it hanging; so, this is to fit the gap.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am a bit overwhelmed with the amendment, particularly the financial implication. I am not so sure whether this amendment has taken care of the financial implication because it looks as if it is an additional charge. Can it be clarified that this has no financial implication?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first of all, the proposal is coming from the Government; so, it does not offend Article 93. Secondly, when you remove the Pensions Act from applying to the judges, you must provide something. This is what this provision is saying.

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us now go to the schedules. I put the question that schedule 1 –

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I think the way it reads here and the amendments - Are we on schedule 1?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Schedule 1 is about the staff of the Judiciary to be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.

MR KAKOOZA: Okay, sorry. I was concerned about schedule 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the chairperson have any amendments to the schedules?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, before the Attorney-General comes in, under schedule 2, paragraph 1, I think the Attorney-General should be clear as to what he wants to bring in this Bill. As it appears in the Bill, schedule 2, paragraph 1 reads as follows: “A monthly allowance equivalent to the basic salary payable to a sitting Chief Justice. The allowance shall be paid to the retired Chief Justice for life.” 

That is what is in the Bill. The Attorney-General, however, has an amendment on spouses and children which must be qualified here and even after the Chief Justice, it must be qualified here in this schedule.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As I look around the House, there is an uncoordinated movement of Members of Parliament. I see many small meetings. Is it not procedurally right for us to stand over this and then we adjourn and make sure that we come out with the best law, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is now 5.30 p.m. and we are approaching curfew time. It is an appropriate time to adjourn. I ask the Attorney-General to move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 has been considered and the House has adopted the following clauses, with amendments: clauses 21, 23, 24, and the new insertions immediately after clauses 25 and 26, the new clause 27, and schedule 1. They have all been passed with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
 
5.29
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, may I request the Attorney-General to circulate the proposed amendments on the schedules, which are remaining, so that by the time we come back on Tuesday, we do not waste time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please study the proposals. Look at the schedules - that is all that is remaining - so that on Tuesday we finish this. Now, we have lost some of the time for Tuesday, yet we are still stuck with the Bill.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 10 O’clock in the morning. Please, keep time because we have a lot of work.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 June 2020 at 10.00 a.m.)








