Thursday, 21 May 2015

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you can see from the Order Paper, we have one Bill and four reports on the budget matters. Let us see if we can finish all this and that will be a flash for us towards meeting the deadline imposed by the law on when the budget should be passed. Let us go on with business.

2.09
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Yesterday but one, we witnessed a nasty scene in the premises of Parliament, where one of the citizens of Uganda, a lady, was arrested in an undignified manner. What bothered the onlookers - because it was live on television - is that the Parliament of Uganda, which belongs to everybody and where people should feel secure; witnessed a group of people coming to present their petition to this Parliament on appointment with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - 

It was quite a challenge and I stand here to bring it to the notice of Government and to ask for clarification as to whether the public is not allowed to access the Parliament of Uganda. Two, if the way suspects are arrested in an undignified way does matter to this sitting Government. 

Lastly, there are such arrests and particularly we, the mothers of this country, feel increasingly embarrassed. At one time, breasts were squeezed, another time women have been arrested in the same nude way. We are seeing this on the increase. We deserve better, as mothers of this nation. Could Government take responsibility and apologise to this country and change the method of work to let mothers have a dignified life in society. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if this matter happened in the precincts of Parliament, that would be the responsibility of the Speaker. We will do the investigations and we will communicate on Tuesday, when the House resumes. We will give you the details on what happened, why it happened that way and what steps have been taken to correct whatever wrongs have been meted against innocent people.

2.11
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing up on a matter of national importance. Schools all over the country, according to the government calendar, should have opened on Monday.

Private schools opened but Government’s Universal Primary Schools are not operating. We are here as representatives of the people of Uganda. We need to get information from Government because teachers have declared a strike under UNATU. What action is Government taking to ensure that children of the poor get equity in terms of education? We cannot negotiate the future of our children, our neighbours and the future generation. 

Human capital is a must, Mr Speaker. Without education, we would not be here. May I know from Government what action they are taking to ensure that teachers are in class and their 10 per cent is incorporated in the budget?

2.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Geofrey Ekanya for this very important point he has raised. Let me use this opportunity to inform this august House that ever since the teachers decided to take this industrial action, Government embarked on yet another set of negotiations and as I speak, we have just concluded one of the many meetings that we have been having with the leaders of the teachers.

In the first meetings, we were negotiating with the Executive. This very meeting, which has just taken place, included many representatives from across the country as they requested. Government will be able to come back to the House and tell you how the negotiations have been concluded. However, what I would like to assure you is that Government is not just looking on as teachers have put down their tools, especially at this time when our children have just reported.

We are very concerned and that is why we are engaging one another in coming up with a win-win situation that will be beneficial to the entire country. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Government Chief Whip. I would like to inform the Government Chief Whip that the last time we almost resisted passing the budget, the then Leader of Government Business, hon. Amama Mbabazi, made a commitment to the teachers through UNATU. They agreed and signed. The issue I would like the Government Chief Whip to explain is, since then, Government has not changed. The Government for which hon. Amama Mbabazi stood in for is the same Government in existence today.

Can she explain under what circumstances the same Government can have more than one commitment on the same issue? Government committed that the teachers’ salaries would be increased in phased percentages. Under what circumstances is Government negotiating on the same issue and yet they committed themselves earlier?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Nzoghu. Yes, it is the same Government. However, factors and circumstances do not remain constant and that is the reason we are negotiating. We are trying to answer as to why we did not fulfil the remaining 10 per cent out of the 50 per cent negotiated.

This is what we are negotiating: we are trying to tell them the factors that prompted Government not to fulfil their part. We are negotiating with teachers and they have not refused to come and meet with Government. They are meeting the same Government; that means that there are justifiable reasons as to why we need to sit together and talk. If we manage to convince them, that because of the circumstances that we put on table - then they will lift the industrial action and return to the classrooms.

They have come in numbers. This morning, we have been in a meeting. Therefore, allow us to continue negotiating because factors do not remain constant. There are always pressures that come in and prohibit us from fulfilling whatever we have planned and it is normal. It even happens in our homes. You plan but other factors come in and then you have to do re-adjustments but you have to consult your family to allow you do those adjustments. That is why we are negotiating with the teachers.

2.17
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Government Chief Whip. We appreciate the efforts Government is putting and secondly, we strongly understand the predicament the teachers have but at the end of it all, it is the children and their parents to suffer. May I seek this clarification; the teachers give notice and this time round they gave notice before they went for holidays. May we know why you have not negotiated during the holidays such that when the schools open the children go back to school? It is as simple as that. 

We really appreciate what the teachers are saying and we appreciate the efforts of Government but at the end of the day, the parents - I have visited a number of my primary schools but the children are suffering. Like hon. Ekanya said, the children of the poor are the ones suffering because our children are busy in private schools. We need to be serious, Government Chief Whip. Thank you very much.

MS OLIVIA KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister needs to know the plight of teachers from an experienced person, who is a teacher. Honourable minister, I am seeking clarification on whom you have trusted to negotiate on the side of Government for the teachers because it seems the people you send to talk to the teachers do not have the will to change the teachers’ plight. Their children are in homes. Even then, they told us that the 10 per cent – we know that finances cannot be got 100 per cent but even the little; some few teachers were saying we know the increment can be in phases but what have you done yet? You have not even gone there to explain to them. Therefore, which category of people have you sent to negotiate with the teachers and if you have made any increment, what is the percentage because at least we could argue that with 20 per cent, wait for the 50 per cent. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKARIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the question as to why we did not negotiate in time yet the association of teachers indicated that they would take an industrial action, as far as I know, the negotiations have been there but on a lower level with the minister in charge of education. However, the negotiations I am talking about now are the negotiations between the teachers and Government and the leader of the team from Government is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have other ministers and on that team like the ministers of Finance, myself, Minister for National Guidance, Education and the Attorney-General. 

The honourable colleague also wants me to go into the details of percentages but since we are still negotiating, I am hesitant to go into the details because it will jeopardise our negotiations. I beg that the information I have given this House regarding that be sufficient for now until we conclude the negotiations. Thank you very much.

2.21
MR RICHARD SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I raised a point which was of interest to the nation regarding the pesticides and I was promised that there will be an answer from the line ministry concerning the pesticides. I was promised that I will get feedback today, Thursday. It is a very sensitive issue and crucial for our economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue of pesticides. There was an undertaking that the statement will be made today. Government Chief Whip and Minister of Agriculture?

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankarirwa): Mr Speaker, I expected the ministers of Agriculture to be here. I am sorry that they are not here. However, I promise that I am going to do what I must do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As soon as the ministers come in, they will make the statement.

2.22
MR MUHAMMED MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. For the last one week as a shadow minister, there has been a trend - it is not even new - the Police have once again resurrected their old habits. They go to homes of people. Last week, they went to the home of the Lord Mayor and Dr Col. (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye and surrounded it at midnight. They were not allowing them to go out of their homes. Yesterday, out of nowhere, they moved blockades and they were free people, but police surrounded Parliament consequently. 

Mr Speaker, these individuals have family and children; they have young people who have to go through a police blockade to go to school. For no good reason, the police should not go out of their way to block somebody’s home and all of a sudden you remove the blockade and one goes away scot-free.

In addition, the police are arresting people. Last week, they arrested about 20 young people whom they found with T-shirts at the back with words, “NO MORE”. They were arrested and taken to Luzira. As we speak, yesterday they arrested a young girl called Phiona and took her to CPS. While at CPS, Ingrid Turinawe went to check on her and she was also arrested. This morning, they have been transferred from CPS to Naggalama Police Station. 

This trend - we were amazed last evening when we went to CPS’ fourth and third floors. On the walls of the police office, there are pictures of “Museveni Pakalast.” “We will support Museveni for 2016” posters in a police office at CPS. This country needs to be reassured whether we have a police force for Ugandans or we have a police force that is patrolling for the NRM regime.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there are also some police officers in civilian clothes who are going around in police detaches or upcountry police stations sweet talking the officers that they would want to see change. If by mistake you get lured to their talk that you want change in this country, they later on come and arrest you.

Mr Speaker, there are police officers from Karamoja who were lured into saying that they would want to see change and they were given some Shs 50,000 and later on, they were arrested and are languishing in the police stations as I speak.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, you are holding the Floor.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter because we are heading towards the 2016 general elections and the heat is on in our constituencies across the country. Every single post in this country is going to be contested for including that of President Yoweri Museveni for the Presidency; even mine and yours, Mr Speaker. Therefore, the people of Uganda need to be assured that the police force we have in this country is non-partisan. That is a right, not a privilege. We cannot have a police post in Uganda that acts like a kind of militia. 

By operational standards, the police force we have in this country - it is unfortunate that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not around; and we have been making this point over and over. It is high time we had a police force that is for the people of Uganda as we head towards the 2016 general elections. Let us be assured that men and women in uniform are going to be non-partisan. This year, we will not allow as it has been before, for security operatives to involve themselves in politics.

I also have credible reports that DPCs and RDCs are involving themselves in the NRM registration in my constituency; I know and I receive more credible reports. I would like Government to reassure us; do we have a police that is for the people of Uganda and how can we have a police force that will ensure we have a free and fair general election? (Interruption)

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: My brother, what is the extent of involvement? For instance, if people are gathered and the police come to protect them, we need to know the level of involvement. Are they protecting people? We need to know the level of involvement.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I will give you an example of my constituency; a DPC called crime preventers for a meeting –(Interjection)– well, they are crime preventers; let me be positive. One of the aspiring candidates in my constituency went to address that meeting and assured them that you have been recruited and you are supporting so and so. Actually, they were not my supporters; they were talking about the woman representative in my constituency. They say, “Please ensure we support this one”; that cannot be a meeting called by the DPC for crime preventers. 

During the NRM registration at a police station in Wakiso, the police were urging people to go and register in the NRM register. The police force of the Republic of Uganda - there is no way that can be acceptable. Therefore, Mr Speaker, this matter is so critical, as the country prepares for the 2016 elections. We would like to be assured by Government that we have a police force worth its mandate.

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to colleagues and I have noted their consistency in raising the point regarding having a Uganda Police Force which is for everybody and I agree with them. Having participated in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, I am aware of Article 210, which establishes the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Force and the functions therein.

I also participated in the enactment of the Police Act and I know that Police is not supposed to be involved in partisan politics.

I am also aware that when recruiting UPDF and Uganda Police Forces personnel, we give quotas to districts and the guidelines are very clear; that we recruit everybody without discrimination. However, when we are implementing all those laws which we have put in place during recruitment, there could be officers who are overzealous.

The commitment I would like to put across is that when we are informed of such individuals - it is not a policy of this Government to have a police force which is partisan but there could be individuals who could naturally be drawn into this by themselves or by us. I request that such cases are brought forward so that we can follow them up and we punish whoever is violating the very laws we enact in this august House.

I am so sympathetic to the cases that are on the extreme, if they are there but since you have guided rightly when hon. Beatrice Anywar raised this issue before hon. Muwanga Kivumbi entered, you had given guidance that you are going to investigate and probably inform us on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is in relation to what happened in Parliament.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi also partly touched on what hon. Beatrice Anywar raised. I thank you for that guidance.

I am also going to inform my colleague, the minister in charge, about the arrests that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has raised because when the police is going to do arrests, they do not consult the Government Chief Whip. I cannot be in position to give an account of what happened. However, I will report to the minister in charge so that we can get a solution. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us take it as that; I will allow the Leader of the Opposition to say something.

2.33
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, what has been raised by the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs affects all of us. Not only those in the Opposition but even those on the government side. I remember when we were passing the Public Order Management Bill into an Act, there were a number of statements that were made and some people did not believe that what was passed would affect even those on the government side until they saw the youth that supported hon. Amama Mbabazi being arrested. 

I am telling you that we should start behaving like Ugandans; what affects members of the Opposition in a matter of time will also affect you. Therefore, we need to implement the Constitution of Uganda to the letter. We agreed that the police and the army must be non-partisan. However, we are seeing that increasingly, Uganda is becoming a police state - a state that is being managed by the police. 

We have raised the concern of crime preventers who are normally prepared before elections. In my district, we prefer to call them crime promoters because they are employed to beat up people during elections and we have raised this concern. I have shared a platform with the spokesperson of the police who said that crime preventers are the community people who are supposed to police the community. In other words, they should not be partisan in any way; but we see that in practice, they are partisan.

Honourable members, you are also aware that even the roles of the RDCs are now being questioned. They are supposed to ensure that the government programmes are implemented. However, these same RDCs are employed during the time of elections to fight some candidates who are opponents of those who are favoured. It does not matter whether you are on the Opposition or the government side; even if you are contesting in the primaries in the NRM, they are employed to pursue and ensure that certain candidates lose.

These RDCs are supposed to be public servants. You can look at the description that is given for the role of the RDC, in the Constitution. Mr Speaker, we are not just lamenting because we are members of the Opposition; we are crying as a country. We must start practising democracy and not pretend.

When some of us go out of the country, we speak so eloquently about the way Uganda is trying its best to apply the principles of democracy. When I come back to my country and find that all our supporters are being arrested, it is as if I have to go back and tell them that Uganda has changed. This is very sad indeed; we have to change our ways. Uganda must enjoy the multiparty dispensation, which we have all agreed to. We must be seen to practice democracy. Uganda must be seen to be fair, must ensure that the police and the army are nonpartisan.

I had requested, as a whip, and I hope the Government Chief Whip will agree with me, that the army must begin to sit in the centre. I do not see why the army should sit on that side? The army should sit in the centre because they have no business on that side; they should protect both sides of the House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. That does not make the honourable Member for Ndorwa a member of the UPDF –(Laughter)

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students from Ohio State University under the SIT Study Abroad Programme. They are visiting Uganda to learn about Ugandan development from a field-based perspective. They have come to observe how we do business here. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 10

MR ANTHOHY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, before the House was adjourned on Thursday last week, the House had passed proposed amendments up to clause 10(g); proposed section 89(g); Taxation of licenses.

Mr Chairman, we now go to (h), proposed section 89(h) limitation of deductions relating to petroleum operation;
    i. Re-number as 89(g)(a)
    ii. Under sub-clause (1), insert between the words “Only against the…” and “Gross income” the words “The value of the cost of oil included in the…” The justification is to limit the deduction to the cost of oil.
    iii. Under sub-clause (1) and (3), replace the words “… a petroleum operation…” with “Petroleum operation.” The jjustification is that petroleum operation is a defined term in section 89 (a).
    iv. Insert the following sub-clauses immediately after sub-clause (3) as follows; (4) if a licensee has a loss carried forward for a contract area, under sub-section (3) for more than one year of income, the loss of the earliest year shall be allowed as a fact deduction.
    v. In this section, a contract area that is a development area includes an exploration area provided the development area is wholly within the exploration area.				

The justification is to align with the equivalent rule for mining operations under section 89(c)
    i. Propose section 89(h) (a) petroleum exploration expenditure;

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I deal with the amendment in 89 (h)? Honourable members, that is the amendment proposed by the –

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, when we adjourned last week, it was because this Parliament recognises that taxation is very important and affects the lives of everyone and therefore, as a matter of principle, we must discuss and pass every clause of taxation when the House is fully constituted. As I see now, the same reason for which it was adjourned is still standing. 

I have observed and I have counted and seen that there is no quorum and I am not about to take a decision that affects the lives of my voters when the House is not properly constituted. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I appeal to you that we should abide by our own rules. I am moving a motion that there is no quorum therefore we cannot continue to discuss this subject. I thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and has made no decision.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

        I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

        II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/16

    a) PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we are still talking about revenue and expenditure and you recall that this House was very uncomfortable with the presentation that was done earlier and we have not been convinced that the government side has gone back and rectified the serious concerns that were raised on the issue of budget.

In view of the fact that we do not have quorum, Mr Speaker, I wish to move that we cannot proceed to deal with this matter which is of grave importance to the lives of our people. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are a senior member of this House and you understand that where no decision is required, no quorum is required. (Applause) Chairperson, proceed. You have 10 minutes. 

2.46
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and pursuant to rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the sectoral Committee on Health is mandated to inter-alia examine and comment on policy matters affecting the Ministry of Health and also to critically examine Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations thereon. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we looked at the following votes:
    a) Vote 014 - Ministry of Health
    b) Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute
    c) Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute
    d) Vote 116 - National Medical Stores
    e) Vote 134 - Health Service Commission
    f) Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services
    g) Vote 161 - Mulago National Referral Hospital
    h) Vote 162 - Butabika National Referral Hospital 
    i) Vote 501-850 - Local Governments status in charge of Primary Health Care
    j) Votes 163 - 176 for 14 Regional Referral Hospitals of this country.

Mr Speaker, page 4 has terms of reference and I will not read them, for purposes of keeping time.

The methodology is on page 4 and we interacted with a variety of stakeholders on page 5. On page 7, we have key achievements of the health sector for the financial year 2014/2015.

I would like to go to the observations and recommendations on page 15 of my report.
Previous committee recommendations from financial year 2011/12 and 2014/2015; the committee appreciates the work of the health sector in the performance of its roles and applauds – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairman of the committee is presenting a very important report but unfortunately, we do not have it on our tablets from our side. I have consulted and I do not know why it is not on most of the tablets. Could that be done for us so that we can follow the debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please seek technical assistance.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, the committee looked at medicines supplies and equipment. The committee had observed that the National Medical Stores made reasonable progress in the procurement and delivery of medical supplies to the health centres and hospitals across the country. However, some challenges still remain like the delivery of suture materials and gloves to hospitals.

The committee then recommended that the preparation of the annual procurement plan by all health facilities as required by law before submission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I suggest you go to your recommendations for the House this year. Previous recommendations, we cannot discuss.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, much obliged. The following are the committee observations and recommendations on the proposed health sector budget for financial year 2015/2016 and that is on page 27. 

The committee observed that although the total of health sector budget for financial year 2015/2016 has reduced by 1 per cent from Shs 1.281 trillion –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you will excuse me; maybe I have very bad sight. Is it procedurally right to have the report for a very important sector like Health without the minister present?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a matter for the House, the Budget is now property of the House and the House cannot relegate its responsibility to discuss what is before it. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I had said that the budget has reduced by 1 per cent from Shs 1,281.1 trillion to 1,263.7 trillion due to a reduction in external financing by 15 per cent. In the share of the national budget it has reduced from 8.5 per cent that is financial year 2014/2015 to 5.4 per cent in financial year 2014/2016. 

However, the committee noted that the Government of Uganda’s allocation to the sector has increased by 8 per cent to cater for various activities listed in table 2 under the section on the proposed budget.

The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda should increase its funding to the health sector with a view of reducing donor dependence.

Attraction and retention of health workers in health centres IV and below: The committee observed that the poor service delivery in the health sector has persisted over time. One of the major reasons cited is shortage of staff in Government health units because of failure by Government to attract and retain health workers. 

The committee notes that no funds have been provided for wage enhancement for the other health workers for financial year 2014/2016. This creates a problem because earlier, medical officers at health centres IV had a retention allowance provided in financial year 2013/2014 - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not object to your ever wise ruling; now the committee is raising issues which touch the ministry and the ministers. Would it be procedurally right that since the budget is our property, we can shift money anywhere we want without any complaints? Will it be procedurally right? 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, under rule 134 (2) of our Rules of Procedure, this House is permitted, where there are inconsistences or figures that are not reconciled, the Speaker can refer the matter to the Budget Committee, minister or no minister. This is a matter for the House; we should take decisions.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, the committee further notes that motivation of health workers is not only about increment of salaries and allowances but rather the urgent need for improvement in the entire working environment. This includes providing them with accommodation and ensuring that the health facilities are equipped enough to enable the health workers properly perform their duties. 

The committee therefore recommends that Government should provide Shs 13.3 billion to the sector to enable provision of retention allowances to the critical cadres at these health facilities. This will increase or improve attraction and retention of medical staff specifically the nurses, midwives, anaesthetists and lab technicians. 

Primary Health Care 

The committee recommends that Government should prioritise provision of an additional Shs 34.5 billion for primary health care nonwage to improve health service delivery in the local governments in the Budget for financial year 2015/2016 –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the issue of health is a very important one. The chairman continues to read but the members in the House are not following and it is not even on the iPad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have said that if you cannot - because this matter was uploaded on the iPad - if you cannot access it, just seek technical assistance. That cannot be a procedural matter. Seek technical assistance so that you can have access to it. Please, let us receive this report.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, on poor maintenance of government facilities/equipment, the committee recommends that out of the Shs 5 billion provided for maintenance of medical equipment country wide under the Ministry of Health, Shs 4 billion should be implemented through the regional maintenance workshops in the country to ensure that all equipment in various regions are maintained.

The Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package (UNMHCP)
The committee noted that the Second National Health Sector Policy emphasises the provision of the Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package. The Health Sector Strategic Plan III defines the UNMHCP as having the following clusters: Health Promotion, Disease Prevention and Community Health Initiatives, including epidemic and disaster preparedness and response.

Maternal and child health; nutrition; prevention, management and control of communicable diseases plus prevention and management of control of non-communicable diseases. Mr Speaker, the committee however observed that there is no indication of the amount of the money allocated to each of the mentioned clusters.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should ensure that there is at least a summary budget broken down by clusters to clearly show how much money is allocated to each cluster in the Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package in the budget for proper accountability purposes and oversight. 

Off-budget Vs. on-budget support

The committee commends the Ministry of health for developing a tool to track the off-budget and recommends that this process should be expedited to enable the ministry streamline off- budget support to ensure that it delivers national priorities and increases efficiency of these resources.

National Health Insurance Scheme

The committee observed that Government started the project of introducing a National Health Insurance Scheme in 2007 and one of the key activities was to have a law on national health insurance. This scheme has potential to harmonise resources and increase allocation efficiency in the health sector. However, the committee was concerned about the delay in finalizing the Bill on National Health Insurance.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should expedite the process of harmonizing all the requirements of the Bill on National Health Insurance so that it is tabled in Parliament - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, is the chairperson really in order to continue referring to the honourable Minister of Health, who is not here or Government who are not here, to attend to this budget? Is he in order to continue referring to them when they are not interested in this budget at all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me say it again and I hope this will be the last time I am saying this; this budget has been presented to this House. It is up to this House to approve it or not to approve it, minister or no minister, the matter is with us. Please, let the record show that those concerns have been raised. Our records are capturing everything, please.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I want to mention something about genital fistula. The committee was informed that a number of mothers in the country are suffering from fistula, a condition in which a mother who has a complicated delivery begins to leak urine and or faecal matter. It was very alarming yet an operation to correct this condition can easily be done. However, the funds provided in the budgets for the hospitals are not adequate to treat all these mothers.

The committee recommends that;
    (i) The Ministry of Health encourages mothers to deliver in hospitals and attend antenatal care and clinics to avoid cases of obstructed labour and trains doctors and other health professionals to treat fistula locally in our hospitals. 
    (ii) Government, through the Ministry of Health, develops a strategy to address this problem while exploring the possibility of support from the health development partners.

Malaria reduction strategy 

The committee has noted with concern that there is another programme that is being introduced in the Ministry of Health which is not what we had recommended. However, we recommend that the Ministry of Health should abandon its programme of photo biological control of Malaria and implement its previous recommendation of Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS). IRS should be given priority as an effective way of eradicating Malaria- induced deaths. 

The committee notes that Indoor Residual Spraying has worked well in the start districts and further recommends that Shs 750 million for photo biological control goes to indoor residual spraying. 

In addition, sensitisation of the public should be done on the proper use of mosquito nets.  

Mr Speaker and colleagues, there is an issue of expatriation of health workers to other countries. The committee was concerned about the ministry’s intention to export workers to Trinidad and Tobago. The committee was informed that the exportation of health workers was initiated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

The understanding of the Ministry of Health was that the initiative was meant to give opportunities to the jobless Ugandan doctors and nurses to work and develop skills in Trinidad and Tobago. However, when the advertisement ran, it was found that only specialists were required. This was not acceptable because most of the specialists in the medical field are currently offering critical services to Ugandans and they are few in number. 

The matter has been referred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for advice –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, two more minutes. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: The committee recommends that Government should abandon this idea and should ensure that our facilities are well-catered for and equipped with medical staff and only allow for the exportation of the surplus. 

Undergrading of anaesthetics officers 

We were informed that one of the reasons for failing to attract anaesthetics officers in all health facilities is because these officers, after qualification, are not upgraded in terms of payments and that is why they have failed to go to these hospitals.

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that in order to attract anaesthetics officers the Ministry of Public Service should revise the salary structure of the anaesthetics officers and upgrade them from U5 to U4, which is commensurate to the additional qualification they have in anaesthesia in order to be attracted and retained in these fields.

Mr Speaker, there is something important which I would like Members to know, about the cuts we have made for two specific things: Hepatitis B in Northern Uganda, West Nile, in Eastern Uganda and in Kiruhura District in Western Uganda.

We sat with the Ministry of Health and I want to thank the ministers - and we agreed that Shs 5 billion be re-allocated from the output procurement of assorted medical equipment and furniture to cater for the emergence response plan for hepatitis B in Uganda.

In addition, additional funds be provided in any additional resources realised by Government to cater for management of Hepatitis B in the high burdened districts.

Furthermore, a new output called response to Hepatitis B be created to facilitate analysis of Government’s response to Hepatitis B.

Allowances for Interns 

The committee observed that most hospitals cannot run without interns; that is, the pharmacists, doctors and nurses because they help temporarily address the shortage of human resource in health facilities. The interns of this country have spent four months without getting any allowances. 

The committee further observed that most of those outputs had additional resources in their budget allocations, which we have been talking about. The committee recommends that Shs 2.4 billion be re-allocated from the Ministry of Health budgets to intern allowances from the following outputs. We have been specific -

    i) Shs 208 million from the nonwage component for clinical health services.

The justification is poor absorption of budget on account of reallocation towards payment of intern allowances. 

In addition, the nonwage budget has increased from Shs 1.43 billion in financial year 2014/2015 to Shs6.39 billion in financial year 2015/2016.

    ii) We recommend removal of Shs 250 million from photo biological control of malaria. 

The justification is that 50 per cent of the approved budget for financial year 2014/2015 was reallocated to clear the obligations on Global Fund and interns allowances. 
Mr Speaker, money from the Global Fund was eaten by Ugandans; they should have paid their own money and not the ministry to pay for them.

We recommend the removal of Shs 361 million from ministerial and top management services. 

The justification is that this is 25 per cent of the proposed nonwage budget which has increased by Shs 126 million from the current budget and the activities are projected to reduce in financial year 2015/2016 compared to financial year 2014/2015. 

    iii) Re-allocate Shs 391.75 million from item short term consultancy. 

The justification is that the budget for this item has increased from Shs 2.94 billion to Shs 5.06 billion 

Mr Speaker, we are also proposing to remove Shs 413 million from workshops and seminars. The justification is that these are workshops reflected under both workshops and seminars and under policy consultation, planning and monitoring services. 

Mr Speaker, we are also recommending removal of –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, we want to remove Shs 201.7 million from printing, stationery and photocopying and we want to remove Shs 600 million from maintenance and others. 

Mr Speaker, in general, the share of the health sector to the national budget has reduced by 36 per cent from what I have already talked about.

Subject to the recommendations advanced above, the Committee on Health urges the Committee of Supply to supply the following revised recurrent and development budgets under the health sector for the financial year 2015/2016.

Health 

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 60,137,827,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 478,700,709

Uganda Cancer Institute

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5,493,411,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 11,954,514,000

Uganda Heart Institute

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 10,126,245,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 4,562,500,000

National Medical Stores - Shs 218,614,467,000

Health Service Commission

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,924,588,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 446,799,000

Uganda Blood Transfusion Services

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 8,333,048,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 370,000,000

Mulago Hospital Complex

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 50,421,814,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 5,520,000,000

Butabika Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 8,000,528,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,863,981,000

Arua Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,529,001,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 758,000,000

Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5,503,013,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 600,000,000

Gulu Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5,421,700,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,470,000,000

Hoima Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,637,127,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,400,000,000

Jinja Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 6,404,182,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 600,000,000

Kabale Regional Referral Hospital

Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,136,370,000
Development expenditure – Shs 600,000,000

Masaka Regional Referral Hospital

Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,795,942,000
Development expenditure – Shs 1,222,180,000

Mbale Regional Referral Hospital

Recurrent expenditure – Shs 7,104,207,000
Development expenditure – Shs 600,000,000

Soroti Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,500,365,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 900,000,000

Lira Regional Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,157,152,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 600,000,000

Mbarara Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5,908,644,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,328,706,000

Mubende Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,560,842,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,800,000,000

Moroto Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,050,999,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 664,000,000

Naguru Referral Hospital

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,775,203,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,394,000,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee that has handled this matter. Honourable members, the motion, which I now propose for your debate, is that the report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate. Debate starts now.

The chairperson still has something outstanding.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the committee proceedings in terms of minutes plus the reports. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, we have four reports. If you contribute on one, you will not contribute on the other. In that regard, choose which one you would like to speak on so that we can balance the debate properly. 

Therefore, if all of you have spoken in this one, that means the next one will pass without debate. Let me start from Pader District. Three minutes, Members. No, let us do two minutes. Honourable members, just look at the Members that would like to contribute. Two minutes.

3.13
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the committee for this report. I have two or three issues. One is about recruitment of health workers in the lower health centres; health centres III and health centres IV. 

The committee is indicating that the district service commissions in these local governments do not have capacity. However, I do not think that is really the major problem. I believe these district service commissions have the capacity but the problem is attracting these health workers.

The local governments are failing to attract health workers and that is why recruitment cannot take place. I think the appeal of Members and what the committee is recommending that these recruitments should be recentralised should be taken up seriously.

In Pader District last year, the district was supposed to recruit 123 health workers. They failed to attract these people and ended up recruiting only 62. You will find that there are serious problems at these health centres.

Mr Speaker, the issue of Hepatitis B is a matter of emergency. My district is affected; Northern Uganda is affected. I submit on this issue with great pain because last year, I lost my uncle to Hepatitis B. Sincerely, I believe Government can put aside certain things and find funds that can be used to vaccinate people in these affected areas. This should not really be a very difficult thing. Will Government wait until all the people in these areas are infected or maybe dead before they can realise that there is a serious problem? It really pains me because it is a serious problem - (Member timed out.)

3.16
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would propose that we first halt approving the budget for Ministry of Health until the minister comes and explains how they used the Shs 600 million, which was allocated to them for management of jiggers. (Laughter) It is very serious. This Parliament allocated Shs 600 million but up to now, when you check on the ground, there is no intervention. 

Therefore, I would request that we first halt approving this budget. In the National Medical Stores, there was Shs 2.5 billion and Ministry of Health was advised to use part of it to manage jiggers in Karamoja and Busoga but they have not made any intervention. 

Secondly, why is the Committee on Health not concerned about the management of jiggers? Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– you see, in this Parliament, people come here wearing suits and when you talk about jiggers, they pretend as if they do not exist yet their voters are dying of jiggers. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I beg that Ministry of Health explains the Shs 600 million that was allocated to them and the Shs 2.5  billion, which was allocated to the National Medical Stores. It is because they were supposed to use part of that.

Third is the ambulance system in Uganda –(Member timed out.)

3.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairman for the report. Before I make my submission, the person who was holding the floor should have informed the House that Masaka Municipality is now facing a serious problem of infestation by jiggers. (Interjections) Yes. Mr Speaker, people think jiggers are the other side but they are not.

I would like to make one observation. It is unfortunate that my tablet is not open for me to see the tables you were reading but you have informed this House that the overall budget reduced by one per cent. You also informed us that the government expenditure on the health sector has increased by 8 per cent and you attributed the one per cent to the reduction of the donor funding. This does not add up mathematically because if the donors reduced their funding but Government increased by 8 per cent, how could it be that the overall reduction is only one per cent in the budget? I would like some clarification on that.

Mr Speaker, I know it is not just a coincidence and I do not want to allege that the committee chairperson could have deliberately done it, it cannot be so but I am surprised that Jinja Hospital is always receiving Shs 600 million for development budget, which is less than half of what Mbarara Hospital is receiving. I am wondering why this is so. We would like to get some explanation because I know the state of Jinja Hospital and I am wondering why Mbarara takes more than double what Jinja Referral Hospital is receiving.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about ambulances. We have had situations where ambulances have been donated to different districts in Uganda and you wonder what the criteria are. We do not know what procedure Government is following to allocate these ambulances to the different districts. We would like to understand because, for instance, where I come from, we do not have a government ambulance. Some of us have been compelled to buy these ambulances for the wanainchi - (Member timed out.)

3.21
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I find some of the recommendations of the committee really impressive, especially where they talk about reallocating the monies. However, some of the recommendations are so flat and they do not give any proposals. For example, on page 31 of their report, talking about functional referral systems, the committee just recommends to Government to devise means that are cost effective.

Mr Speaker, because we do a lot of bench marking in this Parliament, I would expect, in a report like this, to see examples and probably proposals. Say in this situation, “You could do it like this as we saw in this country.” However, making flat generic recommendations is not going to help us. 

Mr Speaker, on page 33 of the committee report where we talk about exporting health workers, the committee says the reasoning that was given and the organisation that was responsible was Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I question the coordination between ministries. How does the Ministry of Foreign Affairs begin exporting labour, knowing that we are short of health workers in Uganda even at the cadre of doctors?

They are also talking about providing jobs for Ugandans. How can Ugandan doctors be jobless and at the same time, we do not have doctors in our hospitals? Mr Speaker, I think this one is misconceived and misplaced. 

I would like to request the chairperson to probably give a different reason for this or to ask the ministry. Maybe it is not a substantive situation. I know we do not have enough doctors but at the same time, you are saying there are some who are jobless. It is an irony that we cannot understand.

Mr Speaker, I also find the committee’s report not very serious on the Abuja Declaration. They are talking of Government increasing the amount of money given to the ministry. Why are we shy to mention that we have failed to meet the Abuja Declaration –(Member timed out.) 

3.23
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee members for their elaborate report. I wish to talk about some few issues and the first one is Rota virus. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Rota virus causes severe vomiting and diarrhoea, especially in children. In the month of January, 80 per cent of the admissions in most of the government hospitals were due to Rota virus. Rota virus appears on the immunisation card but in all the government facilities, they do not offer the services or there are no vaccines to immunise against the virus. 

Therefore, I would like to inform the committee and the honourable members that Rota virus has no direct treatment. You only treat the symptoms and it has killed very many children. My humble request is that Government finds money and procures the vaccines so that Ugandan children can be vaccinated against the virus.

Mr Speaker, I also want to comment on safe male circumcision. I would like to request the government to sensitise the youth especially. It is because they know that once they are circumcised, they cannot acquire the deadly virus. Therefore, my humble prayer is that they need to sensitise the youth in order to reduce the spread of HIV. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for having talked about Fistula. The biggest challenge with Fistula patients, mostly in the upcountry health centres, is that it is not managed. In most cases, the government has left Fistula patients in the hands of NGOs and they are the ones who are helping these cases –(Member timed out.)

3.26
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I concur with most of the recommendations. 

However, I would like to comment on the issue of rehabilitation of general hospitals. Mr Speaker, this has been a song in the ministry and in Government. We have 22 hospitals, which are popularly known as Obote’s hospitals and one of them is in my district. Even the health workers are running away right now because they can no longer work in such an environment. May this stop being a song that we sing every day and be actualised because my people are suffering! The people who have persevered to help in such an environment are now taking on other jobs because they feel Government has neglected them. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to stop singing this song of rehabilitation of general hospitals. These are not cursed hospitals. If they hate Obote, they should not hate the people who live now. They should go ahead and provide services, as the people demand. 

I would also like to talk about family planning. The committee has noted that there are no skilled workers to provide long term and permanent methods of family planning in the local communities. There is a high need for family planning services, especially among the young people. 

The committee has not talked about adolescent sexual reproductive health, which is very important. This is because many girls are dropping out of school. They have high rates of teenage pregnancy. We would like a road map on how the Ministry of Health is going to intervene to make sure that teenage pregnancies are reduced and also make sure that the young people can access good methods of reproductive health –(Member timed out.)

3.28
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are several indicators in Uganda to prove that the health sector is itself sick. One of those is that almost every day, Ugandans are referred to neighbouring countries for further treatment. 

How much does Uganda’s budget cater for Ugandans who are sick and to what extent? I see people who are being referred to countries like Kenya, Rwanda, India and Pakistan and they are treated like they are condemned to death. When you go to Mulago National Referral Hospital, you are referred to India.

To what extent does this budget that we are about to approve cater for Ugandans who are sick? Does it mean that if I cannot be treated in Mulago National Referral Hospital, I am no longer a Ugandan? When you go to India, you hear people mobilising for funds from families and friends. It is even absurd that some of these countries we are referred to for further treatment are financially smaller than Uganda. A case in point is South Sudan. I have seen friends being referred to hospitals in Juba - (Member timed out.)

3.30
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee’s report. Every generation has its own challenges and one of our main challenges today, as the leadership, is giving quality health to our people. Therefore, without wasting time, I support the introduction of health insurance without any further delay because you know what it means to all Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I have been a patient with the Heart Institute of Mulago and each of us here is a candidate of that institute. I would like to call upon Government to immediately support the development plan of that heart institute. This is because it has well-educated and dedicated doctors who are committed but if you look at their plans, they are always crying that the government is not attending to them, despite some good progress. We need to give more support to that institute. 

I would like to commend Government for the work they have done on the Cancer Institute. 

Regarding malaria, it is one of the biggest killers in this country. I would like to propose a multi-pronged approach that is by using the indoor residual spraying, using herbicides to kill the breeding centres and availing mosquito nets to all homes plus the usual treatment in hospitals. However, you know that prevention is better than cure - (Member timed out.)

3.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and address two key issues. 

On top of the dysfunctionality of our entire health system, Government is committed to exporting health workers. Our dysfunctional health system is the greatest indictment on the NRM Government. Our nurse to patient ratio is 1:17,000 against the World Health recommended ratio of 1:400. There is one doctor to more than 15,000 patients in this country against the World Health ratio of 1:10,000. 

Why can’t we pay attention to the crisis facing our people?  The people are dying out there. Instead of recruiting, retaining, bonding, motivating health workers, all that our Government is doing is putting in place a programme for exporting health workers. 

Don’t you even care about the people who have kept you in power for 35 years plus? Mr Speaker, it is a shame, it is an indictment; you have failed and let down the taxpayers of this country. You have even let down your voters; those peasants you boast about. 

The other issue is about Hepatitis B. Since we came back to this Parliament, the first thing we did was to talk about Hepatitis B. That is why I wanted the Minister of Health here. I wanted to ask him because he does not seem to know that the Shs 23 billion we want to combat Hepatitis B is an urgent matter. Instead, the committee is being forced to find Shs 5 billion. 

Today, I wanted to ask the honourable minister if he does not know how many people he is treating because there are no vaccines and no sensitisation. At least he would care to know how many people Hepatitis B has killed in this country –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. 

A few days ago, I interfaced with the Health Service Commission and I got information, which I thought should be brought to the attention of the ministry and Government. I vividly remember that at one time we had discussed and discouraged the training of comprehensive nurses. However, it seems this is still going on. 

When the Health Service Commission was interviewing people who had been trained as comprehensive nurses, they were found wanting in nursing and midwifery. I thought the committee would have captured this so that they can advise the relevant ministry to clean up. This is in order for us to have either nurses or midwives trained and leave out this issue of comprehensive. It seems to have been brought up because they were trying to prepare some people who would work in health centres II but with health centres III and other health centres, we really need nurses and midwives. 

Mr Speaker, I did not hear, in the report of the committee, the issue of accommodation for health workers. This is a serious matter where health workers have been posted to certain centres and they have no accommodation and yet they are expected to be available when called upon, whether on duty at night or otherwise.

Coupled with that is the issue of PHC funds where certain health centres are given resources but they are inadequate –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking for your indulgence. When the chairperson was deliberating on the national budget, I realised that it needs to be enriched.

In my view, two minutes to a man or woman who has stamina, is nothing. Therefore, I seek for your indulgence that the two minutes’ rule, as earlier guided by you, is slightly adjusted, especially where Members are enriching the debate. It does not matter if some of us do not get an opportunity to talk. The few that speak could at least enrich the debate. I beg for you indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on my list I already have 33 Members who would like to speak. I actually wanted to reduce the time to one minute.

3.38
MS ADONG LILLY (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have two concerns, although I support all the recommendations of the committee.

One of my concerns is on Hepatitis B. Much as we have been vaccinating children from 2002 to date, recently I took off time to visit the place where the routine immunisation was taking place. I found that the ministry is not giving enough vaccines for Hepatitis B for children. At one station, they only had one bottle, which was almost finished. 

This means that much as we are concerned, as people from the North, that our children have been vaccinated from 2002 to date, close monitoring needs to be done as the vaccines provided are not enough. We are begging Government to intervene and save the people of Northern Uganda. This is because when you see the statistics that have been given, Northern Uganda has the highest rate of 23 per cent as compared to other regions, which are at two per cent or three per cent.

Does Government want all the people of Northern Uganda to die before they vaccinate? The vaccines are there. Can’t they really save the people of Northern Uganda with Shs 14 billion? Can’t Government get Shs 14 billion to save the whole of Northern Uganda?

Secondly, I would also like to support the committee on their recommendation on health workers’ training. I really support that the training of health workers be taken back to the Ministry of Health. We have got students who get admissions from private health institutions and then come to seek for scholarships from us. When you see the grades that are being admitted, you shed tears for your country.

Someone who has failed in O’level but pushed his way to A’level and has got only one principle pass and all the others failures, is being admitted to do three years’ training to become a clinical officer - (Member timed out.)

3.40
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they have presented.

I do not know where the minister is as he is not around. However, I wanted the minister to tell us the role of local governments in upgrading health centres to referral hospitals. Mr Speaker, as I speak, there is a challenge in Rukungiri where the council has resolved where the referral hospital should be built.

As far as I know, it is the Ministry of Health to guide the local governments on where the hospitals should be built, after they have supervised and advised the council members. This is still an issue in my district.

Mr Speaker, my second point is on referrals abroad. In this country, if you are not well placed, you cannot access an opportunity to travel abroad for treatment. It is only Government supporters but you cannot get –(Interjections) Yes, I know what I am talking about. If you are not –(Interjections) Please, I have only two minutes – So –(Member timed out.)

3.43
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the committee report and thank them for the good work they have done. 

A few other things that we would have liked to emphasise include improvement of the governance of the health sector. This is divided into two; one by the Ministry of Health, which governs the headquarters and regional referral hospitals and the Ministry of Local Government, which superintends over the local government hospitals. 

However, the two do not coordinate. They squabble over who owns most of the finances and the Ministry of Health does not have sensible answers to the governance of health in the Ministry of Local Government. This is because local governments do not adequately supervise the delivery of health care systems.

We have suggested, therefore, to re-centralise most healthcare activities to return to the Ministry of Health and leave aspects of primary health care –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a member of the committee to stand up and debate this report? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear. A member of the committee cannot debate. The Member is a shadow minister who submitted his alternative policy issues to the committee. Therefore, I think it will not be proper for him to contribute because the Minister of Health will not speak on this matter. Let us move on.

3.45
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Perusing through the report of the committee, I am really disturbed that the chairperson of the committee, having previously authored a report on nodding syndrome, seems not to have put it among the priority areas.

Mr Speaker, one would wonder if nodding syndrome is a health problem or a political one. Many issues come up, which are now urgent on the agenda yet since we brought the issue of nodding syndrome to this House and asked for an undertaking and resolution of this Parliament to ensure that money is found to carry out research, give psycho-economic support to families as well as sensitisation and surveillance, up to now, new cases are coming up, young children are raped but the government seems not to care. Nobody is putting emphasis or making this issue of nodding syndrome a priority. 

I would like to hear from the chairperson who authored the report, which report was never debated as to whether the nodding syndrome is a health problem or a political problem.

Secondly, regarding the issue of the Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago, honourable colleagues, when we debate the health budget, one of the things which must be done immediately is that we must expand and decentralise this institution. You find so many patients sleeping under trees in Mulago and the health workers are overwhelmed. 

About four of my people came from Kitgum and for three weeks, they were not able to get blood transfusions. Actually, I call on Ugandans to donate more blood because if you went there as a patient in dire need of blood, you would not find it but you would just wait for death. Can we decentralise the Uganda Cancer Institute? Can Government –(Member timed out.)

3.48
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Government what wrong the people of Northern Uganda have done to Government to deserve the kind of treatment that they are going through. We have talked about hepatitis B here endlessly and yet the Government does not seem to listen to us. The Shs 5 billion that is being proposed by the committee, not even by Government, is a drop in the ocean. Does this Government care about the people of Northern Uganda? Where do you want us to go? Our people are dying and you are just watching. The elections are coming and I think the people of Northern Uganda need to make a statement if nothing is done. 

Secondly, when will you attend to these dilapidated hospitals where sewage is flowing freely? I went to Atutur Hospital and the staff are living with raw sewage. What are you doing for these members of staff? What is wrong with the people in Government that they do not realise that there is need to attend to health infrastructure?

Thirdly, I went to a primary health unit and I was informed by the nurses in my constituency that deliveries are conducted using lights from telephones. Practically, what happens is that the nurse puts a telephone between her teeth and directs it towards the area where the delivery is being done. I do not want to be –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Women Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern regarding the health budget is the Primary Health Care (PHC) budget that is supposed to be to a tune of 3.9 per cent and yet it is Shs 5 billion. There are so many issues, especially with regard to the local health centres II, III and IV where this PHC money is allocated. It is a big concern and if this money is not increased, it is going to create a crisis in the health sector at the lower local levels especially for the immunisation programme.

Last year, the Speaker raised the issue of public toilets along highways. Maybe that is why the issue of hepatitis, cholera and dysentery is so much. I do not see this coming up in this budget. Chairperson of the health committee, you need to bring out the issue of public toilets along the highways.

Mr Speaker, the committee talked about issues that are not clearly budgeted for, especially issues of maternal health, child health, non-communicable diseases and fistula. These are gender issues; we continue to see many women dying every day. If the Ministry of Health does not come up clearly to say that this budget is going to handle these issues, are we going to continue burying 17 women every day? How is the ministry coming on board to reduce on the number of women that are dying every day?

Regarding the issue of equipment, Government spends a lot of money in purchasing equipment that is supplied to health centres and hospitals. However, in terms of managing equipment that breaks down - (Member timed out_)

3.52
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Women Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this good report. I agree with the recommendations of the committee. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to support the recommendation on education of the public on proper use of mosquito nets. I also appreciate the good number of nets given per family; the minimum I have seen is a family being given about 10 mosquito nets. However, in spite of this, the public or communities have gone ahead to misuse these mosquito nets, thinking they are going to use one and the extras are used for other purposes. In some communities, some of these nets are used as fishing nets, curtains, sleeping mats and others are even used for thatching huts in the rural areas. 

I think it is very important for the Ministry of Health to make sure that communities are sensitised before these nets are distributed so that they know the proper use of these mosquito nets as a way to protect them from mosquitoes. I would further recommend that those found to be misusing these nets are disciplined or punished. This will deter them from misuse of the nets.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to support the recommendation on indoor residual spraying. This is a very good programme that can rid mosquitoes from the source, especially from their breeding sources. Once these sources are destroyed, there will be very limited efforts to treat people because we would have prevented people from getting malaria. I would also like to say –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I would like you to restate your prayer to the House in 30 seconds.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the prayers of the Committee on Health are: We kindly request you to make sure that we cut some money from specific items to cater for the interns.

Secondly, we want to get money to cater for people who are getting hepatitis B but we want additional money to cater for our people because there is no way we can sit here in this Parliament and we leave people to die. Even if we make the roads, people will die and there will be nobody to travel on the roads. That is why we are saying that on top of the Shs 5 billion, which we have cut from the money, we want the balance to cater for all Ugandans so that we can be all inclusive.

Mr Speaker, we pray to Government to give us more money, totalling to more than Shs 30 billion, for primary health care because we believe in prevention, which is better than cure. 

We have stipulated monies for recurrent and total development budgets for all national referral hospitals and regional referral hospitals plus the Ministry of Health and other institutions. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the prayer from the chairperson and you know that where there are issues raised that bring matters that need resolution, rule 138(2) still allows us to refer those issues to the Budget Committee. We will use that rule to bring all these issues up so that we can move forward and take care of those burning issues that have been pointed out by the committee. Can I put the question to this particular -

3.57
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I happen to be the Leader of the Opposition and I think that on this very important report, I must give the view of the Opposition.

I would like to appreciate the committee for the report and I thank the chairperson. However, I would like to ask what happened to the report of the select committee on nodding disease, which committee was chaired by Dr Bitekyerezo? I would also like to ask why this report, which is very well analysed, has not mentioned anything about nodding disease. I would like that reply, Mr Speaker.

Secondly, this Parliament has a right to say that the statement made by the committee on page 16, which ties up with that on page 20 on hepatitis B - We should agree, as a Parliament, that until Shs 14 billion is provided for in this budget for vaccination against hepatitis B, it will be irresponsible for us to allow this budget to pass. It so happens that when you look at page 20, it is mainly districts from Northern Uganda that are affected. Is it because the chairperson does not come from the north that he is ignoring the thousands of people who are dying? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you have exceeded the ambit of the rules by imputing improper motive. I am under duty to call you to order.

MRS OGWAL: I withdraw that statement, Mr Speaker. I hope the chairperson has heard that and I know that you are very much related to the people of the north. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we are lamenting about the plight of doctors and yet we know that this government is aware of the Abuja declaration but we are not implementing it. Where do you expect our doctors to find the best way of survival? I think it is unfair for us to stop our doctors from going out to get the best for themselves unless we, the Government, are able to provide a good environment for them to practice. 

Mr Speaker, let us ask ourselves; many of the people who go out to seek medical services, whether in South Africa or India, find doctors whose expertise cannot compare with those we have in Uganda. What we lack are facilities. Can some people wake up and provide, in this budget, money for facilities where we can carry out some of the treatment we receive in South Africa or India? It is very costly for this country. I am surprised that the chairperson did not raise this serious concern in the report.

Finally, I would like to say that the committee ought to have raised the issue of the general management of Mulago Hospital. I lost my mother in Mulago recently and it so happened that the mother of one of the ministers, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, was in the same ward with my mother. One thing that hurt me was that if your patient needed any treatment at all, the doctors can only give you prescriptions. By 8.00p.m., there are no more facilities available in Mulago. You have to go out of Mulago to get medication. Our own Mulago pharmacy is closed by 5.00 p.m. Is this a Government hospital?

We are here talking - This minister was there in pain –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I apologise for coming a bit late. We had a function in Mulago where the His Excellency the President was commissioning the new Cancer Institute. I should have been here earlier to listen to the debate but I will extract the Hansard and be able to provide a response to the issues raised.

I rose on a point of information to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that there has been a practice, not only in Mulago but also in some other hospitals, to close the pharmacy units at night. It is true that together we were nursing our old mothers who passed on, but I have since given an instruction to Mulago Hospital and all the hospitals in the country that they should operate 24 hours, most especially the pharmacy units. This is because disease does not know day or night and sometimes, health workers have to prescribe very important medicine at night.

I have told the hospitals that they should not expect a private pharmacy to be open somewhere and then a government one closed. We have worked on this but later on, we shall give comprehensive responses to the issues raised in the debate. I thank you very much.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can now see that a minister had to lose a mother in order to change the law. It is a very painful matter. The experience he went through forced him to look deeper into the issue. 

One of the issues that we also saw with him is the state of the mortuary in the medical school. That is our departure lounge. When any of you die in any hospital, they will take you to the medical school mortuary. As it was in the 1960s, so it is now. If you are shown where you are supposed to sit and wait for somebody to talk to you, you will wonder whether to sit there or not. Can’t we do something to rehabilitate the mortuary where each and every one of us is bound to visit before we go to our home countries for burial? Even the Shs 20 billion per year-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable please-

MRS OGWAL: I am finalising. Regarding the Shs 2 billion per year, which has been requested for destroying expired drugs, where are these expired drugs coming from and who orders for them yet there is shortage in every hospital? There must be an investigation regarding how our medicines are being managed. Somebody somewhere must be deliberately importing expired drugs so that they get the Shs 2 billion. That must be stopped. Before we pass this budget, the Shs 2 billion must be removed and we put that money into rehabilitating the mortuary and other areas and put it on the nodding disease. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, my concern was very clear. It had Shs 600 million -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is clear that these figures that have been raised will be referred to the Budget Committee for harmonisation. 

Honourable members, it is important that we finish with these reports on the ministerial policy statements so that there is an opportunity given to the Budget Committee to harmonise these things. I am saying this because we are running out of time. The law tells us to finish this matter by the 31st of this month and the 31st is on a Sunday. That brings the deadline backward to the 28th, which is the last day for a Parliament sitting. Therefore, we should be done by 28th, which is next Thursday. 

That is why it is important for us to do this so that we can deal with the figures, refer them to the Budget Committee to harmonise them and come back so that we can see how to proceed with this matter before that date. If we delay with this, we shall be eating up the time that the Budget Committee can use to sit. So, please let us proceed in this way. We have adopted this, can we go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to first thank the committee whose report we have just passed. In the public gallery this afternoon we have religious leaders from Buhweju District. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Katwesigye Oliver and hon. Biraaro Ephraim. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.08
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Grace Namara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 177 (a) and (d) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 for the following votes:
    a) Vote 015, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives
    b) Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute 
    c) Vote 154,	Uganda National Bureau of Standards(UNBS) 
    d) Vote 022, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 
    e) Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board (UTB)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Mr Speaker, before I present the report to this House, I request to lay on the Table a copy of the report and minutes of the meeting that the committee held while examining the ministerial policy statement of the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the committee meetings.

MS NAMARA: In the interest of time, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I refer Members to page 11 of the report. 

Vote 015 - Ministry Of Trade Industry and Cooperatives 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee made the following observations and recommendations: 

1. Border Markets

The committee notes that the construction of the border market at Bibia in Amuru District cannot take off due to the flooding of the area during the rainy season – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the committee presenting the report is an independent Member and the Speaker of Parliament has specifically identified areas where they should sit. We have, with a lot of love and concern for one another, provided for them accommodation on the Opposition side of the House. 

Is it procedurally right for this honourable member to appear to be crossing to the other side, which is against the law? Is it procedurally right because we may soon breach our own law? Can the honourable member be guided on where she should be standing when presenting the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please stand on the proper side of the House. (Laughter) 

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have always seen my colleagues who are independents present reports of the committee from that side; therefore, I also did the same. However, Mr Speaker, I will proceed with the committee report. 

Before I was interrupted, I was talking about the border markets. The committee notes that the construction of the border market at Bibia in Amuru District cannot take off due to the flooding of the area during the rainy season. Although the committee had recommended that alternative land be identified by the district local government, the committee was informed that it is not easy to get land of about five square miles at the border area. Therefore, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is working with the Ministry of Works and Transport to address the issue of flooding using technical expertise since they faced the same challenge when constructing the road to South Sudan.

The committee further notes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives had earmarked to use Shs 3.74 billion from COMESA on compensation on trade loss in the FY 2013/2014, but due to non-payment of subscription for membership and non-operationalization of the of the COMESA FTA in 2012 the resources were not received.

The committee recommends that Government should provide US$ 1,778,871 to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to pay the COMESA dues so that it can benefit from the compensation on trade losses. 

The committee further recommends that Government should find resources to facilitate the construction of the border markets.

2. Salaries

The committee observes that the recurrent budget for the tourism, trade and industry sector for wage and non-wage in the FY 2015/2016 has remained constant at Shs 14.820 billion and Shs 24.343 billion respectively, thus affecting efficient delivery of services in institutions. 

The committee further notes that there are about 532 vacant posts in the tourism, trade and industry sector, for instance Uganda National Bureau of Standards has a gap of 231; Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) has a gap of 45; Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has a gap of 43; Uganda Tourism Board has a gap of 14; Uganda Wildlife Education Centre(UWEC) has a gap of 28; Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) has a gap of 36; and Hotel Tourism and Training Institute (HTTI)to mention but a few.

The committee recommends that Government should, in a phased manner, recruit staff in these institutions to improve on service delivery especially in critical areas such as Uganda National Bureau of Standards.

3. Contribution to International Organisations

The committee observes that settlement of contributions to international organisations such as World Trade Organisation, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, United Nations Industrial Development Organisation was still outstanding at Shs 5 billion. The committee was further informed that the ministry cannot pay the arrears due to MTEF ceilings which leave the ministry with only Shs 400 million as contribution to the international organisations.

The committee recommends that Government allocates Shs 5.128 billion in the next financial year’s budget to clear the outstanding arrears to international organisations if Uganda is to benefit from these very important organisations.

4. Cooperatives Revival and Development

The committee notes that cooperatives revival is one of the core components in the National Development Plan. However, the budget allocated for it under vote function 0602 - cooperatives development - in the past two financial years and in the medium term does not reflect the Government’s commitment to revive this sector. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Government prioritises and provides Shs 2 billion for the revival of the cooperatives rather than putting more emphasis on SACCOs, which are a sub component of the cooperatives. The process to revive the Cooperative Bank should also be fast tracked.
 
5. Transfer of Funds to Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)

The committee notes that Cabinet (minute extract 282) that sat on 20 August 2014, directed the establishment of seven centres for production of fruit pulp in Luwero, Kayunga, Masaka, Soroti, Arua, Kasese, Ntungamo, and three tea factories in Kisoro, Kabale and Kanungu using Shs 88 billion from NAADS transferred to UDC through Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. However, only Shs 6 billion was provided as additional funding for value addition for tea in Kisoro and Kabale.

The committee recommends that for proper linkages between NAADS and UDC and value addition in the identified centres for fruit pulp, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should transfer the said funds to UDC which is the development arm of Government.

6. Budgeting for NSSF and PAYE

The committee observes that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, through the Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority, has budgeted for NSSF and PAYE separately. This contravenes the principle of deductions of NSSF and PAYE as statutory requirement from recipient beneficiary of the payment.

The committee recommends that the ministry desists from wrongful budgeting for such statutory requirement and Shs 372 million meant for payment of NSSF and PAYE be stayed.

7. Counterpart Funding (COMESA) 

The committee notes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is to receive donor support of US$ 1.85 million from Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) for the Regional Integration Implementation Programme (RIIP). However, the Government has not provided the counterpart funding - Shs0.500 billion - for the same activity.

The committee recommends that Shs 0.500 billion be allocated as counterpart funds for effective release of the donor support.

8. Uganda Export Promotion Board

The committee observes that Uganda Export Promotion Board plays a very important role in the promotion of the export sector that leads to the growth of the economy. However, the institution gets only Shs 1.718 billion out of the planned Shs 5 billion thus leaving a funding gap of Shs 3.283 billion. This is coupled with the lack of a separate vote and poor releases of funds for its activities.

The committee recommends that Government avails Shs 3.282 billion to this institution and a separate vote should be created for it. The committee further recommends that the agencies of the trade sector should link their interventions to export promotion.

9. Settlement of Cooperative Union War Debts

The committee observes that the Government has not cleared cooperative union war debts amounting to Shs 28.372 billion. The committee was further informed that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has forwarded the claims of the war debt claimants to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for verification and clearance before they can be compensated.

The committee recommends that the Government should consider paying the outstanding balance on the cooperative union war debt claimants’ Shs 28.372 billion 

10. Revival of Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and District Chamber of Commerce and Industry

The committee observes that worldwide, chambers of commerce play a great role in mobilising traders and they have diverse membership. In Uganda, the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry has a nationwide membership, with 10 regional and over 80 district branches. These branches are not very vibrant and need to be revived to champion the aspirations of the traders as an engine of development, employment of youth, mobilisation of micro, small and medium enterprises and a forum through which to communicate government policies in – (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will suggest that in the two minutes I am going to give you, you read the recommendations only. If you had been doing that, we would have finished. Just read the heading and recommendations for two minutes.

MS NAMARA: Mr Speaker, they are quite a number and I had not even touched on the Ministry of Tourism.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you can go to the conclusion.

MS NAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry identifies the following items in the sectors budget as critical and seeks the support of the whole House to urge Government to look for additional resources to fund these activities as shown in annex 1 below -

Mr Speaker, I pray that Members go to page 55, in the interest of time. Subject to the observations and recommendations mentioned in this report, the committee recommends the approval of the budget of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and its associated institutions, and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its associated Institutions for the financial year 2015/2016 as follows - The figures are laid down in those two-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the figures, please. 

MS NAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The figures are as follows:
Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 10,906,239,000 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 12,630,598,000 
    c) MTAC wage subvention – Shs 58,000,000
    d) MTAC appropriation in aid (NTR) - Shs 4,130,000,000 
MTAC in total is Shs 4,188,000,000

The subtotal for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 15,094,239,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 12,630,598,000

Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI)
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 5,917,602,000
    b) Development Expenditure Shs 8,322,620,000
    c) NTR - Shs 100,000,000
Subtotal for UIRI is:
    (i) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 6,017,602,000
    (ii) Development expenditure - Shs 8,322,620,000

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 9,248,446,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 3,279,748,000
    c) NTR - Shs 7,900,000,000
    d) NTR development expenditure - Shs 300,000,000
The subtotal for UNBS is: 
    (i) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 17,148,446,000
    (ii) Development expenditure - Shs 3,579,748,000

The total expenditure for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 38,260,287,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 24,532,966,000	

Vote 022- Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 9,063,148,000
    b) Development Expenditure - Shs 8,774,248,000
The subtotal for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and UTB is: 
    • Recurrent expenditure - Shs 20,527,263,000
    • Development expenditure - Shs 9,327,551,000

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board (UTB)
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 10,850,115,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 553,303,000
    c) NTR- Shs 615,000,000
The total for UTB is:
    (i) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 11,464,115,000
    (ii) Development expenditure - Shs 553,303,000

Uganda Wild life Authority (UWA)
    a) Development expenditure (Government subvention)- Shs 3,061,760,400
The subtotal for UWA is:
    (i) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 54,871,642,648
    (ii) Development expenditure - Shs 13,517,115,400

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 1,060,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 1,574,000,000
    c) GoU subvention - Recurrent expenditure, Shs 140,000,000 and development expenditure, Shs 300,000,000

The subtotal for UWEC is:
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 1,200,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 1,874,000,000

Hotel Tourism and Training Institute
Appropriation in Aid
    a) Recurrent expenditure- Shs 1,474,679,772
GoU subvention
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 1,100,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 210,000,000
Subtotal HTTI
    a) Recurrent expenditure- Shs 2,574,674,772
    b) Development expenditure- Shs 210,000,000

Uganda Wildlife Training Institute(UWTI) 
Appropriation in Aid
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 784,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 24,000,000
GoU subvention
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 647,000,000
Subtotal UWTI
a) 	Recurrent expenditure - Shs 1,431,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 24,000,000

Total under “Others”
    a) Recurrent expenditure- Shs 58,878,517,420
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 16,824,472,341

The total for Ministry of Tourism Wildlife and Antiquities, UTB and other institutions is:
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 79,405,780,420
    b) Development Expenditure – Shs 26, 152,023,341

The grand total sector budget is:
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 113, 536,067,420
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 50,684,989,341

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I urge this august House to adopt this report and to pass the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, madam chairperson and members of this committee. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimates for FY 2015/2016 be adopted. That is the motion that I propose for your debate and debate starts now. Can we have a limited debate on the subject? I will start with Jinja Municipality East. We maintain two minutes.

4.34
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

When the chairperson talked about domestic arrears, I was under the impression that where there is good governance you do not commit Government without money. The government control system requires that where you commit Government, then arrears should receive the first call. I thought my colleagues here, like hon. Kiyonga, must know that because they are in Government. Otherwise, if you go and commit Government and even in the next budget you do not budget for it, it sets a very bad image of Government and it speaks volumes about the Government’s will when dealing with the public. However, I think they can pick it from there. 

Secondly, when you talk about staff without providing an adequate budget for Uganda National Bureau of Standards, even Members of Parliament here shall end up putting on counterfeit suits. I want to tell you that the Chinese have reached a high level of producing counterfeit products; they can make a shoe that will last for one or two months, one year, five years. They can even produce disposable suits. However, when you go to other countries, you can even be sentenced to death for introducing counterfeit products in the country. 

It is important that before members of this House get affected by those types of counterfeit products, either in terms of counterfeit suits or otherwise, the ministry comes out very strongly. We must provide money to the ministry so that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards takes action. In effect, we lose money; we must understand that as a matter of fact. 

On the issue of counterpart funding, when we pass loans in this country, there is always an obligation on the part of Government and we are convinced that Government will do its part by providing counterpart funding. So if the other party provides its part of the bargain and you negate yours, I do not know what type of –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also join my colleagues to commend the committee for the good work, although they fell short of adding something that I needed them to add. I remember you had told us that this Parliament needed to get onto serious business and ensure that we work like the Parliament of the 1960s. I expected this committee to recommend serious revival of industrialisation like it used to be in the 1960s, but they fell short.

I like the issue of compensating the cooperatives, but we needed to have put a lot of emphasis on the revival of the cooperative movements. This is because collectivism was what drove this country where it was in the 1960s. Therefore, we needed to have put much emphasis on the revival of the cooperative movements. I know there was suspicion that the members of the cooperatives were UPC members. (Laughter) That is why they planned to kill them. 

However, we are saying that now, more than ever, we need the cooperative movements revived as Members of Parliament. We need industries like Lira Spinning Mills functioning because with this rampant unemployment, we cannot afford to sit back and look on as our young generation is suffering. With the revival of these industries and with the revival of the cooperatives, we would go a long way in addressing the problems of unemployment. This would go well with the spirit the Speaker talked when he said we should be debating serious matters in this Parliament. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.38
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for its report. 

I have two issues to raise; one, which actually came out very well, is the revival of the cooperative societies. Currently, Government is implementing Operation Wealth Creation. The lifecycle of Operation Wealth Creation will only be complete when the Government emphasises the revival of cooperative societies, marketing and value addition. Therefore, I really implore Government to look for money to ensure that the cooperative societies are revived as they will go a long way in supporting this sector.

Secondly, we have the tourism sector out of which we expect this country to earn a lot of money. However, we can only do that if we invest in the sector. We are unlike our other counterpart countries, Tanzania and Kenya, which give this sector a lot of money. We expect to earn a lot out of this but you can see we have given this sector a mere Shs 10 billion. This amount of money cannot do anything and yet this sector can earn us foreign exchange. 

Members and the Government, I really request that we look for money and finance the tourism sector to be able to earn a lot foreign exchange –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. 

I thank the committee for the recommendation on revival of cooperatives. Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) have been effective in mobilising savings from the grassroots, but they are that - small organisations. We need to revive and enhance the cooperative movement so that the money saved from the SACCOs can now feed into the cooperative movement to boost production and economic growth, and as my colleague, hon. Mawanda, has said, for value addition and marketing of the produce. It would really encourage production if we revived cooperatives. 

Promoting tourism - up to now, we come last in funding tourism in the region. It is no wonder that the tourists will go to other countries when we have the best tourist attractions. Development of our tourism sites is key. We cannot expect the tourists to come when we have not developed the sites. Let us encourage community tourism so that Ugandans can have a stake in their tourism industry, so that we can begin to earn on individual and community level. This will help in the development of the tourism sites right from community level. 

Finally, the measures required to –(Member timed out.)

4.42
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I just want to talk about the issues of silos. As a country, we need to look at the issue of silos because this is an agricultural country and without better storage, agriculture is not full. In that regard, we need to give this sector money so that we put up these storage facilities so that our farmers can store their produce during the time of harvest and sell them during the time of scarcity. Therefore, we must have the money for this. Issues of marketing are also very important. We need good quality produce to get better markets and storage is very important for this.

Mr Speaker, as a country I think we need to look at the issue of policy shifts. It looks like the issue of storage, specifically of market products and agricultural products, is misplaced under the Ministry of Trade and Tourism. I, therefore, urge my Government to begin to look at that policy shift. Let us put these things where they are supposed to be. The sector is not considering the issue of marketing and storage.

On the issue of unemployment in this country, we need to put a lot of money in the cottage industry. It is only the cottage industry that will employ our youth. We know that our youth do not have employment opportunities. If we invest a lot of money in the cottage industries, our youth and women shall be employed there. Therefore, I urge the Government to look for money so that we boost that area. (Member timed out)

4.44
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for the report. 

The committee did not come out clearly on the establishment of the border markets, especially those which are supposed to capture the East African Community integration. This is something that we would really need to see happen, especially now that there are those districts which have already prepared themselves. 

In Busia, for example, we have already identified land and the ministry was working along establishing a bigger border market, which was supposed to enhance the integration of the East African Community. This was also supposed to provide information and allow free movement of goods and services. This is an area where we feel Government should put in a lot of emphasis so that we can develop the integration through the markets at the border positions.

Another thing is concerning UNBS. The funding for UNBS is really very small and yet at the same time we are talking about the quality of the goods that are being imported in the country. Over time, I have realised that UNBS has not yet developed a system that can link them to Uganda Revenue Authority. These two have a much bigger relationship. The operations of Uganda Revenue Authority and the supervision and monitoring of Uganda National Bureau of Standards definitely should be very close. 

I believe, and I advise, that Government needs to give a lot of money so that UNBS can develop and link their operations and systems management to that of Uganda Revenue Authority so that it is easier to track these commodities. (Member timed out)

4.46
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to confine myself to the tourism sector. All of us travel and we have gone to many airports and visited a number of cities. You ask yourself, where is Uganda in this city? Where is it advertised at all? The answer is negative. However, you find a number of countries advertising their own countries and you can be able to trace where these countries are. 

I continue to torment the minister about what kind of investment she would want us to support her with using Parliament, so that we can support that sector and make it a real priority area. Incidentally, among the priorities of this government, tourism was number two but it received 0.16 per cent of the national budget. What kind of prioritisation is that? Go to Dubai and you will find artificial ways of attracting tourists. Away from the natural sights and animals, what other plans does this sector have that can interest this Parliament to allocate more funding to it and make it a living investment that can attract more foreign exchange to this country? 

It is not just a matter of mentioning tourism as a fast-growing sector, the allocation of funding to it including the priorities that would be stipulated become a very important issue in my view. The minister ought to highlight these areas where there are strategic investments that she would want us to support her with. (Member timed out)

4.48
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to thank the chairperson for the report.

When you look at the NRM’s manifesto, it indicated and pointed out very clearly about five border markets. Out of these markets, I can see only one. I do not know what happened to the other markets, for instance the Kikagati border market. I would like to know why it has not featured anywhere.

Secondly, about UNBS, there are too many terrible counterfeits. Look at the shirts and the shoes we put on. Have you had an opportunity to buy a ball for your youth group in the village and after one day, they already want another ball?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the House is putting on counterfeit shirts? (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: No, I mean the people we represent, Mr Speaker. This is a fact. Some of these shirts are not necessarily of good quality and I want to implore Government to put in more stringent measures to ensure that we get value for the money we spend. However, we also need to invest in UNBS. We need to get more qualified people and resources to reach out to some of these traders especially from the source, not when they are already here.

Finally, I would like to summarise the issue of tourism as “you reap what you sow”. If you put in Shs 3,000,000, you would not expect to get US$ 10,000,000,000. I think it is high time the ministry came up with some fundamental programmes and a master plan for the next five years to say if we did this, we would reap this, instead of rumbling around that they want money. How do we do that? It is just laughable that we are trying to - (Member timed out.)

4.51
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report, which is very important to us. 

I would like to address myself to the international markets. The markets have been identified and Koboko has been one of them. I am surprised that Nimule, which has been selected, has not planned. Why don’t we give the money to Koboko, which is already well planned and is ready to take off, instead of taking it back to the Treasury when others are ready to use it? 

Mr Speaker, the other issue I would like to talk about is warehouses. There are farmers’ organisations which are ready to use the warehouses and Koboko District Farmer’s Association is one of them. It is a one-stop centre where we were training the farmers. We have small stores and we have a lot of produce and we do not know where to put it. I would like to ask the minister what the criterion is for getting a warehouse. We are ready to apply for one so that we begin benefitting from it.

Lastly, I would like to comment on SACCOs. These SACCOS are suffering because they are not under cooperatives. If they were under cooperatives, first of all, cooperatives would be geared towards production and would encourage people to produce and they would then look for the market. After marketing, they would have the money saved. You detached these SACCOs from the Uganda Co-operative Alliance and that is why they are dying. Many of them are embezzling the farmers’ money. When shall we have a law to control these SACCOs at the sub-county level? (Member timed out)

4.53
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I will just go straight to the issues that affect my people in relation to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. In March, I came here and reported that Uganda Continental Tobacco Company and Premier have not paid 800 farmers from my district since August last year. This has affected the lives of my people. They have complained and pushed in their petitions. I am aware they are being licensed by the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. As we debate our committee report, I do not know how my people will be assisted. This is over Shs 2,000,000,000, and these farmers go to their gardens to dig so that they can have a livelihood and also pay tuition for their children. Our people in Kibaale are stuck. 

Since the minister and the committee members are here, I would like to tell them that this company continued to entice farmers to again plant more tobacco for their company and yet they have not paid for the tobacco of the previous season. Madam Minister, now that you are here, I ask you to come to the rescue of my people. (Member timed out)

4.55
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report they have provided. 

When I scrutinise this budget, however, my concern is on the releases. Look at the releases in the FY 2014/2015; in some areas in the ministry, the Government released only 28 per cent. In the area of industrial development, the release was 49 per cent. I only want to know from the minister whether it is the problem of the ministry in absorbing the funds or it is Government’s problem because it does not have the funds to give to the ministry.

Mr Speaker, we cannot talk about reviving cooperative unions or cooperative movements when you cannot provide funds. Shs 2,000,000,000 which is being allocated here is peanuts. Look at a cooperative union like mine in Masaka, which the Government owes about Shs 3,500,000,000; so, you cannot talk about Shs 2,000,000,000 to be provided for their revival unless I do not understand the word revival. Are we putting up new cooperatives or we are reviving the old ones? If we are reviving the old ones, we must first of all put back the money there. We must give them the money, which is not a favour; this money is theirs and we must find money for that.

When you look at the issue of value addition, there are so many areas were we need to put fruit processing factories - (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tourism should be our biggest source of foreign exchange. It is said that Tunisia has only an eighth of Uganda’s tourism potential but Tunisia makes about $ 10 billion from tourism. I do not think we have made a billion dollars yet. If so, then it must be on one or two occasions. The question is: what do other countries do to raise that foreign exchange that we are not doing as a country? 

What can the ministry change so that we begin seeing a fundamental shift from what we have been seeing for several years, so that we begin to solve this challenge of foreign exchange which comes up every other time? Today the dollar stands at about Shs 3000 and it seems to be getting worse. If we could find a clear strategy - get a convincing position that this time round we are all going to see a huge change in the way things are handled in tourism – then everybody will want to support this sector. Certainly, for the youth - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, please use one minute. 

4.59
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I spent one minute moving to the microphone. (Laughter) I also want to join others in appreciating the report presented. However, allow me to raise three concerns.

The first one is that the Government must come up with a clear policy on agro-based value addition on our primary products. I come from Northern Uganda where we grow a lot of cotton and in the central region, we have a lot of coffee grown here. We are not ashamed to export these key products in their primary state when we should be consciously developing mechanisms of processing these products before exportation. In that way, we will have improved on the welfare of our people particularly the farmers. I think that is a gap which needs to be dealt with. 

Secondly, on the issue of revival of cooperative societies, we first want to know what happened to the revenue that was collected from the sale of the various cooperative societies - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: What happened to the money that was collected from the sale of the Cooperative Bank? Those are key questions. We cannot think about revival when nobody has told us what happened to what was sold. We need to know this.

Finally, we are not talking about investors and animals; we must first think about human beings. While we are consciously creating a favourable environment for tourists, we must also think about our own people. Therefore, I would be very upset if we are going to displace Ugandans because you want to give some business to some investor who wants to promote tourism. 

On our missions abroad, we had agreed many years ago that we must now change our policies. Instead of using the embassies for diplomacy - there is no more diplomacy; the world is now open - we must strategically use our missions to sell our products and to stimulate the interest of people to come and trade with Uganda. We have this mission in Addis Ababa; Rwanda every month has a week when they expose their products. Uganda, which is a founder country of OAU and is very well known because of what she has done in stabilising the region in terms of security, does not have any initiative to use our mission to promote trade. Mr Speaker, somebody who is running that sector is not serious and is not working in the interest of Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chair in charge of the tourism sector and the committee. Chair, you have 10 minutes.

5.04
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope I will not forget to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee and the report therein. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the policy statement. 

Mr Speaker, as you have guided, I will read the recommendations beginning with vote 008 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which votes does this report deal with? 

MR SSEBUNYA: The committee deals with many votes which include the following: 
    b) Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
    c) Vote 130, Treasury Operations 
    d) Vote 108, National Planning Authority (NPA)  
    e) Vote 131, Office of the Auditor-General 
    f) Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) 
    g) Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) 
    h) Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposable of Public Assets (PPDA).

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Recommendations 

The committee is constrained to uphold the proposal in the addendum to reallocate Shs 33,000,000,000 from National Lotteries Board to Capital Markets Authority. The committee therefore recommends that the proposed budget allocation to National Lotteries Board on non-wage recurrent expenditure be reinstated to Shs 1.7 billion to enable them undertake the revenue mobilisation mandate entrusted to them.

Capitalisation of Institutions 

Re-capitalisation of Bank of Uganda

There is a minority report that shall be read under this. The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda presents a comprehensive re-capitalisation plan to enable Government undertake this activity in the medium term instead of presenting to Parliament as an addendum to the ministerial policy statement. 

The committee also recommends that Shs 150 billion be allocated to cater for the operating deficit of Bank of Uganda as at 31 March 2015.

The committee recommends further that Shs 50,000,000,000 be re-allocated to vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority, to enable them partly address the funding gap of Shs 54.45 billion on systems enhancement and revenue enhancement measures.

Agriculture Credit Guarantee Scheme

The committee recommends that Shs 20,000,000,000 be appropriated to meet the capitalisation requirements of the Agriculture Credit Guarantee Scheme.

The committee recommends further that Shs 10,000,000,000 be re-allocated to other priority interventions as per annex 1 and appendix 2. In addition, the committee strongly recommends that with Shs 76,000,000,000 on the account, Government establishes an agriculture commercial bank that will be charged with the task that was envisaged to be handled under the Agriculture Credit Guarantee Scheme.

Financial Intelligence Authority 

The committee recommends that Shs 4,000,000,000 be re-allocated to the Financial Intelligence Authority as per annex 1 and appendix 2. 

The committee recommends that Shs 60,000,000,000 be re-allocated from the recapitalisation requirement of Bank of Uganda and the Agriculture Credit Guarantee Scheme to other priority interventions, while the allocation of the Financial Intelligence Authority is enhanced by Shs 4,000,000,000. 

The committee therefore recommends that Shs 247.366 billion be appropriated for the vote functions 1401, macroeconomic policy and management. 

Budget Preparation, Execution and Monitoring 

The committee recommends that monitoring and evaluation guidelines be formulated and reporting mechanisms be harmonised.

The committee further recommends that: 
a) 	A monitoring and evaluation framework be worked out to clearly link with planning, budgeting and expenditure.
b) 	Along with this monitoring and evaluation framework, the reporting mechanism should be developed. 
c)	 Sanctions be established for those who do not comply. 

Recommended Appropriation to Vote Function 1402 

The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and therefore recommends that, Shs 18.065 billion be appropriated for the budget preparation, execution and monitoring vote function.

Vote Function 1403 - Public Financial Management 

The committee observes that there is no comprehensive plan to address the IFMS roll-out in order to support the Treasury Single Account (TSA).

The committee recommends that the public financial management vote function expedites completion of the IFMS rollout and embarks on IFMS sustainability. 

The PPDA Tribunal 

The committee is dissatisfied with the proposed allocation of Shs 1.5 billion to establish the PPDA Tribunal. The committee is therefore of the considered view that allocating Shs 0.50 billion to establish the PPDA Tribunal is inadequate. 

The committee therefore recommends that Shs 0.5 billion be appropriated to establish the PPDA Tribunal. The committee further recommends that Shs 1,000,000,000 be re-allocated to other priority interventions. 

Procurement Audits under FINMAP 

The committee recommends that government institutions should explore avenues of utilising reports produced by institutions charged with the mandate to do so.

The committee further recommends that Shs 0.322 billion be re-allocated to vote 153, PPDA, to enable them enhance the undertaking of procurement audits as the institution charged with the mandate to do so.

Recommended Appropriation to Vote Function 1403 

The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and therefore recommends that Shs 63.23 billion be appropriated for the public financial management vote function.

Vote Function 1404 - Development Policy, Research and Monitoring 

The committee undertook an on-spot inspection of the factory in Bushenyi. The committee also received a strategic plan and a copy of the land title on which the factory is allocated, which was in the names of PIBID. The committee is convinced that efforts are underway to have all the concerns raised earlier addressed.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Parliament appropriates Shs 9.03 billion to PIBID. The release of funds to PIBID should be subject to the Solicitor-General’s opinion on the patent rights, complete change of PIBID to 100 per cent government owned and management issues addressed.

Population Secretariat 

The committee recommends that Shs 2,000,000,000 billion be re-allocated to the Population Secretariat to enable it to adequately operationalise the National Population Council Act as passed by this Parliament.

Recommended Appropriation to Vote Function 1404 

As earlier recommended, Shs 2,000,000,000 billion should be re-allocated to the Population Secretariat. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 36.18 billion be appropriated to the development policy, research and monitoring vote function.

Vote Function 1406 - Investment and Private Sector 

Specifically on free zones, the committee recommends that Shs 4.04 billion be re-allocated to the Free Zones Authority. 

The committee further recommends that Government takes lead in the establishment of free zones to provide the necessary infrastructure that will stimulate private sector involvement as it was the case in China, Dubai, Turkey, Mauritius and Kenya.

Enterprise Uganda 

The committee recommends that Shs 2.1 billion be re-allocated to Enterprise Uganda to enable it fully implement the activities in the above paragraph. 

Recommended Appropriation to Vote Function 1406 

The committee earlier recommended Shs 4.04 billion be re-allocated to the Free Zones Authority and Shs 2.1 billion to Enterprise Uganda. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 53.907 billion be appropriated for investment and private sector vote function. 

Vote Function 1408 - Microfinance 

The committee noted with concern that efforts to get clarification as to why the committee recommendation as adopted by Parliament in the financial year 2014/2015 was not implemented were fruitless as Microfinance Support Centre declined to appear before the committee.

The committee therefore reiterates its earlier recommendation of FY 2014/2015 that Microfinance Support Centre be wound off the government budget, and with these accumulated resources from capitalisation since 2002/2003, operate independently as it is a profit motivated institution. 
The committee also recommends that Government undertakes the necessary steps that will turn the Microfinance Support Centre into a people’s bank.

The committee further recommends that Government of Uganda’s proposed budget allocation to support microfinance of Shs 2.487 billion be re-allocated to other priority interventions and Parliament explores avenues of terminating external financing to relieve Ugandans of this debt burden since the activities for which it is intended are not productive. Parliament must stand to be counted by terminating non-performing loans and support to microfinance among others. 

Therefore, as earlier said, Shs 2.487 billion be re-allocated to other priority interventions and external financing of Shs 8.97 billion be stopped. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 20.708 billion be appropriated to microfinance vote function.

Vote Function 1449 – Policy, Planning and Support Services 
Specifically on project support 0054 - support to Ministry of Finance - the committee recommends that Shs 2.935 billion be re-allocated from development expenditure of project 0054 to other priority interventions.

Tax expenditures of project 0054 - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA: Treasury operations matters are captured in full. On public debt, the committee recommends that Government looks up avenues of fulfilling the conditions for loan disbursements so that the intended objectives of loans contracted are achieved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclusion - (Laughter)

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I need one minute to look for the conclusion.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is on page 44.

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, with proposed massive investments in infrastructure, education, energy and health sectors, a strengthened PPDA will ensure a transparent procurement process that will give rise to most efficient firms taking on contracts. After efficient firms taking on contracts, the Office of the Attorney General will ensure that there is value for money. Therefore, there is need to bridge the resource gap in these institutions to effectively execute their mandates.

However, the massive investments envisaged may remain just a dream if inadequate resources are mobilised. Therefore, consideration should be given to increasing resource allocation to URA to enable them enhance revenue collection.

In conclusion, I now move that considering the observations and recommendations of the committee, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies as prescribed in the summary here below. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the summary.

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The summary is as follows:
Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 114,320,849,000 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 361,951,892,000 
 
Vote 108 - National Planning Authority
a) 	Recurrent expenditure - Shs 18,150,270,799. 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 405,416,000

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 47,549,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 20,860,000,000

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 227,700,553,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 64,762,000,000

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 32,009,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 33,584,000,000

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA)
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 9,786,449,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 2,257,000,000

I beg the House to adopt the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a minority report.

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, we had a contentious issue on the re-capitalisation of Bank of Uganda and one member, hon. Tim Lwanga, had a dissenting view. I propose that he comes and reads his minority report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, present the point of dissent. No procedural and preliminary matters, just the point of dissent.

5.23
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with number two, which dissents from the committee position. Rule 194(1) states that, “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her dissent and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”

Rule 194 (2) provides that, “The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report.”

I stand to present this minority report on the main report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am a member of the committee and I did attend meetings of the committee but I am in total disagreement with some of the committee report recommendations, which are technically in error. Such recommendations should not be passed or approved by this noble House. Therefore, in line with rule 198 of our Rules of Procedure, I have decided to write a minority report. 

My point of dissent relates to the following: 

1. Recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda 

The committee has recommended that Shs 50 billion be reallocated from vote 130, Treasury operations, to vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority, to address a funding gap of Shs 54.45 billion. This money was part of the Shs 200 billion meant to recapitalise Bank of Uganda with securities.

Mr Speaker, this is a very technical matter because the recapitalisation with securities entails not cash but Government issuance of government securities or instruments like treasury bills and treasury bonds, which are actually promises to pay at a future debt. These securities, therefore, serve two main purposes:

(i) 	They work as assets and are not in cash. Therefore, as capital is equivalent to the difference between assets and liabilities, the central bank’s capital must increase by an amount equal to the value of the securities issued to it. As such, there is no cash transaction involved.

(ii) 	The central bank uses the securities as a monetary policy instrument. In this case, if they want to control inflation and money supply or mopping up liquidity, as is technically used, they sell these papers (securities) to the public or to other financial institutions. This selling of the securities does not increase the central bank’s capital because it is an exchange of paper for cash. Therefore, it does not affect the balance sheet as far as capital is concerned.

(iii) 	During the committee consideration of the report, I tried to raise these matters but the members did not consider the technicalities involved after repeated explanations. 

Mr Speaker, I recommend as follows: 
1) 	That Parliament rejects the recommendation of removing Shs 50 billion from Bank of Uganda to Uganda Revenue Authority. It is technically not feasible to appropriate to third parties amounts which are meant for the Bank of Uganda and are not cash but securities. In other words, it is not cash.

2) 	I, therefore, further recommend that the Budget Committee, at the time of considering the Appropriation Bill, provides an opportunity to the Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to iron out the technical complications involved in the transfer of Shs 50 billion as was recommended by the committee in their report.

In conclusion, in view of the above, this matter should be treated carefully as it may have far reaching implications on the operations of the central bank and may affect the macroeconomic stability of the country.

Mr Speaker, I have taken time to review the committee report and relevant literature to come up with this minority report. It is my humble appeal that the House adopts the recommendations laid down in this report. For God and my country; I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lwanga, for the minority opinion that you have submitted. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted. Debate starts now.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am mindful of the issue of time but I seek guidance from the chairperson in respect of the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). The last financial year, Parliament declined to appropriate money to PIBID because there was a substantial issue when it came to the patent. We did not appropriate money because as of now, the products from PIBID are patented in the names of an individual.

When we appropriated the money to Uganda Industrial Research Institute, we were giving Shs 5 billion. Now, here we are talking about giving an individual and yet Parliament has already set conditions, which have not been met from the reading of the report. In passing, the chairperson says that they will handle. Isn’t it procedurally right that we expeditiously deal with those issues before we appropriate money to an individual, whose ownership of those rights we are dealing is for personal benefit?

MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA: On the matter of PIBID, we had agreed as a committee. Parliament had earlier decided not to give anything to PIBID. However, after a full year without any resource and after some explanations - the documents asked for in as far as the land title is concerned and the strategic plan were provided - we hoped that with just one item of the patent outstanding, we could proceed to give money to PIBID.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the chairperson would help this House if he told us what transitional arrangement PIBID has put in place to shift from the research that they were supposed to be doing to the marketing that they are now about to begin. They have already come up with the product; the patenting is not in the names of the owners of the money. That is problem number one.

Problem number two, we are now shifting; we were funding research and now we are shifting to marketing. Who is going to benefit from the product of that marketing? You need to convince us that the framework is clear before we add another coin to a very contested situation. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give information. The element of research for PIBID has always been an important component of the investment. It is not only the marketing of the product that is important but also the research to make sure that there is increased production of matooke in the country, that we deal with the banana wilt disease and that we are able to support the factory. 

If this factory was operating at full capacity, there would not even be sufficient raw materials in terms of the matooke to feed the factory. So, it is that element of going into the community to make sure that there is increased production of the crop so as to sustain the factory and then you can have a final product to sell. That is why it becomes very important.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we are talking about a matter of national importance. The outcome of that research will benefit all Ugandans. However, we are talking about technicalities. I am a member of the Committee on Budget and it was agreed that we cannot continue putting money into a project which is not owned. Who owns this project? Who will own the patent? We agreed that it can only be done after we have put in place some institution or organisation that will take ownership and then we will know that this particular institution will be accountable for the money that will be put in that research.

Is hon. Kamateeka, who even chairs the Committee on Human Rights, in order to abuse the rights of Ugandans, when the same report is saying only Shs 6 billion is being given to the industrial research?

This particular project is based in Bushenyi, which is my home, but that is not the issue. Let us do it properly. We do not want the people of Bushenyi to be cursed. We want this particular project to be owned by Ugandans. There must be an institution owned by Ugandans.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now ruling on your order?

MRS OGWAL: Is hon. Kamateeka in order to appear to be abusing the rights of the people of Uganda? (Laughter) Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you say the honourable member was appearing to, it gives the Chair difficulty because when somebody is appearing to, it means they have not done it. (Laughter) I cannot rule on that. You have concluded; can we have this information and we see how to move.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were various issues that were raised in the last financial year that lead to the re-allocation of this money to PIBID and most of them have been addressed. 

One was that Parliament wanted this institution to have a work plan in place. Two, we wanted them to show a transition from research to commercial. Three, we wanted a title to be in the names of Government. Four, we wanted Government to own the patent. They have fulfilled the three. What is remaining is the issue of patent. It is the Ministry of Justice delaying this issue; the rest of the documentation has been done.

Mr Speaker, when we failed to give money to this institution last year, it greatly affected its operations. People who had supplied their products to the factory have not been paid up to now. These are poor people who supplied their matooke one year down the road have not received payment. 

When the committee came and met the people, they had started gaining some hope that now something is coming up. To again deny this very big institution money will actually kill it.

I really request Members that we support the committee report, go ahead and give this money to the institution so that this factory is not affected in its operations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, I am still trying to gather information about the procedural point raised by the hon. Mwiru because I do not have all the information. That is why I am seeking out to the Members who have information to guide me in ruling on this subject. 

So, please –

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, thank you, very much. The issue at hand is that there should have been a transition from research to commercial. To the best of my knowledge, I sit on Public Accounts Committee, that is not yet done.

Secondly, PIBID is a registered entity. Could these Members tell us who the owners are and who the shareholders are before we give them the money? I thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of Budget Committee, you have some information on this matter?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to submit that this matter has not yet been brought before the Budget Committee in terms of the progress made so far. We expect that this report, once adopted by the House, will come to the Budget Committee and then we shall be able –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, this is not the way I always do things against my chairman. I am a member of the committee on budget which is chaired by hon. Lugoloobi, very ably moreover, and he has always been very good as we all know. However, I do not know whether it is in order for him to come and lie before the House as if there is no member of the committee to point out the truth. There was a time last financial year when the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development pushed this matter to our committee and we looked at the matter and indeed, the chairperson himself was so much involved in raising these matters and chased them away unless they brought the documents that were required. 

I am so surprised, Mr Speaker, the chairman is denying that that this matter has never appeared before the committee. Is he in order to lie before this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, a chairperson of a committee of this House can never lie but he can engage in factual in- exactitude. The word “lie” cannot be associated with any Member of the House –(Laughter)– So, please, let the record reflect that the reference lying was actually about factual in-exactitude.

Mr Chairman, would you like to clarify this and we proceed?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, what I was talking about was that the information we had was as at that date when we made our submission to this House. Now, what we need is a progress report to examine whether this project has been able to submit the documents as were expected at that time. As it is today, we have not received any official communication in that regard.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some information that I thought would be useful to the House. One, a private individual, Dr Muranga, was doing research on bananas. Now, we all know that we cannot collectively do research as Government. I have never seen Government in the laboratory doing research. This research was being done by a scientist known as Dr Muranga.

Two, the President decided to invest public monies to support this scientific research; a very noble objective. I know for a fact that there is also the Presidential Initiative on Science and Technology, where we invest money to help scientists and people who are researching in technology to develop the scientific and technological capacity of Uganda.  PIBID was such initiative that benefited from this funding.

Three, you know that patents are part of the intellectual property regime. Now, a patent accrues to the person who does the research and applies to patent it; the person who is involved in innovation. The government in this particular case was not involved in any innovation but there was a decision – (Interjection)– hon. Alaso, if you could only stop harassing me for a second and learn some bit of law. 

Mr Speaker, the issues here are the following: You have a PIBID which is a registered entity to which we vote public money. You have a private researcher who benefits from these resources and by no fault of hers, you have a patent registered in her names; again it is not her fault. No omission or irregular commission –(Interjections) - can I just conclude?

You have a Parliament that decides that - 
    1. she must transfer the land on which the project is and she did that;
    2. they must move from research to commercialisation of the project; they did that and there is evidence availed to the committee that they did that. Parliament also demanded that she must transfer her legal rights - the patent - to the funder; the Government of the Republic of Uganda. There is evidence that she has no objection. This is an on-going - (Interjections) - this information was availed to the committee and the chairperson of the committee can confirm this. This is an on-going process – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. I am listening keenly and I need to rule on this and I do not entertain interruptions when I am listening very well like this.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, this is an on-going process. Information that was availed to the committee was that the Solicitor- General is in the process of transferring the patents from Dr Muranga to PIBID, the registered entity. Now, would it be prudent as legislators to sit here and determine that we punish this very critical initiative of the President? My answer is certainly no. I thank you. (Applause)

MR BAHATI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One is that the potential of PIBID to transform that part of the country is immense and I think the support to this project will, indeed, transform that part of the country. That is very important to note.

As the chairman has said, I was in the committee. All the requirements by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to PIBID were submitted. Hon. Kwizera said that this PIBID is a company. It is not. It is a project of Government. It is funded under a sub-division under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The President appointed the board to oversee this.

They requested for a business plan, which PIBID submitted. They requested for a land title; I came with a hard copy of the title to the committee and it has been provided. Parliament requested that the patent rights should be transferred to the government and Rev. Muranga, the wonderful lady from Busoga, has written to Government allowing for its transfer. The rights are going to be transferred to the PIBID project and she is willing to do that. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, hon. Bahati, for having seen light because earlier on, the people who have been talking about PIBID being a pit where we were wasting public resources - I was with hon. Bahati but since he crossed, he has seen light and now he is saying –(Interjections)– He crossed to the front bench; he was at the back bench. Having moved from the back to the front, he has seen light.

Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising this, is that first and foremost, PIBID is a good project. The only problem we have is how it has been run and its management. Research has been carried out, money put in place for many years and results are not seen. It is only Parliament, which always puts a stop; then the director of the project acts. If in the wisdom of Government, especially Ministry of Finance, sees that there is need for the land title it would have not funded this project before getting the land title. If it was in need of saying that they should be transferred, there would be an agreement showing that the transfer would be in such a place –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to this House is that Prof. Muranga appeared before PAC. We essentially agreed on other things but when it came to the transfer of patent, she said if she is paid, she can transfer the rights. I have seen my brother hon. Bahati trying to say that since she is from Busoga - like some form of blackmail. 

I have no problems with Prof. Muranga and I support the project but what we are saying is that we have put almost over Shs 90 billion - what we are all saying is that since this is a right, which is transferable even to our children, as we put in more money and she says she has no problem to transfer, then we must agree that as we put in more money, what are the benefits of Ugandans who are putting in money? That is all we want.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, patents are good. For example, we have very good workers in ministries. I am sure hon. Bahati knows that there are very good workers in Ministry of Finance who work and we pay them a salary. At the end of their time, they go bare-handed apart from pension. 

If this lady has brought knowledge for Ugandans to benefit and whom we are paying, she has not sat and done it at her own cost. She has done it at the cost of the people of Uganda. In fact, if it is at the cost of Ugandans, we own it. (Interjections) Anyway, for me, I went to a very good school. So, I am not ready for information today. Mr Speaker, can somebody give me information if I have not accepted? Okay, I allow you and give it to me. (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that Prof. Muranga patented the products immediately she did her research. She did not benefit from the people of Uganda so as to patent the product. It was already patented and the President interested her to come and carry out further research and get further products from her research so as for Ugandans to benefit from her intellectual property. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank her for giving me information that this lady had already patented her rights. If she was ready, why continue with the research? It means she was not ready. (Interjections) Please, listen to me. If I come and say, “I have a product to give and what I need is to produce it massively” - So, I come to you to give me money so that I produce it massively but for her she came with a blank head because she said she had an idea and would like to do X. We gave her money, she went on for all the years over Shs 90 billion has been sunk in the project and nothing has come out.

Mr Speaker, civil servants do work and are paid pension and go home; in NARO, they are paid as civil servants and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to rule on this matter and we see how to proceed. He is holding the Floor and you want to give information; please, I need to rule on this and then, we can see how to move forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you remember Dr Esele who used to sit with you here; the one who brought Epuripur. It came here and it was developed; it is in Rukungiri and many other places but he never took anything. He developed the one which deals with groundnuts and he went bare handed. Why is it that from the other side, they go empty handed? Did you mention from Kisoro? From Busoga? They go with something; is it fair?

Mr Speaker, we have invested this money, the land and the money is ours. I see no reason somebody should hold us; in fact the best thing to do now is not to give any money until we have all that we need before we can release money. Public money should not be wasted for just one person who has only an item, which item we would have done without in all memorial. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a procedural matter; how do we proceed with this issue? That is how it was raised but I had no background and that is why I needed to listen to the Members who -

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to provide some little information as part of the background. What I recall, what the President has been saying was that Prof. Muranga has been carrying out research on bananas but when she interfaced with the President, she expressed financial constraints in her research and that is how the President, on behalf of Government, allowed that Government can put in money but she was already doing research.

That raises the issue of the patent rights because technically, the patent is an exclusive right given by law to an inventor; a scientist and an innovator - somebody who has gone in the research laboratory and invented something. 

I do not know whether in such circumstance you can force her to sell. It is good if she has accepted to pass over the patent to Government but I think it would still be technically okay to give her the patent rights as a researcher because I do not think all of us sat in the laboratory to do this innovation.

If the conditions, which were given by Parliament, have been fulfilled, particularly, to translate the research into commercial ventures, then there should be no reason as to continue punishing the project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let me guide on this issue now. It does not matter the amount of money you put in anything. If it relates to an invention, that invention belongs to somebody as a matter of right. It does not matter how much support you give to that person to make that invention. The support that was given to Prof. Muranga was support but the invention was hers. 

The question is, after the invention is made, it is patented as a right and the inventor has a right to sell that right to another person. That is the law. So, if the Government of Uganda is now interested in buying that patent from the inventor, nothing prohibits it. However, you cannot say, “Because I supported you in the research, therefore, whatever you have now invented is mine.” That would be a violation of that right called intellectual property. And I do not think Government has intellectual property; it can only buy from an inventor the right to use the patent. 

So, what is the situation here is that here has been support and that support did not only relate to the invention process. That support related to supporting the farmers who supplied the researcher with the materials to be able to buy the bananas or whatever was necessary for this research to continue. 

That was part of the support. Now, these accounts that submitted this money to this project were audited. If there is any evidence to show that this particular money went to the benefit of Prof. Muranga, as an individual, in which case it would be said that the amount was used to purchase the right that she acquired as by invention, then that would be a new situation. 

I have in the House here a person who has done some invention; maybe he could guide us on this.

PROF. TIKODRI-TOGBOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I think the difference between what is being discussed now and what I did is that in our case we engineered; we did not invent, in which case the thing that can come out of us are the trademarks, the copy rights and so forth. In the area of automotive, going for patent may not be the best thing you do. Why? You can have the patent, you can own it. But as long as no one comes to buy it to go and produce the vehicles and so forth, you will not gain anything. But you will still pay to sustain the patent in your names. So, I have not gone in that direction. In this case, she can apply for the patent, which she has already done and that will be in her names but should someone need to manufacture or produce things out of that, then you have to pay her. Or, if the Government wants to take over that, it will have to pay her.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is what I thought.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter, PIBID after the research was established by an instrument which was tabled before us. It is based on the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. We directed the Legal Department of Parliament and the Ministry of Finance - we read it, in fact, and we discovered that there are several provisions of the instrument that has not been complied with; several provisions that show serious violation of the instrument. 

Therefore, I would seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that you pick a copy of this entrustment, get Parliamentary Legal Department to give you an opinion so that we have a way forward. But according to my knowledge the President gave a directive based on the instrument, the Minister of Finance was supposed to establish an authority, a team, the management of finance, management of patent is detailed in the instrument and you read the Constitution and other laws relating to that. We asked the committee that before we make recommendations and decision on this, we needed to get a legal opinion.

It is unfortunate that the committee where I belong now goes ahead to say we recommend and then wait for the Solicitor General. We should have got the opinion of the Attorney-General first because there were very serious legal issues. 

Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence since this matter is going to go to the Budget Committee, you have a very robust Legal Department and the Attorney-General; we read the instrument and the Constitution and then we make a decision that will move the country forward. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue here is about the budget. We are not trying to sort out whether the inventor has rights or has no rights. But the issue is, does that project still require money? That is the question that we are asking now, that is a budgetary question. The question of patent, who acquires what right and so on and so forth; those can be resolved later. But as the project stands now, does it require money?

MR TIMOTHY LWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think we have a problem. I was chairperson to the Budget Committee. I was instructed by the President to go and confirm what was happening on ground. We confirmed that there was a lot of work going on but when we were there, we also confirmed that everybody who is on the project is being paid by Government from the Consolidated Fund. I find it difficult as an accountant to spend money from the Consolidated Fund, which is not accountable for the benefit of the citizens. 

From the argument here, it is like we cannot spend money but at the end of the day, we spent money. There must be a tangible benefit for the citizens and if there is, then we have no reason not to give them the money but if there is not, we have reason to question why we should spend the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I am asking the question. Honourable members, there is something called the doctrine of financial initiative. That financial initiative rests with the President, rests with the Chief Executive of any country. It is only the President that proposes the budget. Nobody else can propose the budget. That is the rule all over the world. 

Now, the President has proposed the budget; it is up to Parliament to approve. Ask those questions for approval. The President has said, “There is this problem, the solution to it is we need to put some money to deal with it”. Now, the question we are asking; is that problem properly identified? Will this money solve the problem? That is the approval question we are asking at this stage. If it is necessary that this project still needs money as the President has proposed, then we have no reason not to support the President in approving. However, if it is proved to us that this particular project does not require any more money and this money is going to waste, then this House can decide not to approve the money.

However, we cannot cite other issues other than whether it is necessary that this project should continue or not and bring it to stop the process of budgeting. Please, the issues are these things; if the project is still running, does it require money? If yes, then we stop there. However, if there are other incidental issues, we cannot import them into the budget process. That is how I would guide on this.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Everybody agrees that this project still needs money. There is no argument on that. The argument is because there are people who are importing other issues as you said. Just a few years ago, we had a similar case here about a loan from the World Bank where the Ministry of Public Service and UMI were claiming this money – that it should be in Ministry of Public Service or UMI. However, we sat here and said, “Our job here is to pass the budget.” We passed it and said Ministry of Finance, please, do not release until those issues are sorted out. Therefore, even for this one, let us pass since the money is needed –(Interjections)– then they will sort them out and release the money. I thank you. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, you are the chief custodian of our Rules of Procedure. When we pass resolutions, they are not in vain. This Parliament passed a resolution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What kind of resolution are we talking about?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, we passed a resolution, last time, that we shall not appropriate money to PIBID until four issues had been addressed. To date, only three issues have been addressed. 

What is not addressed, Mr Speaker, as of now, is the issue of the patent. This is actually, to me, the substantial issue. This is because we said this right is transferable from Prof. Muranga to the children. When we were debating, I was on this Floor. First, there is no doubt that we need science. I am on record. I said then that if this facilitation must go on, then we must transfer all this to Uganda Industrial Research Institute. I raised it the other time. 

There was an impression created that Prof. Muranga was agreeable to transferring the patent to Government. When she appeared before the Public Accounts Committee, she said she is agreeable on condition that she is paid. I asked her, “Then you have moved away from the previous position.” She said, “No.” 

What we want, Mr Speaker, to know before we appropriate is that if this is a process we are facilitating, what is the cost? This is because she started this project without a feasibility study. It is on the Auditor-General’s report. Therefore, we would like to know that if this is now a personal project, how much do we invest in it? This is a starting point.

Secondly, if any other Ugandan either from Kisoro or from Nakaseke came up with this idea, how will he or she be identified also to benefit out it? This is because those in Uganda Research Institute have not received the money. I have talked about the budget of Uganda Research Institute. It is Shs 6 billion. However, so far this project is almost coming to Shs 100 billion. We are facilitating an individual.

Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is for our resolutions not to be in vain; whether it is not proper that we dispose of the issue on our resolutions. If it can be in vain, then personally, I would have nothing to contribute but to go with what Parliament will have decided. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, once Parliament takes a decision on a matter, it is a decision of Parliament. The only opportunity that Parliament has got again to review its own decision is when that matter comes up after a Session of Parliament. If it is within the same Session, then we have to go within the ambit of Rule 209 to rescind the previous decision and take another decision. However, if it is coming after one year in another Session of Parliament, then Parliament has a right to review its previous decision based on the circumstances that have occurred.

In other words, resolutions of Parliament, especially when they are being reviewed by Parliament, are not cast in stone. Circumstances shift and if Parliament must re-insist on the resolutions of the past, Parliament will find that the bus has left the station and it is still holding onto something that is no longer valid. That is what the situation is.

Therefore, we have an opportunity to review the situation. Maybe, Parliament was not abreast of all the facts at that time when it passed those resolutions. Now, is the opportunity to look at it again. Did we do it properly or didn’t we? If we did it properly, we uphold the same decision. If there were issues that were not considered properly, then we have every right to depart from that decision. Only rocks do not change their minds. Human beings do. Even Parliament can change its mind.

MR EBIL: Mr Speaker, I do not defer with what you have ruled on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot. (Laughter)

MR EBIL: We cannot. However, my issue is that this country was founded on the basis that no matter where we come from, our future is shared. We must share the prosperity of this country. However, if you find that this programme, which is going to benefit the people of Greater Bushenyi – (Interjections)– Let me present. We have been arguing that Lira Spinning Mill needed refurbishment. Lira Spinning Mill needed some injection of capital. Lira Spinning Mill was employing over 1,000 people. The youth of Lango are unemployed. Therefore, I cannot sit in this House, yet, my people are unemployed –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I sat and listened attentively to the debate. My brother holding the Floor has insinuated that this project was designed only to benefit a specific part of this country. Yet, the project, which was initiated by a gallant Musoga lady who got married to Bushenyi is targeting a commodity, which is grown throughout the country – matooke. In addition, given our move towards job creation, the results of the research will benefit the entire people. 

Is he in order to really mislead us towards the direction of sectarianism and discrimination, which is not the case?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Presidential Initiative on Bananas applies wherever there are bananas. I think there are bananas all over the country. Therefore, that should not be the issue. 

However, honourable members, let us move. The issue is this, Parliament took a decision a year or so ago on this same issue. Today, that we are taking a decision, do we still have the same facts as one year ago or else some things have changed?

I am doing the assessment now. When we took that decision, we did not have a land title. We did not know who owned the land. We did not know whether we are moving from research to marketing. All those things were then. Now we have reached a review stage where we are looking at the same thing after a year. With the changes that have taken place, can we still take the same decision that we took last year, today? If we cannot, how do we move forward? 

It is because I am not so sure whether the same circumstances that led the House to take that decision a year ago is still obtaining today. If it is obtaining today, can you outline for me and the House that nothing has changed since we took this decision in which case, we will be bound to hold the same decision? However, if there are things which have changed, how do we modify our decision to suit the new circumstances based on the changes that have happened with this project?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this project is a good project. Let me say it. However, the way it has been designed and structured, according to the investment plan was brought before us, without the approval of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, put this project in the next three or four years to a liability of over Shs 130 billion. 

Today, you are only considering only Shs 9 billion but colleagues, for those of you who are going to come here, the plan for this project will require more financing for the next four or five years and we shall need to sink more Shs 130 billion. The Minister of Finance had not approved plan when they brought it before the committee. The plan is not even aligned to the NDP. The Public Finance and Management Act requires our budget to be aligned to the NDP. (Interjections) Yes, very clear and categorical.  

The Minister of Finance brought and tabled a title, which had the name of some organisation to the committee and it had not yet been transferred. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we told the minister that we needed an exit strategy. What they tabled to us sinks us deeper and we asked the Minister of Finance to go back and review this plan before we bring the money here for appropriation. To date, he has not yet brought the plan and we needed a signed document. We needed a title - (Interruption) 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Ekanya. I think as we debate this issue, colleagues, I want us to think about what it would look like if you had a packet of Uganda Tooke on the shelves of a U.S supermarket or London. If you entered any of those supermarkets and you found Matooke - we have been complaining about the forex exchange in –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was constrained to give order to my brother, hon. Bahati. We have very many products in Uganda, which should be accessing those shelves. We have millet, Bugisu Arabic Coffee the best in the world, cassava, cotton and many others. Therefore, is the minister in order to only mention that “Tooke” is the only one, which can access the shelves of the foreign supermarkets while the other products, which have been there for a longer time cannot?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if you started discussing sim sim at this time, I would rule you out of order because you will be out of the debate. The minister is being relevant to the debate before the House and we are discussing “Matooke”, not sim sim or cassava - the minister is very relevant in the debate. Therefore, let him conclude what he is saying.

MR BAHATI: The information I want to give you, hon. Ekanya, if you can remember the copy of the title I presented to the committee, in the presence of all the members of the finance committee is in the name of PIBID and this is a project Government is funding. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. PIBID management structure and the legal framework goes back to the violation of the presidential instrument. The ownership of PIBID is 100 per cent in the hands of Muranga and the family. That is why we demanded that the title be transferred to Government because it is in total violation-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it transferred?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, it is not yet transferred. Subject to that –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When hon. Mwiru raised the issue of the resolution, which was passed by Parliament last year, he mentioned four issues, which were in that resolution. You kept on guiding well, trying to narrow the debate so that we can find a solution. You reached a point where you asked us whether out of the four issues, which were mentioned in that resolution, we have done nothing.

We realised that from the presentations, which have been made so far, three things have been dealt with, except for one on patent. We received information from the legal mind regarding patent and one would realise that probably, Parliament was not well informed when we took a decision especially on the patent - tagging and forcing somebody to give you -

When I listened to the Shadow Minister of Finance deepening and widening the debate - (Laughter) - to the extent of tagging the whole issue on the National Development Plan and on the structure, which issues was debated even at that time when we came up with this resolution, I got lost. That is why I am raising the point of procedure whether the Shadow Minister of Finance is really helping this House to come to the conclusion following your guidance? Is he proceeding very well, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only outstanding issue, which the honourable member who raised the procedural point raised is the question of patent. Patent is a right; it is a property. Therefore, to acquire it from somebody, you pay for it. However, where you want to acquire it compulsorily without payment, you are violating the Constitution. Can this Parliament direct that somebody loses some rights without compensation? Can we do that? Why are we then moving as if we want to do that? It is because the question of whether I want to sell my right or not is my decision. Where you want to acquire it compulsorily; that might not apply to issues of patent unless of course you are dealing with security matters and things like that.

However, honourable members, please. The situation obtaining last year cannot be the same today if three of the issues that were raised then have been solved and only one remains on the issue of patent. It cannot be the same.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, kindly let me conclude a very important point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I think you have spoken so much on this matter.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, there are some facts which we need to know. The minister has come here and said that land is owned by PIBID. I did not do law but I read law. You cannot have ownership when you are not a legal entity. Unless you tell us that PIBID is a registered legal entity to own land, then you will be deceiving us.

Another issue, Mr Speaker, is, this project is run with a board of governors. This board of governors is appointed by the President. So, who are we giving the fund? Do we give funding to the board of governors or to Dr Muranga, the Chief Executive? Is Dr Muranga being paid or not? All the work Muranga does is paid by Government. That is why so far Shs 90 billion has been sunk in that project. So, where are we going? What does Government have there? Yes, she appeared before us but what we are saying is: what is the legal status of this PIBID we are giving money to –(Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL:  Mr Speaker, I just want to give the holder of the Floor some information. I want Parliament to be aware that despite the fact that whereas this project is being driven by Dr Muranga, she also draws a salary of Shs 28 million per month. 

From that we can now be able to know who owns this particular project. She draws a salary as a person employed to do the work. She also draws that salary from the Government of Uganda. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, when she appeared in the committee, she failed to tell whether she earns salary under Makerere and at the same time under the project. 

Secondly, if now the minister is saying that there are some products in London and USA supermarkets, where is the balance sheet? Where does that revenue go? If Dr Mulanga was financed and now that we have enough revenue for her, do we still need to fund her? This is because she is now producing. We can leave her to sell and we do not give her more money. I thank you.

MR JUNJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Budget Committee and I was on that committee last year when we made this report. I signed it, which means I confirmed what the committee had agreed on. I would like to request that since a number of issues are coming in, this matter should be referred to the Budget Committee for further scrutiny. We have equal rights as members, so no one should intimidate the other. 

The point of procedure I would like to move is whether it is procedurally right for this House to refer this matter back to the committee for further scrutiny and reporting.

MR ALEPER: I would like to start from where your guidance to the House ended, Mr Speaker. This Parliament had earlier on made a decision on a matter, which so far has taken over one year. I am happy and I wish to appreciate what my brother hon. Paul Mwiru had put across that out of the four issues that were raised, three have been accomplished. 

I have heard members talk about a project. As a student of project management, a project has got cycles. The first is to identify an initiative. In this case, an initiative was identified and all of us appreciate that. Two, preparation was done for this initiative to be put into place. It was also reviewed because money was put into it. And thirdly, there was implementation done. The fourth stage is production, which was also done because all of us have been talking about farmers taking their products. 

However, I am not yet convinced about the fifth stage. No member has convinced the House on this stage. When was the evaluation on this initiative? If an evaluation was done on this initiative of the banana project and was found suitable, money was put in - I do not disagree with Members who are alarmed that a lot of money has gone into this project; it is not about how much money you put into this project. The point is: if we have already done an evaluation and nobody has given concrete evidence that this project has failed, what reasons do we have to refuse to pass this money?  If there is no Member to convince the House that this project is a failure, why do we refuse to put money into it? 

So, wouldn’t it be prudent that since nobody has challenged - and even in the evaluation the three grounds that were advanced have been satisfied with only one in respect of which, Mr Speaker, you guided it not being a crucial - if the three have been accomplished and the House has almost 98 per cent - these other technicalities of her earning money from this project and Government paying her, do not hold water! 

In my view, I think it is prudent for this House to approve this money until such a time when somebody will come out to challenge our decision with evidence that this project is a failure. What we are getting now is that the farmers are succeeding and the project is going on successfully. I support this project. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, I have been carefully listening to the Speaker and Members’ views. It is important to note that whatever money we appropriate in the budgeting process - that is why one time hon. Geoffrey Ekanya asked for the background to the budget. It is an important element because it shows the cost benefit analysis of the money appropriated each year. And that shows a micro-economic performance of a country in regard to the project designed and into which we inject money.

Mr Speaker, you have guided very well that if we are to give money, we need to look at the results from the money we gave the previous year. That is where situation analysis comes in to the effect that before we inject money into any project, we have to look at its performance in the previous year. So, if this project –(Interjections)– yes, it is good, but it does not make sense when the project fails to realise break-even yet it receives money every year. So, the question is: when I give you money, do you realise break-even or not? It is as simple as that. This is –(Interjections)– can I read the Public Finance Management Act we passed - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to either move or not. But we cannot move around in circles. The issue is that we have a report of a committee that has generated this debate. The motion was for the adoption of the report of the committee. That report also has a minority opinion. Okay? Now, the decision we needed to take was on the report of the committee, as well as the minority opinion issued by hon. Tim Lwanga.

The procedural point relates to one budget item and the amount is Shs 9 billion. Isn’t it? Yes, Shs 9 billion for the Presidential Initiative on the Banana Project. 

But, honourable members, you can see that we have spent almost three hours discussing this Presidential Initiative on Banana Project rather than looking at the whole picture of the budget of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development! Therefore, I would like to do this: is it possible for us to do surgery on the whole report? I think we have done quite some debate on this banana project. Is it possible - because some honourable member was saying that we refer this matter back to the Budget Committee, but the House does not just refer matters to committees. What we refer back to, for example, the Budget Committee are matters where there are inconsistencies in figures. If the House realised that the proposal to allocate Shs 9 billion to the banana project amounts to an inconsistency, we would refer that back to the Budget Committee. Otherwise, we do not just refer matters to the Budget Committee. It has to be done within the provisions of Rule 138(2) - that is when the Speaker is moved –(Laughter)–  to make that reference to the Budget Committee. 

So, for purposes of moving forward, I am going to guide that the issue of allocation to PIBID amounts to the matter that needs resolution properly and that resolution can only be done by the Budget Committee. We can get back to it after they have reported back with the figures. That is how we can handle this matter.

What about the issue of the minority report in terms of the Shs 50 billion to be taken from Bank of Uganda to Uganda Revenue Authority; that constituted the basis for the minority report? What is the decision of the House on that? Can we deal with that before we move to the main report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that you are right that we have spent time on one item. These reports of finance are good but we should have looked at them in details. At an appropriate time, this report will need to be further internalised by Members. I will tell you this from the bottom of my heart.

Given the circumstances we are in now, things have changed. For example, the minority report, issued by the hon. Tim Lwanga, he points out that this does not call for money. If it does not call for money, why should it come to Parliament? We do not come here to just play around with the English language. We should not assume that others do not understand. You know in that report, he says that this is a non-resource envelope; it does not require security and the like but security means money, if you have known the value of security. That is why we have security exchange.

Even when you further look at this report - when the gentleman says that the reason we need more money in the Bank of Uganda is because they have to do micro-economic soothing – whatever he said; I didn’t get it well. However, you are very sure, Mr Speaker, that between 2008 and 2015, Bank of Uganda was involved in many scandals; one of them was paying Basajjabalaba a tune of almost Shs 200 billion. This impaired the bank. When it impaired it, money was quoted - Shs 410million.

Two, IMF is saying that the operation expenses of Bank of Uganda are too high. Mr Speaker, if you have ever travelled with a staff of Bank of Uganda, you would notice the way they splash cash; I have been with them. It is because they know it is free money. They even throw parties and IMF is saying -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I need you to help me with the minority opinion, so that we can take a decision on it before we move to the main report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that even IMF has said that Bank Uganda operation expenses should be cut. Even the Shs 150 billion we have given them, if I were on that committee, I would have rejected it. I would have written a minority report to say that, if worst comes to the worst, we give them only Shs 20 billion.

The committee has given them Shs 150 billion and hon. Tim Lwanga says we should add them more Shs 50 billion so that they can go and splash it around. No, Mr Speaker, as far as the minority report is concerned, it should be rejected in totality and I am sure hon. Tim Lwanga is a member from the ruling party - I don’t know if he has discussed this with the Minister of Finance. If he has not, it is quite dangerous. What was his motive to write a minority report without discussing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, I also need to understand this thing. The issue here is recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda. That is the issue. The minority report is saying that Bank of Uganda does not need cash to recapitalize but at the same time it is saying that Shs 50 billion should not be removed from Bank of Uganda. The committee is saying that since Bank of Uganda does not require cash to recapitalise, take away Shs 50 billion and give it Uganda Revenue Authority.

But the minority report is again saying that no, “don’t” yet the Shs 50billion that we are required to appropriate here is cash; it is not an instrument. We do not appropriate instruments. We do cash. And that is where I need help on whether this minority report presents a proper situation for the House to spend time on or not.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Constitution is categorical and specifically, I would like to read Article 159(8) and it reads thus: “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provision of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.”

If you look at the Public and Finance and Accountability Act, Government is exempted from bringing the terms and conditions of borrowing for monetary policy. If Government wants to recapitalise Bank of Uganda under monetary policy, like the way the minister told us, it gives an instrument and does not need to come here. This is a constitutional provision; somebody can read the Public Finance and Accountability Act. It is on the basis of that principle, Mr Speaker, that I agreed with the hon. Tim Lwanga - and we had agreed on principle - that the Shs 200 billion be totally scrapped because it violated the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act.

I am therefore seeking procedure from you, on whether is it proper for us to proceed on a matter that is not legally supported by the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are discussing the report of the committee. In the report of the committee, it is said that Shs 50 billion from that money should be given to URA. The minority report is saying no and that is where we are.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if the money was paper work, there would be no need for us to give URA the money. The Shs200 billion is cash. It is a capitalization, which means increasing capital asset. That means right now; you are either in negative or whatever. But the Ministry of Finance brought it up as a by the way. They talked about putting the Shs 200 billion. I do not know where they got it because the budget must be supported. But after presenting the policy statements, they agreed to add Shs 200 billion for Bank of Uganda. The committee had said if it was that the Shs 200 billion was necessary at that time, it should have been part and partial of the policy statement.

Since it was not part and parcel of the policy statement, the committee agreed with the Ministry of Finance because they do business together and give them Shs 150 billion but 50 billion goes to URA to assist it in order to generate more income inform of taxes.

When they raised that issue to give money to URA so that they can get more taxes, it meant that it would reduce on the money for capitalisation from Shs 200 to Shs 150 billion. What hon. Tim Lwanga has raised in his report - he is saying it is paper work –(Interjection)– instrument. But as the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya has said, instruments do not come here. Instruments are there. They can do for purpose of monetary to wipe out liquidity when they want it or to put liquidity in the system.

So, in the current status, I would even go further that Shs 200 billion should not be given to Bank of Uganda. In fact this money should go to URA, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture but not Bank of Uganda because if they want money for monetary instruments, they are free to do it. And I am sure hon. Fred Omach is here. He knows what they have been using. I do not know the motivation for hon. Tim Lwanga to come here and write a minority report of this nature. Anyway, you have helped us because we have been able to raise the issue that Bank of Uganda does not deserve even the Shs 150 billion, which had been given to it.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, the reason we took a decision to transfer Shs 50 billion from Bank of Uganda to URA is because it has a very good multiplier effect. We are saying that the GDP ratio to revenue collection –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not the issue right now.

MR KAKOOZA: I would want to support the reasons why we took that decision. I am a member of the committee but you should give -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but you are taking us away from the subject. The question is about the Shs 50 billion. Is it cash that can be moved from one place to another or it is not? If it is cash, then the foundation of this argument does not hold and that is what I am saying.

MR KAKOOZA: It is cash and that is what we are also saying. And we decided so because the presentations of Uganda Revenue Authority and Bank of Uganda, which needs to recapaitalise - because Uganda Revenue Authority said that the efficiency to collect revenues that go to the informal sector where they do not have branches to help them do revenue collection -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. James Kakooza, you have exceeded the point we are at. You are justifying why you reallocated. But the issue is: is there anything to reallocate. That is where we are. If there is then this minority report cannot stand, please.

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It seems the problem we had in the committee is resurfacing here as well. When they are capitalising the central bank – when they put money on its capital account, which as of last year had Shs 411 billion and after recapitalizing came to about Shs 600 - the same account, as at March, had a positive of Shs 144 billion, if I recall the figures well. If you continue without capitalsation, you will have a negative Shs 97 billion by June. And if we do not give it any more money by the following year, that amount will have doubled and your central bank could be insolvent. I believe the Minister of Finance can clarify on that. 

When they are capitalising it they actually issue instruments. The instruments, when issued specifically for the Bank as opposed to instruments for raising money from the public, they become assets of the bank. It is a piece of paper but a promise to pay and guaranteed. Now, when the bank, for its operation, needs actual cash it can sell these instruments onto the market to get money. When it gets money, that money replaces the instruments on the asset account. Therefore, there is no difference. 

Now, let me ask a question. You are saying or the report is saying we get Shs 50 billion and give it to URA. But my question is: where are you going to get it from? Is the central bank going to use part of its Shs 150 billion and give Shs 50 billion away or you are going to get an instrument, which they are using in this case and give it to URA? 

Technically, it is not feasible and that is what we are talking about. That is why, Mr Speaker, I recommended that the best thing is for the Budget Committee to invite officials from the central bank and Minister of Finance so that everybody can understand the technicalities involved in capitalizing it. That is all and I do not think I have committed any crime at all. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question then is: do you need to appropriate money as Parliament, to recapitalize Bank of Uganda? If the answer is no, then what is it doing here, if you do not require parliamentary approval to re-capitalise Bank of Uganda? Why are we bringing it in the budget estimate? 

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The capitalisation of Bank of Uganda is done through instruments but these instruments are backed by appropriations. What we are asking for - the Shs 200 billion - is actual money and we need it. We have been, for the last two or more years, putting this to re-capitalise Bank of Uganda. There is some more information from the chair but it is actual cash.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me take the chair of the committee.
 
MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, somebody from Ministry of Finance explained to us that that ministry has been recapitalsing Bank of Uganda since June 2013. They started with Shs 410 billion through issuance of bonds and that they have done so this financial year at Shs 200 billion. In the next financial year - they are proposing - the one that the committee is reducing by Shs 50 billion – Shs 200 billion and that they need to end with Shs 250 billion in the other coming year in order to make Shs 1.1 trillion

So, it has been a programme on progress, from Shs 410 billion to Shs 250 billion currently to Shs 200 billion, in the coming year and will end with Shs 250 billion through bonds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the kind of confusion coming in. For what purpose does Bank of Uganda recapitalise? Is it for monetary policy or it is just for it to have a capital base; to make it strong and vibrant as a central bank? If it is for monetary policy, then it does not have to come to Parliament because it is exempted.

Where they are issuing instruments to manage the account to wipe out extra cash; they do not have to come to Parliament to do that. This one is for capitalisation and it cannot be for monetary policy; capitalisation is capitalisation.

MR SSEBUNYA: From the explanation by the Ministry of Finance, this is for operations because they buy money; they replace old money with new money. So, it is for such operations. And they have increasingly separated between monetary policy and operation money.

MR OKOT: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The debate is now becoming more interesting but given the situation we have being interacting with here and there, it is indicative that this Shs 200 billion, the Ministry of Finance has it. But they want to give it to Bank of Uganda. Only before they do it, the central bank should give them some security – (Interjections) – yes, that is why they want to balance it up.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, you have guided the House properly, and I thought that should be the vein we should take on. If it is just for monetary policy, they do not need to come to Parliament. Why we say that we should deduct Shs 50 billion from that Shs 200 billion, was because we saw it from the presentation as cash. That is why we agreed to reallocate it so that Bank of Uganda can remain with Shs 150 billion.

In that essence it shows you, according to the programme, which the chairperson has read, that even the performance of Bank of Uganda is reducing, regardless of anything. Because if you have a programme that is running and every time you come for more money, but the performance of you sector is really poor, then there is a problem. That is what we have been talking about. And that is why we are saying that if the Shs 200 billion is cash, which Parliament has powers to appropriate, then we can take off Shs 50 billion and reallocate to the Uganda Revenue Authority and leave Shs 150 billion for Bank of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is a proposal from the ministry. My own assessment of this discussion, and looking at the committee report, is that the committee has not helped us understand this matter very well.

I would like the minister to state for the record, what this Parliament should do, which they stated in whatever their supplementary documents to Parliament were. What do you want Parliament to do? Can that be deducted and transferred elsewhere or not? Please guide the House.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, in the process of redeeming the instruments that we use for monetary policy and others, we actually go and impair the capital base. We are building this capital base back so that the bank stands strong. This is actual appropriation, which is cash. And over the years we have been rebuilding this. And this Shs 200 billion will still not be able to bring it to the position of the repair of the capital as required. So, it is cash –(Interjections)– whatever you would want to call it, it has to be appropriated. What you are appropriating is something which you pick from the Consolidated Fund and take somewhere.

So, if you move away Shs 50 billion, it means that the recapitalisation of the bank would be lower than what we expect it to be by the end of this financial year and the period within which we wanted it to be finalised, as the chairperson of the committee has indicated. So, our prayer is that the money should be left to capitalise. But in my opinion, the minority report would not stand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minority report says that Shs 50 billion should not be removed. The principle is that Ministry of Finance has asked that Shs 200 billion be appropriated by this House to recapitalise Bank of Uganda. The committee is saying take away Shs 50 billion from it and give it to URA. The minority report is saying, in this line, no, do not; leave it with Bank of Uganda so that it is Shs 200 billion.

So, to the extent of how much money you need to recapitalise, you should be supporting the minority report, in my opinion.


MR OMACH: The justification of the minority report is that these are just instruments. You would be transferring air supply. And we are saying it is not air supply. It is cash, which we need to make the capital of Bank of Uganda stronger. Instead of by Shs 150 billion, we request that it be made by Shs 200 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in part, you support the minority report to the extent that the Shs 50 billion, whatever it is, should remain with Bank of Uganda but not be given to URA. Not so?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the committee report would not be supported by you to the extent that they remove Shs 50 billion from it. So, can we now move without going into the justifications for the rejection by hon. Tim Lwanga as to why the Shs 50 billion should not be removed from the capitalisation money for Bank of Uganda – without going to the justification, is the minority report valid to the extent that that money should be left at Bank of Uganda?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am happy the minister said they are capitalising Bank of Uganda. But I implore honourable members to look at Bank of Uganda, the way they would look at the Ministry of Finance, or Ministry of Agriculture.

These ministries are tasked with some mandate for performance output. The output for the Ministry of Finance is that we want this and this. That is why we give them the following amount of money.

For Bank of Uganda, its mandate, I think you have mentioned it very well, deals with issues of monetary policy. Monetary policies do not come here because Bank of Uganda can say that they have realised they are about to get a shock and so they request you for either a billion or a trillion shillings to avoid that shock. It will get money in form of an instrument, guaranteeing, for example, the one trillion to avoid the foreseen shock. In case it happens, Bank of Uganda will make it good. So, Bank of Uganda capitalisation does not arise in the sense - do they want money to capitalise so that they go and borrow? No. Capitalisation means you want your asset base to increase so that you can go to the market and say you are big. Bank of Uganda does not have to go to London and say we are big here. It is a Government of Uganda, which we talk about.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the minister is right, in one way but not on the other hand. If Bank of Uganda has made a loss in the process of its macro policies, it gets the difference of the money but that money is not called capitalisation. It acknowledges the loss. They will acknowledge that they have made a loss of, for example, Shs 200 billion. So, for the minister to say that they want to capitalise - let Bank of Uganda tell us what their loss is. The loss is the one to be dealt with. If the loss is Shs 100 billion – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: According to the document given to us, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the loss by Bank of Uganda is Shs 144 billion. The document is here; it was given to the committee by Bank of Uganda. Can I read it for you? It reads in parts: “The nine month performance of the period ending 31 March shows that the bank recorded income of Shs 100 billion against expenditure of Shs 248 billion resulting into net operating deficit of Shs 144 billion.” Therefore, why should we give them this Shs 200 billion?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hope you have now seen what I am talking about. In fact, I would like to thank the committee for quoting this. It is the loss which we make good but not that we get money and put it in the Bank of Uganda to capitalise it, no. And the excess they make - okay when they make some operation saving - is the one they can use for expansion for example for building currency centres and whatever.

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I would like to tell you that first the minority report had its own faults but also the issue of Shs 200 billion for capitalisation of Bank of Uganda does not arise unless they are coming to us to make good of the loss. In this case, if I look at it, the loss here is Shs 144 billion and in that regard we should only appropriate Shs 144 billion to Bank of Uganda to take care of the loss, which has accrued. To be better off we make it Shs 150 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, my prayer has been that we would be given all the Shs 200 billion but we have brought our position to Parliament.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the debate has been narrowed only that what the minister has not done is to explain to us how he is coming to Parliament. I am saying this because my understanding of this is that the Shs 50 billion, according to the minority report, actually does not arise. That one we moved away from it.

When it comes to the Shs 200 billion, we have also understood it to be that when you go to capitalisation, you only issue instruments. Therefore, it does not also arise too.  But then how does the minister want us to appropriate to him the Shs 200 billion? That is important to know because it doesn’t seem clear to me. I beg to seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the total indebtedness of Bank of Uganda? What are the steps being taken to do that? What do you want from Parliament? Honourable ministers, help the House.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the total indebtedness we had were Shs 1.1 trillion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have to listen, hon. Mafabi. Let us listen then you can respond.

MR BAHATI: From 2013/2014 up to – for the last four years, and we have been recovering slowly by slowly; appropriating slowly. This year we are requesting for Shs 200 billion. As hon. Fred Omach has said, the responsibility of appropriation is with Parliament and we have put our case that this bank needs to be recapitalised slowly. Even next year we shall come back because today we have asked for Shs 200 billion, given the resource envelope that we have. Next year we will come back. We think that if this is done, it will help the central bank to stabilise because every single year, the Bank of Uganda issues instruments and in the process it makes losses. We need money to be able to capitalise this –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member for Agago to continuously go the other side as if he is the Minister of Finance consulting and writing while the Minister of Finance is discussing an important issue? And when he comes, he misleads us. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the technical bench is for the House; it gives advice to the House. (Applause) That is why we call it a technical bench. That bench constitutes people who can assist the House on how to proceed; any member can have access to it.

Honourable members, I would have now said we receive the next report; just to receive it in five minutes. I hope the chairman is ready to present in five minutes. But if the House is not prepared - we could receive the one on agriculture and defer it to next time for debate. We cannot conclude this particular report now, but we can as well make progress on the next one so that we can deal with two, which will just require decisions next time. 

Honourable members, five minutes will not make much of a difference, we have already sat this long. Five minutes for the Speaker.

7.15
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Mr Speaker, I am the one to present and I will be presenting on agriculture. If one item on the banana project took us three hours, it will not be fair, considering the fact that we are going to debate it in -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, your presentation will not take more than 10 minutes. Health took 12 minutes and all the other sectors have taken that time. There is no exception, no. All the sectors are important and they are all taking 10 minutes. Now I was giving you the opportunity to present so that the House can internalise so that when we come back next time, we are able to debate - it looks like you are the one throwing the spanners in the wax. Okay, if the chair is not ready to proceed, this House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 pm.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 May 2015, at 2.00 p.m.)




