Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 22 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to inform you of the passing on of Ms Carol Nakakande, a sister to hon. Robert Kasule, the Member of Parliament Nansana Municipality. There will be a vigil today at the deceased’s home in Najeera, Kampala near Hass Petrol Station. A funeral service will be held on Thursday, 23 May 2019 at St Andrew’s Church, Bukoto at 10.00 a.m. and burial will take place on Friday, 24 May 2019, in Kiruhura District.

I have also just been informed of the passing on of hon. Elijah Okupa’s brother, Mr Denis Outa. He passed on yesterday. Burial will take place in Apapai, Kasilo ancestral home. Members of Parliament, you are all informed. Please give support to the honourable colleagues who have lost their dear ones.

On my own behalf and on behalf of the Parliament, I convey my heartfelt condolences upon this loss. We pray that God’s grace supports the bereaved families during this most trying period. Let us rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Kiryandongo had a matter to rise. Please proceed.

2.12
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning land evictions. Government allocated 20 square miles of land, in Masindi Port Sub-County in Kiryandongo District, to one company called Sole Agri-business. 

Unfortunately, the land had squatters estimated to be more than 800 households. There were no compensations nor were there any resettlement plans. The people have stayed on the land for more than 30 years. The investor is giving just Shs 100,000 as money for transport to every household and thereafter, forcefully destroying their houses.

Mr Speaker, the villages that are affected include: Katuugo, Kaduku, Kokaitwa and Ndabulye. The affected persons pray that Government halts the eviction exercise until there is fair compensation or resettlement of the affected persons.

In a similar way, allow me to present a similar matter that concerns ranches in Kiryandongo District. Government gave away very many ranches to an investor to do sugarcane growing in Kiryandongo District. However, there was no prior compensation or resettlement plan for the people that were staying on the land. Government had promised to resettle the affected persons on one of the ranches called Ranch 22.

However, the same Government that promised or committed itself to resettle the people on Ranch 22 leased out the same ranch to some people. The first person who leased Ranch 22 sold their interests to another person. Therefore, the current person who bought or acquired Ranch 22 is now also forcefully evicting the people who had resettled there.

Mr Speaker, the prayers are that Government should intervene immediately and that this House directs the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to investigate the matter and also other ranch related challenges in the district and report back. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, hon. Kahunde for raising these issues. We will ask the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development - because there is an issue of land - to get in touch with the honourable member and handle this issue.

I also, in the circumstances, request that on the issue of the ranches, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will answer this question now or if she need more time she can answer tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the ball is in your court.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ranches in Kiryandongo are not under me. The ranches which are under me are not in Kiryandongo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to relay the information to the right person?

MS KABATSI: I will take the message to the Minister of Lands Housing and Urban -(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like from the minister is: she said the ranches in Kiryandongo are not under her yet we all know that ranches are for animals. May we know the ranches, which are under your docket and in particular, this one of Kiryandongo since is not under you, whom is it under? That is the friendly clarification. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the minister was clear and said she is not in charge of that one. It is the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; she is going to relay the information. Let us leave that.

Now that I see the Member concerned here - because at the time I was giving my communication, both of them were not here - the honourable member for Kakumiro District was not here and she has a petition to present and hon. Robert Kyagulanyi has a personal statement to make. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate these two so that we can receive them. Thank you. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.19
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me an opportunity to make a personal statement under Rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure. 
 
 I rise to give a statement regarding the persistent injustices occasioned against me and the people I work with, both as a political leader and as an artiste, by the Uganda Police Force and other security agencies. 

These violations have unduly affected my ability to carry out my duties both as a Member of Parliament and personally as a citizen of this country. 
 
It will be remembered that in November last year in this Parliament, the issue of the illegal blocking of my music concerts by police and other security agencies was raised. This very Parliament directed the police and other security agencies to stop violating my rights and those of other people.

The leadership of the Uganda Police Force has decided to ignore the directive of this Parliament. As a result, since November last year, I've not been allowed to work or even hold a political rally anywhere in this country. 

We have laws in this country and ordinarily any such matters would be resolved by courts of law or other institutions of Government.

However, regarding my concerts, the High Court failed to uphold my constitutional rights; choosing to rely on technicalities and ignoring the substance in total disregard of Article 126(2)(e) of the Constitution. 
I petitioned the Uganda Human Rights Commission in respect to the same matter under Article 52 of the Constitution but up to date, we have not been invited for any hearing. 

As far as I know, the Constitution is the supreme law of this country. I think time has come this Parliament needs to decide whether to follow the Constitution and laws of this country or to follow 'orders from above'.

I know the issue of police brutality has been raised many times before this House but the situation is only getting worse, as a matter of fact I have been personally a victim of this brutality. 

Recently, the police broke windscreens of our vehicle in a criminal manner before arresting us violently. Colleagues, we have been subjected to physical and psychological torture. I have personally been placed under house arrest; a practice that has been declared illegal in this country. 

While I was under house arrest, the Minister of Internal Affairs informed this House that I had committed some offences for which I needed to report to the CID department.
 
I complied with the summons but while I was headed there on 29th April 2019, I was once again blocked by the same police- once again violently arrested, pepper sprayed, and driven to Naggalama police station.
 
I was arraigned before the Buganda Road Chief Magistrates Court that afternoon. I could not apply for bail because my sureties were blocked from accessing the court premises by the police and military, which had cordoned off all the roads leading to the court and hence was sent to Luzira prison.

On the day I was granted bail, as soon as I stepped out of the gates of Luzira prison, I was immediately arrested by the police, bundled into a police van and driven off only to be dropped at my house later.

Mr Speaker, I have been denied the opportunity to participate in any peaceful demonstration; which is a right guaranteed by Article 29(1) of our Constitution. Whenever I and my colleagues write to the police notifying them of our intention under the Public Order Management Act, 2013, they simply ignore our letters.
 
This Parliament is mandated by Article 79(3) of our country's Constitution to protect the Constitution, promote constitutionalism and constitutional governance in this country.
I implore all of you colleague Members, not to look the other way while rights and freedoms of Ugandans are being violated. Experience has shown us that when we sit back and watch these violations go unchallenged, each one of us will one day be a victim. 

We are alive to the history of our country. There are many people who sat in this very House before and turned the other way while the rights and freedoms of the citizens were being violated. Some defended human rights violations with all their might on this very Floor. At different times in our history, right from the days of late hon. Grace Ibingira, there are those who vigorously pursued legislation which would violate the rights of citizens. 

Unfortunately, those are the same people that became the first victims of the same violations they were championing or defending. I implore us, honourable members, to be very good students of our own history.

Finally, having interacted with many of our security officers, I have come to realise that many of them work under very unfavourable conditions.  As we all know, they are under paid, poorly accommodated and experience so much injustice and unfair treatment in terms of promotions as well. 

I would like us to remember that they are also humans like us. They have families to look after and we should consider their plight as a matter of priority. 

Mr Speaker, at the right time and with your permission, I intend to move a substantive motion for the improvement of the welfare of our men and women in uniform. I request all of you honourable members to support my motion when I bring it. 

I believe that in many ways their poor living conditions are the reason why some of them treat us so inhumanly. If we treat them right, we shall have the moral authority to demand them to treat us right. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and thank you colleagues for listening to me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kyagulanyi. The rules are clear that there might be a comment I need to make because when you say, “I think this Parliament needs to once and for all decide whether we follow the Constitution, other laws or follow orders from above”, we all took oath and we know which set of laws we swore to uphold and defend and it is the Constitution. I think you are referring to other people not Parliament. Secondly, when you bring this motion be mindful of Article 93 which makes some limitations on what can happen, thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

2.27
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I move under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure to present a petition to this august House for the people of Kakumiro District farmers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak up or adjust the microphone.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request for your protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed honourable, if you want me to deploy around you I can do that but you are okay proceed.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are tobacco farmers from Kakumiro District whose survival essentially depends on farming.

2. Your petitioners aver that:

    (a) Tobacco is one of the top foreign exchange earners in the country that brought in about $46.30 million (Shs 170.9 billion) in 2017 alone.
    (b) There are an estimated 75,000 tobacco farmers in the country in the areas of Arua, Kanungu, Koboko, Kiryandongo, Mubende, Hoima, Kikuube, Buliisa, Kibaale, Kyankwanzi, Kagadi, Masindi and Kakumiro districts.

3. Your humble petitioners further state that:

    a) In 2018, they harvested their tobacco and sold it to two tobacco companies, that is, Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited and Nima Tobacco at a total price of Shs 800 million. 
    b) The two companies promised to pay up but up to now, they have not. 
    c) After several failed attempts to secure their payments from the two companies, the petitioners sought help from different avenues including lodging a complaint with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) for Kakumiro District but their efforts have not yielded any fruits.

Mr Speaker, it has been over a year from the time the payment for the tobacco supplied was due but the petitioners have still not received their payment.

4. 	The Government of Uganda has made commitments in the National Development Plan II and Sustainable Development Goals Agenda 2030 under the theme: “Leave no one behind”, where specifically SDG 1 seeks to ensure the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions.

5. 	The petitioners whose survival depends entirely on farming are now finding it difficult to meet demands, for example, of paying school fees for their children and catering for other domestic responsibilities.

NOW THEREFORE your humble petitioners pray that Parliament directs:

    1. The Minister responsible for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in consultation with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to put pressure on the two companies of Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited and Nima Tobacco to attend to this issue as urgently as possible so that the petitioners are paid the monies due to them for the tobacco supplied. (Applause)
    2. The ministers responsible should report back to Parliament within one week from the day of this petition to report on the action taken.

And your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Hereto appended are your humble petitioners’ signatures.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table this file that contains signatures and the receipts of the would-be money to be paid to the petitioners, which totals to over 800 million. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Are you laying the petition as well?

MS NABBANJA: Those are invoices. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Are they receipts or invoices?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, those are invoices.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes our people get frustrated and they do not know where to go so they end up here. Ordinarily, this should not have been a matter that should have been brought to Parliament. 

You have a contract that has been signed, the farmers have acted on it and supplied but the people on the other side of the contract have received these farmers’ tobacco and have declined to pay for over a year. What can be done about this? It is not entirely something that Parliament can go to say, “Pay.” 

Honourable Minister of Trade, what can be done about this? You are encouraging them to grow - but they are now being frustrated. Proceed.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, this issue has been with us for quite some time. We have interacted with the company, especially Continental Tobacco Company. That is the most notorious one. We have summoned them even to our ministries and we have had discussions. 

Recently, we are in negotiations with new buyers who have agreed to pay the farmers directly with the help of all the stakeholders so that the tobacco goes to them without endangering the interests of the farmers. 

Therefore, we are still in negotiations. We shall come back in a week and present a full report as to how far we have gone on this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, accordingly, under the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I refer this petition to the minister to handle and come back next week to brief us on what has happened instead of sending it to a committee.

MR WERIKHE: I oblige, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of three farmers representing the others who are also local leaders from Kakumiro District. They are represented in the House by hon. Nabbanja Robinah, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki and hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko. 

They presented the petition to the Speaker of Parliament earlier today and are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE:

    I) ADDENDUM TO THE CORRIGENDA FOR THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to submit the Addendum to the Corrigenda for the Draft Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you and the House that this arises from the fact that we revised the remuneration for science teachers out of the de-stations and the Corrigenda, which we submitted yesterday. The money was allocated at the centre. 

Therefore, one of the amendments we are making is to move the money from the centre to the districts. It is a simple amendment and we have already informed the committee in the interest of time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Budget to handle and report tomorrow.

    II) REPORT ON THE COMMONWEALTH WOMEN’S FORUM, “AN EMPOWERED FUTURE FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS”: 14TH – 21ST APRIL 2018, LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM
 
2.38
MS MARY TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a Report on the Commonwealth Women’s Forum: “An Empowered Future for Women and Girls” which took place from 14th-21st April 2018, London, United Kingdom. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, we will have time to look at what they experienced and what they recommend from their experience, which we can use to improve on our systems.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PAYMENT OF CLAIMS BY THE UGANDA-SUDAN TRADERS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH SUDAN

2.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PAYMENT OF CLAIMS BY THE UGANDA-SUDAN TRADERS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH SUDAN (Ms Ann Maria Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay a copy of the recordings of proceedings of the select committee on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the recordings of the proceedings.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I would also like to lay on the Table the minutes of the select committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, this House, carrying a motion laid by a Member - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you laying the text of the report for our records?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thought I would lay it after the presentation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Proceed, Chair.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: This House, after a petition and presentation by the members, decided to institute this select committee to look into the matters of Ugandan traders in South Sudan who are claiming payment since 2009 but have not been paid to date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, I am giving you 15 minutes to present the report.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I will not go through the terms of reference because they are clear. However, I would like to request you to allow me to recognise my committee members for their selflessness and hard work. Although it was not easy to complete this task on time, we did it.

Mr Speaker, we held hearings of the claimants and witnesses. After the hearings, the committee thought it was prudent to travel to South Sudan to follow up many of the issues arising from the hearings. We also travelled to Nairobi, Kenya because it had been mentioned, in the hearings, that some countries like Kenya, Eritrea, Ethiopia and South Africa were benefitting more in South Sudan in terms of trade than Uganda and yet we thought Uganda had done a lot. We could not go to all the countries but at least we travelled to Kenya as well.

Mr Speaker, allow me to skip the background of the report. I would like to inform this House, based on the background, that following the signing of the peace agreement between the Government of South Sudan and the People’s Liberation Movement Army in 2005, South Sudan became an attractive destination for many of the Ugandan traders. In a short time, we had a lot of exports to Sudan. 

In 2010, we had US$ 630 million in exports, which increased to US$ 1.3 billion in 2012. Today, according to the data of Bank of Uganda for 2017/2018, exports lowered to US$ 300 million. This is as a result of the war in 2013, which has crippled many of our business people and exports.

To note, the services of the other countries are still going on in South Sudan because many of our traders have not been paid to date and as such, they were greatly affected.

Mr Speaker, we looked at the business environment in South Sudan. As a country, we need to do more in enhancing and improving the business environment. We have the potential but the business environment leaves a lot to be done. I beg members to read that finding.

Challenges faced by Ugandan traders in South Sudan 
Mr Speaker, the challenges include delayed or non-payment for goods and services supplied to the Government of South Sudan and harassment of traders by the agents of Government of South Sudan. We interfaced with Ugandan traders under an umbrella firm who went and leased land and built a market, which is employing over 2000 Ugandans. It is a destination for all our exports from Uganda, especially food. While submitting to us, they said that at one time, their leaders were arrested and while in the cells, they were given a condition to sign off their ownership from that market. That is why we have stated it as a challenge. Good enough, Government intervened and the market was saved. 

Ugandan traders were also fleeced by their partners in South Sudan. Mr Speaker, the policy in South Sudan is, in order to do business or get a contract, you must be a local company or a native of South Sudan. However, foreigners are allowed to go into joint ventures or as sub-contractors. That is why many of our traders ended up being sub-contractors and when they supplied goods, in some instances, the partners went away with the money, which affected our traders. In other instances, traders who were able, registered their sub-contracts with the Ministry of Justice in South Sudan and those are the contracts that were saved and received payment.

Another challenge was outright cheating of Ugandan traders through collusion of Government officials of South Sudan with some trade agents.
 
Confiscation of property of the Ugandan traders was also a challenge. In the report, we mentioned a one Bongomin from Nwoya who worked in South Sudan, managed to save money, leased land and built apartments. However, during the war, his tenants were chased away and up to now, he cannot access his apartments because they are occupied by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA). 

We managed to interface directly with the Minister of Defence in South Sudan, Gen. Manyanga and we made resolutions, which will be seen later in the report.

There is confiscation of property of Ugandan traders by officials and agents of Government of South Sudan (GOSS).

Absence of Ugandan banks in South Sudan - even when Ugandans were paid, they had to carry sacks of money and at times, they could be stopped immediately after being paid. They would be told, “Please, stop! Put the bag of money there, walk off and go.” However, these are things that sometimes happened during war. 

When we went to Kenya, we realised that what saved Kenyans was the Kenya Commercial Bank and Equity Bank being present in Juba. During our interface with the Ugandan Embassy, we found out that even today, when the Ugandan Embassy wants to pay salaries, they have to come back to Uganda because access to cash is a bit problematic due to the lack of financial institutions. Uganda, specifically, does not own a financial institution in the young country of our brothers and sisters, South Sudan. 

On the issue of non-enforcement of judgement - many of these traders tried to go to court but there could not be any enforcement in judgement. At some point we listened to a case where one trader, dealing in private vehicles, had his vehicles taken away by some South Sudan national. When he reported the issue to the office of the IGP, where he was seeking assistance, the IGP gave him three minutes to disappear because other nationals were killing themselves because of him reporting the matter. 

Mr Speaker, this is what guided the President of the Republic of Uganda to meet his counterpart of South Sudan to handle the issue. They agreed that there was a problem that had to be handled by the two countries. A bilateral agreement was entered between the Ugandan Government and the Government of South Sudan and this - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please give us the recommendations of what you want this Parliament to do. Use the microphone, please.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Allow me to specifically tell you about this bilateral agreement in Section 5 before I go to the recommendations. The Government of Uganda committed to pay the traders on behalf of the Government of South Sudan, as the Government of South Sudan sorted out its financial obligations to Uganda. That is why many of those traders, who transacted in South Sudan, cannot now go to deal directly with the Government of South Sudan. This has, however, taken too long. Many of these traders are losing property. Some have lost life and families, specifically the traders in Northern Uganda. Why? They had just come out of war and South Sudan is so near; to some of them, they are brothers and sisters but they are now crippled. They need to be helped to walk again. 

Recommendations

Based on that small background I have given you, we do recommend as follows: 

    (a) That the claims by the Ugandan companies, whose payment had been approved by the Ministry of Finance of South Sudan, amounting to USD 207,151,324 be provided for in the budget of the financial year 2019/2020. The list of the companies is attached as Annex 15 (Category A: Claims at the level of the Ministry of Finance of the Government of South Sudan); and 
    (b) The committee further recommends payment after verification of other companies whose claims total to USD 45,288,312 and are named in Category B. Specifically here, we were informed by agencies in Uganda that many of the companies had not been verified. The Ministry of Finance and the Government of South Sudan had not provided a joint verification committee.  

I am happy to report, as attached on our report, that the committee, while in South Sudan, managed to secure the joint verification team and with us, we carried the ministerial order and a letter to the Ministry of Finance. 

Mr Speaker, there is Category A; the traders whose payments were at the level at the finance ministry; some of them with bounced cheques. To note, the current Minister of Finance of South Sudan, the then undersecretary, who is at the level of the permanent secretary in Uganda, had even signed these contracts and authorised payment. We met with him and the Minister of Trade. That is how the committee managed to make strides. That is why we strongly recommend this be done saving our traders whose property is being attached.

By signing the bilateral agreement with the Government of South Sudan in 2016, in clause 5, the Government of Uganda undertook to pay, on behalf of other counterpart, in the form of loan. The current suffering by the Ugandan traders is a result of failure by Government to meet its obligations under the agreement. The intention of clause 5 of the bilateral agreement was to provide a mechanism for faster settlement of claims, in order to mitigate the suffering of the traders. 

It is the considered view of the committee that Government should find money in the budget and urgently meet its obligation. In the event that the budget cannot accommodate this at ago, then it should explore possibilities of obtaining the said funds from the domestic financial market and expedite the process of settling the claims and also remedy the first accumulation of interest on the loan that some of the traders owe the financial institutions. 

It must be noted that in some of these loans that traders undertook, the interest now accruing is now almost exceeding the principal. 

I need to inform this House that Government, so far, even has sovereign guarantee with the Bank of Uganda, which means Government is secured. The faster we do this, the faster we save these traders.  

Somebody will ask about the interest. When we borrow on the domestic market and interest accrues, Government can decide, by guidance of this House, that it should give traders a subsidy. 

We also read the Cabinet minutes where the President gave a directive - he was concerned that the traders’ losses could not be helped because Uganda has no trade guarantees. That is why he instructed the finance minister to urgently look for finances and explore ways of saving these traders. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently disperse the loan balance of USD 30,750,997 under the sovereign guarantee to the intended beneficiaries, in order to build confidence and ensure to the GOSS is committed to the terms of the bilateral agreement. 

While in South Sudan, we found out that in the sovereign guarantee that they had given, Government of Uganda had not released that money fully. Hence, they thought that Government had no capacity to release the money attached on the sovereign guarantees. That is why we are giving that recommendation. 

Government should consider writing off tax arrears by the traders in distress to Uganda Revenue Authority as a form of direct support to enable them restart their enterprises, and also avert possible action against them by Uganda Revenue Authority for failure to meet statutory obligation, as required, given their current business situation. 

Mr Speaker, when we met with Uganda Revenue Authority, about this issue because Parliament is now the only one with the powers of pronouncing about any tax arrears exception, they said their hands were tied but they were also seeing it. These are part of the big bill appearing under tax arrears and some of these companies are the ones which are demanding money in South Sudan. Everyday Uganda Revenue Authority puts interests on the taxes. We are deceiving ourselves if we continue holding such amounts of monies reflected in the tax arrears. We propose that they should be waived off. 

Constitution of the joint verification committee
Government of Uganda should send its team to join the Government of the Republic of South Sudan (GORSS) verification team to undertake the joint verification exercise. Subsequent to the verification, the Uganda Government should expeditiously follow up the efforts of the committee to ensure that GORSS provides the sovereign guarantee to cover the payment of the remaining claimants. While in South Sudan, we had to write to the ministries of finance and trade to send us a team to find us there because they challenged us upon our complaints that they were being sluggish. They said: “We are ready. Can you provide us with your documentation and we begin on Monday?” That was a Friday and we had to write back home so that we handle the issue. In addition, we had informed them that the Speaker of Parliament was concerned and that is why we were there. Mr Speaker, a copy was given for your attention.

Traders with no contractual arrangements or documents

War is war. First, the GORSS is only committing itself for those traders who did government-to-government contractual obligations. The committee in some instances has made them to agree to take on compensation issues like that of Mr Bongomin and other cases, which could easily be defended. 

Mr Speaker, the Government of South Sudan is saying that for those other private businesses and people without documentations, they will not honour. While the committee was handling its hearings, one time, one of our witnesses – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the way you are handling your book, you keep switching off that microphone.

MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Sir. I am not used to this microphone but I will learn. Mr Speaker, I do not think that any of my committee members ever failed to shed tears because of the stories. There was a lady from northern part of Uganda, who was raped by 27 men. She had just sold her grains and she got 800,000 South Sudan pounds. She could not tell how she reached back home. These are cases you cannot justify with the Government of South Sudan. There are many other cases that we think this House and the Government of Uganda should handle. These are people with small businesses and have evidence but their evidence is not substantial enough to be taken on by another state of sovereign nature. 

We recommend that the Ugandan Government should immediately put in place a fund to assist Uganda-South Sudan traders who cannot be compensated by the GORSS for lack of documents or contracts with GORSS agencies.  From this fund, traders should be paid ex-gratia as some form of entandikwa to enable them start afresh. Those who lost dear ones or got maimed while in South Sudan should also be assisted from this same fund. This list of the potential beneficiaries of ex-gratia payment is attached as Annex l4. This was a list provided jointly by the ministries of trade and finance.

Export strategy

Uganda, through the Uganda Export Promotion Board, should urgently develop a Uganda-South Sudan export strategy that should guide Uganda’s export business in South Sudan. The strategy should provide incentives to attract Ugandan investors to South Sudan and cater for their protection.

Negotiation for bilateral trade agreements

Given Uganda’s contribution in establishing peace in South Sudan, Government of Uganda should urgently negotiate comprehensive and favourable trade agreements with the GORSS.

Capacity enhancement of Uganda’s Embassy in South Sudan

Mr Speaker, Uganda Government should cause the appropriation by Parliament of an enhanced budgetary resource to improve the human, logistical and technical capacity of Uganda’s embassy in South Sudan, given the huge business opportunities and the number of Ugandans trading in South Sudan. The current capacity of the embassy cannot enable it play an effective role in supporting commercial diplomacy in the entire country. 

Insurance of Ugandan investors in foreign markets

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should take advantage of the African Trade Insurance Agency (ATI) to support our traders against political and commercial risks while operating in foreign markets.

Formalisation of business operations abroad
The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should sensitise our traders to form and operate under formal associations such as the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry. In addition, traders should be sensitised to always register their presence in foreign countries with Uganda’s missions abroad.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that Ugandans lost businesses and lives in South Sudan. However, the process of making amends to these losses has taken too long and has left very many frustrated.

The committee commends the steps taken by Government of Uganda (GOU) through negotiations and making budgetary provisions for the losses suffered, although the process has been unnecessarily delayed. When GOU took a step to pay the first group of traders on behalf of GORSS under the bilateral agreement, it was a step taken in the right direction and this offered hope to the remaining claimants. The challenge was that the relevant Government agencies did not take quick steps to ensure that all other claims were processed. It is the considered view of the committee that although GORSS was affected by war, it should still have acted faster than they did. The bilateral agreement helped to mitigate the extent of the burden which GORSS was still experiencing due to war. 

However, the committee is pleased to note and report to this House that finally, GORSS has accepted to constitute a verification committee which was constituted during the committee mission in Juba.
The committee strongly recommends that the recommendations of this committee be implemented so that justice is done to all Ugandan traders who suffered losses in South Sudan.

Finally, the committee would like to applaud the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament for the support extended to the committee in the course of its inquiry.

In a special way, it must also be mentioned that the committee would like to appreciate the support and fruitful cooperation that it obtained from the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Transitional National Assembly of South Sudan, Rt Hon. Anthony L. Makana, hon. Minister of Trade and East African Affairs, hon. Paul MayomAkec, the Minister of Finance and Planning of South Sudan, hon. Salvatore Garang Mabiordit, the Minister of Defence, Gen. Manyanga and the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning of South Sudan, hon. GocMakuacMavol.

Finally, the committee would like to appreciate the support it received from Uganda's embassy officials in Juba. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. I beg to lay the reports on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the reports. 

Honourable members, by way of summary, I have not seen any item in this House that has virtually exhausted all the procedures of this Parliament other than this issue. There have been petitions, motions, reports, ratification procedures, budgetary procedures, all on this same issue and all of them attracting debate each time they came. So this House has debated this matter - we would like to give it one final debate because even in this very report, there are still gaps that can be supplied by Members who have some information. This report has just been presented and laid. We will not debate it now. We will proceed with this matter tomorrow and probably the following days. 

We have received the report. I now propose the question for your debate that the report of the Select Committee on the payment of claims by the Uganda-Sudan traders against the Government of South Sudan be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts tomorrow. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE GIVE AWAY OF MARUZI RANCHING SCHEME AND THE ILLEGAL LEASING AND GRABBING OF LAND BELONGING TO THE RANCH

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Grace Okori Moe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like to seek your guidance because we have two reports. One is on the Maruzi Ranch and before a directive was given to the committee by this House, the committee had already started investigating other ranches. We have that report too. So I am seeking your guidance on whether I should present only the one of Maruzi or I present both.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you should have given us notice. Do we have the other report on the Order Paper? Honourable chairperson, did you submit a copy of the other report to the Clerk?

MS OKORI MOE: It was submitted a long time ago together with this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The easiest would have been to receive the two reports, debate them together and take decisions separately. That would have helped us. Chair, there seems to be no record of the report because all the reports that are brought are uploaded, whether they are laid here or not. Do you have both of them on your iPad? Are you prepared to present both of them?

MS OKORI MOE: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can we then amend the Order Paper to accommodate both reports instead of doing one today and another one some other time? Please present the first one, we receive it, then you present the next one, we receive it and then we debate together. You have 10 minutes for each. 

MS OKORI MOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table, a copy of the report of the committee investigations into the giveaway of Maruzi Ranch Scheme and the illegal leasing and grabbing of land belonging to the ranch. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Would you like to lay the second one as well?

MS OKORI MOE: I beg to lay on Table, the minutes of the committee meetings regarding the Maruzi Ranch investigations. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS OKORI MOE: Mr Speaker, during the plenary sitting of Wednesday, 16 January 2019, hon. Tonny Ayoo, MP Kwania County raised the matter of the giveaway of Maruzi Ranching Scheme and the illegal leasing and grabbing of land belonging to the ranch.

A debate ensued following the concern raised by hon. Tonny Ayoo and the following were the key issues that were brought out:

1) 	On record, in the Lira land zonal office, in the land information system the lease or registered volume 717 Folio 4 which was registered on 24 April 1969, is the only document that exists and proves the true ownership of the said land at Maruzi ranch.
2) 	There is a caveat on the title that was put by the Chairperson, District Land Board, Apac District on 6 July 2018, stopping any further activity by any person or any changing of the title by any person.
3) 	There is a certificate of title under freehold registered Volume 1560 Folio 20, that was registered on 19 January 2016 in the name of Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd that converted the freehold title to leasehold title.
4) 	Registered title vide leasehold registered volume 4624 Folio 1 in the name of Hillside Agriculture Limited that was registered on 7 September 2018 in the name of Hillside Agriculture Limited

The following matters were brought out:

1) 	The honourable members sought to understand the circumstances under which the leasehold public land was converted to freehold and eventually subdivided. 
2) 	Why the two titles; freehold and leasehold volume 1, had been registered only in the analogue system not in the land information system.
3) 	People were being evicted from this land and that the UPDF were guarding the land and move at night arresting people. Cases of rape were also cited.
4) 	The mode of compensation was also of great concern with people being compensated with Shs 400,000, Shs 200,000 and Shs 100,000 without a proper schedule of payment and valuation. The payments were done by the District Internal Security Officer and some UPDF officers.
5) 	Hillside Agriculture Ltd paid Shs 9 million for stamp duty, premium and annual ground rent for the land measuring 54 square miles.
6) 	The other concern was that Uganda Livestock Industry Ltd was divested and is therefore defunct. The mover of the petition sought to know the circumstances under which it was participating in converting leasehold land to freehold in their own name and also sub-dividing and allowing people to get into the land.
7) 	People who do not belong to the area of the ranch had been included in the demarcation and their land had been taken away.
8) 	The volume of the land, which is being opened, is bigger than the original land of the scheme and therefore, land belonging to other people had been grabbed.

The Rt Hon. Speaker directed the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to conduct a field visit to Maruzi Ranching Scheme to establish facts on the ground and report to the House. The committee followed the methodology that is captured in the report. We met:

    a) The Ministry of Lands, Housing and urban Development officials
    b) Uganda Land Commission;
    c) Hillside Agriculture Limited
    d) H.E the President
    e) Lira Zonal Office
    f) Apac District Local Government
    g) NAGRC&DB which is in charge of breeding in Maruzi ranch.

We visited:

    a) Ibuje Subcounty 
    b) Acamcabu sub-parish
    c) Akokoro sub-county.

Mr Speaker, when the committee visited Lira land zonal office, we held a meeting and this is what we found:

    a) Lira zonal office handles, among others, land administration, survey and mapping.
    b) The office issues land titles using the computer model, that is Land Information System.
    c) In 1968, Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd was issued a leasehold title for Maruzi land in Maruzi County, Apac District. The land measured 42,149 acres. The lease was running from 1 January 1968 for 99 years. The leaser was Uganda Land Commission, which was the controlling authority.

Mr Speaker, the report is long and I am just highlighting a few areas. Let me go to the observations and recommendations.

The committee made the following observations in regard to the Maruzi ranch:

    1. There are multiple land titles on the same piece of land as highlighted below:

    • A Leasehold title issued on 1 January 1968 to Uganda Livestock Industries Limited. The land area was 42,149 acres.
    • A Freehold title issued on 20 January 2016 to Uganda Livestock Industries Limited. The land area was 42,149 acres. This is a substitute title that was issued for the land. 
    • The substitute Freehold certificate of title dated 20 January 20l6 was issued in respect of the land on plots 2 and 17 Maruzi Block 2 at Lango Maruzi Ranch. The substitute title was signed by Haruna Golooba, the Registrar of Titles.
    • A Leasehold title on the freehold was issued to Hillside Agriculture Company Ltd on 6 September 2018. The land that was leased to Hillside Agriculture Company Ltd was part of the freehold land that belonged to Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd. Out of the 42,149 acres of land, 34,560 acres (54 square miles) was leased to Hillside Agriculture Company Limited, leaving only 10 square miles of land (7,589 acres).
    2. The committee notes that Uganda Livestock Company Ltd, the first and genuine one, is now defunct. In its earlier consultations carried out in March and April 2018 on Government ranches, the committee was informed by the then Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) that Uganda Livestock Industries Limited was a state enterprise that was mandated to manage the state-owned ranches. However, with the divesture of public enterprises, these ranches were transferred to NAGRC&DB. However, the land title for Maruzi ranch was still with the defunct Uganda Livestock Industries.
    3. The committee further notes that Uganda Livestock Industries Limited can only be a private company. 

Recommendations

Based on its findings, the committee makes the following recommendations:

    1. The irregular freehold titles should be cancelled and the land should revert to Uganda Land Commission, which is charged with the responsibility of managing Government land.
    2. There should be fresh opening of the boundaries. This will help verify the actual area of the land in question and also help in ascertaining if there are people living within the ranch. The boundary opening should be based on the original size of the land/original survey print.
    3. If the boundaries are opened and it is established that people are within the ranch then the affected people should be resettled according to the law.
    4. All land titles for all Government institutions should be in the names of the respective user institutions, though in custody of Uganda Land Commission so that in case of change of use, the respective institution has a say in the matter.
    5. In regard to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development headquarters in Kampala exercising its delegated functions to zonal offices, the committee recommends that where there is delegation, the head office should give the zonal offices power and authority to carry out their work. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should respect the zonal offices and any transaction at the national level should be initiated by the zonal office.
    6. All officers who were involved in the process of valuation and title transfer should be investigated.
    7. Government should clarify on the status and activities of Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd, which is operating as a private limited company with all the rights and assets of Government under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    8. The premium paid to the private company (Uganda Livestock Industry Ltd) should be passed on to the Consolidated Fund.
    9. The Office of the Government Chief Valuer should carry out re-evaluation of the land to establish the actual value of the land for purposes of paying ground rent, premium and any other Government fees.
    10. For harmonious co-existence between NARO and NAGRC&DB on the Maruzi Ranch the committee recommends that:

    i. Both NAGRC&DB and NARO should co-exist on Maruzi Ranch since they have different mandates and their services are all needed by the people of Lango and the neighbourhood.

    ii. NAGRC&DB has already made some investments on the ground using Government resources. To avoid wastage of these resources, their services should be supported to continue on Maruzi Ranch.

    iii. NAGRC&DB and NARO should share the land available on Maruzi land. The sharing should consider the products and services that engage community outreach programmes and ensure the communities benefit from the services. 

    iv. Since the investor was allocated 54 square miles, NAGRC&DB, based on breeding function, should be allocated seven square miles and NARO, three square miles, which gives a total of 64 square miles.
 
    v. Atterra Irrigation Scheme should not be tampered with. It should be left for its function and part of the area that was not part of the 64 square miles should not be tampered with. This area was surveyed around 2011 by the Ministry of agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

    vi. That acts of harassment, intimidation, forceful eviction and destruction of people's property by the security organs and some community leaders, must stop; and

    vii. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) should provide some relief items to the over 1,081 people whose properties have been destroyed, like those in Acamcabu.

Mr Speaker, the list of these affected people from Acamcabu Sub-parish is available. I do not know whether I should lay it on the Table or not. I beg to lay on the Table, the list of the evicted persons from Acamcabu, Akokoro Subcounty, Maruzi County, Apac District. I beg to lay.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OKORI–MOE: Mr Speaker, finally, allow me to thank the committee members for their dedicated service because the issue we were investigating involved a lot of intimidation but we went above that. We would like to also thank everyone who cooperated. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson, for a very good job. Like you said, where citizens are affected, we need to do something. Do you have the second report?

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY FISHERIES ON THE GIVEAWAY OF LAND UNDER STATE-OWNED RANCHES AND STOCK FARMS

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the giveaway of land under state-owned ranches and stock farms. I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of this investigation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the investigation into the giveaway of land under state-owned ranches and stock farms. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Chairperson, can in conclude something?

Honourable members, you recall that when the report of the Select Committee on the payment claims by the Uganda-South Sudan traders against the Government of South Sudan was presented, we made some recommendations, which included some figures that should, where possible, be accommodated in this budget, which we are likely going to deal with tomorrow.

Given that the minister, up to this afternoon was still presenting addendum to corrigenda, I would like the Committee on Budget to look at this matter - because we are concluding the debate tomorrow, before we deal with the budget. I request the chairperson of the Committee on Budget to look at the figures and see if they can be handled. If they cannot be handled, he will advise the House accordingly because we will be approving it before we go to the budget.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries made a field visit to the ranches in Ruhengere, Nshaara and Aswa and the government stock farms of Njeru, Lusenke and Kasolwe and we wish to report as mandated.

Challenges facing the ranches 
Mr Speaker, the report was uploaded one month ago -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Madam Chairperson. It was uploaded; it has been confirmed.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In its investigations into the Government ranches and stock farms, the committee found out that there a number of challenges that are facing these ranches. 

The committee was informed by the communities around the ranches that the ranches have high maintenance costs. This is due to the invasion by pastoralists’ herds and neighbouring cattle keepers especially at Nshaara Ranch, where the wild animals from Lake Mburo National Park, with the associated cutting and breaking of fences, had affected activities in the ranch. 

The herds of pastoralists are never sprayed properly and so, they act as a source of tick borne diseases. This has increased maintenance costs as the ranch management has to spend more funds on treatment and prevention of the ticks plus the reconstruction of the fences.

The other challenge some of the ranches face is attacks by wild animals. When the committee visited Nshaara and Ruhengere ranches, they were informed that during the dry season, many wild ruminants migrate from Lake Mburo National Park to the ranch in search of water and pasture. They drop ticks, making it hard to control them on the ranch. 

Some of the animals are predators and kill other animals. For example, leopards and hyenas have killed heifers, 38 female calves, 47 male calves and goats in the last two years. Besides, they destroy fences and valley tanks and buffaloes are a threat to workers’ lives who are managing the ranches. At Nshaara Ranch, wild animals such as hyenas ki1l cattle. For example, out of 50 new-born calves, only 10 survive.

The other challenge they face is the inadequate funding of the ranches. The committee noted that the ranches are very critical for the improvement of Uganda's livestock sector. In spite of this, they are underfunded and not able to carry out very important activities and infrastructural development such as fencing and water harvesting, among others.

Land ownership and encroachment is another challenge. Aswa Ranch and other ranches have faced contention over land ownership between the local communities, local governments and NAGRC&DB. This challenge makes management and development very difficult, especially for NAGRC&DB, which is in charge of breeding. 

Some of the ranches face issues of encroachment. For example, the committee was informed that Ruhengere Ranch was being encroached on by the neighbouring communities. The committee met a family of 67 people, who were living on the ranch. When asked how they had occupied the ranch, they informed the committee that they had been relocated to the ranch by the then Inspector General of Police in 2015, after they had been chased from their land measuring 1.4 square miles.

Mr Speaker, the committee also discovered that some of this encroachment is even done by very “big” people. The most affected is Njeru Stock Farm because there are very many land titles and anybody can simply walk there and fence it off but nothing is said by the Government and yet it is supposed to be a breeding centre to assist the neighbouring communities in improving on their livestock.

The only safe Government stock farm that the committee found had no encroachment was Kasolwe, which is located in Kamuli District. We thank the leaders there, including the Rt Hon. Speaker, for protecting the interests of Government and the community there. (Applause)

The other challenge affecting the ranches is infestation by parasites and diseases. The committee was informed that the ranches are infested by ticks from neighbouring communities that has led to the death of some of the cattle that are bred by NAGRC. Foot and Mouth Disease is also transmitted by animals from the same neighbouring communities.

The other is environmental degradation. The ranches are dealing with a problem of environmental degradation, caused by charcoal burners who have been cutting down trees, left right and centre. For example, illegal logging is still being carried out at Aswa Ranch, despite a police directive to stop the activity. 

Mr Speaker, I will now go to the recommendations on Page 28.

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee noted that ownership of some of the ranches is contentious and this can affect their success and lead to eventual collapse of the projects being operated on them and therefore, waste of Government resources. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries works with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to sort out the issue of ownership of the land under these ranches, to avoid future problems which could be caused by this and enable the ranches to operate efficiently and effectively.

The committee also recommends that Government halts the leasing of part of the ranches until consultation with the local communities and local leadership has been done, to allow them give their opinion and agree on the projects that should be undertaken. 

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries reviews the giveaway of the ranches, in line with the PPDA Act, 2014.

The committee recommends that in the event that successful investors are given land leases, it must be initially for five years and later extended to 49 years, with land use strictly for ranching purposes. The committee further recommends that Government sets clear guidelines and criteria for selecting potential investors.

The committee further recommends that investors should only be given land-use rights and not ownership of public land, since some of them end up transferring it into their names and claiming ownership. The committee also recommends that land should strictly remain the property of the Uganda Government and for purposes of ranching and that non-development of the land by investors reverts back to NAGRC, which is the custodian of breeding.

The committee also recommends that Uganda Livestock Industries Limited hands over land titles of all state-owned ranches to NAGRC because Uganda Livestock Industries is limping with only three elderly board members – I think – sitting somewhere in the corner of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Laughter)

The committee further recommends that the Inspector General of Government carries out an in-depth investigation to establish the status of Uganda Livestock Industries Limited, since its present status is controversial and there seem to be fraudulent acts and manipulations going on.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get funds to complete fencing off of the ranches, in order to prevent any future encroachment by the neighbouring communities.

On attack by wild animals, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries works with the Uganda Wildlife Authority to deter the animals from crossing over from the national parks to the ranches.

On financing of the ranches, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides more funds to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to ensure that state-owned ranches have enough funds to undertake the critical activities to enable them fulfil their mandate.

On counterfeit drugs, the committee recommends that the Directorate of Inspection and Certification in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries strengthens inspection, certification and regulation and those who contravene the law should be prosecuted.

On the relationship with the local communities, the committee also recommends that NAGRC works together with the communities to empower them and provide breeding and extension services, which they are required to do. 

In conclusion, the committee thinks the Government's leasing of the ranches to private investors may be with good intentions of developing the agriculture sector and the economy. However, the committee recommends that Government should follow legal and proper procedures, in consultation with all the relevant stakeholders.

Finally, I would like to thank the members of the committee for their dedicated service that enabled us to produce this report that I have been able to present. I thank you for listening to me. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will need a copy of the second report so that I can propose the question. However, you said something about three elderly people. Did you meet them to be able to establish these facts? What evidence do you have? (Laughter)

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, I speak with facts because we invited them before the committee and saw how they looked like - (Laughter). They also complained that they are a limping board of three people managing Uganda Livestock Industries and they sit at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will now propose two questions for your debate. The first question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the investigation in the giveaway of Maruzi Ranching Scheme – is it the scheme or ranch – and the illegal leasing and grabbing of land belonging to the ranch be adopted. 

That is the first motion I propose for your debate.

The second motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the giveaway of the land under state-owned ranches and stock farms be adopted.

Those are the two motions for your debate and we agreed we will debate them jointly. Debate starts now with each Member taking – if I can know how many Members would like to debate, then I would be able to decide on the time. Okay; since there are only two Members, - (Laughter) – since you are many, we will reduce it to two minutes. This is not the only matter we are handling. We agreed on two minutes and we will start with the Member for Kajara County.

3.47
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the two reports. Since we are debating them together, the issue of Maruzi is almost the same with other ranches in the country. They are being taken over by mostly very big investors, most of whom are foreigners. 

I am looking at a situation where our indigenous people are on a ranch, they form a cooperative and produce beef or milk and add value to the economy of this country. At the moment, we see ranches being given away to people who would like to cultivate. I do not know whether they will remain ranches when they are being used for cultivation. I do not know whether they will remain under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAIF).

Mr Speaker, my proposal to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is that we should encourage our indigenous people to learn good practices of ranching and form cooperatives such that they can be able to produce beef for export or local consumption. I am looking at a scenario where the amount of money being used to torture and harass Ugandans can be used –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the two reports. Together with the Leader of the Opposition, we visited one of the ranches - Aswa Ranch in Pader - and from the reports, the stories are almost the same. 

This Parliament must help this country on whether we need these ranches or not. From a personal perspective, we need the ranches but what the NRM Government is doing is illegal and it is something that we must not entertain because it is going to destroy the intention of having ranches. Any country that is practising modern agriculture has got ranches. Our neighbour, Kenya, has ranches and they are fully controlled by the Government. If there is anybody in the name of an investor, that investor should be guided by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; there should be some control. Our ranches provide parcelling land to anyone without following any procedures and that is very wrong. 

Therefore, I concur with the committee that Parliament must pronounce itself, first of all, on the ownership of these ranches. They should fall back under the ministry so that it can guide them properly. If the individuals are more powerful than the Government, then this Parliament should guide the country to protect these assets.

Secondly, while at the Aswa Ranch, we found animals from the neighbouring community – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Buhweju District is next. Oh, Buhweju is here; it was Buhweju County first. I did not see him because normally he sits somewhere else. 

3.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I am concerned about the issue of “big” people. Who are these “big” people? How big are they? How do they just come, encroach on ranches and we say that they are too big to be dealt with? Who are they? The chairperson of the committee is saying they are connected; to whom are they connected? (Laughter) 

We need to understand this so that we know how to deal with them. We need to know where they are connected, who connects them and what their size is so that we are able to deal with them. Otherwise, wherever there is land grabbing, they will tell you the grabbers are big people and that they are connected.

Mr Speaker, I was discussing with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development a few days ago about some people who are evicting people away from Buhweju. Just two people are evicting 4,000 people. They will tell you, “We are connected”. To who are they connected? Therefore, I am really concerned about this report. I hope the chairperson can help us name these big people and where they are connected.  I thank you. 

3.54
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The issue around Maruzi Ranch is not any different from the issues around Aswa Ranch. 

The land under all these ranches was originally given by the local communities to be used by Government to benefit the local communities in one way or the other. They remain a key stakeholder. It is not right for anybody to go and start changing the purpose for which this land was given without involving the local communities. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Livestock Industries is defunct as it was stated in the report. It is not clear how it resurrected and the land that the Uganda Livestock Industries is claiming now, according to the documents that we were able to access, the industry then was only given user rights. So, how can they wake up from nowhere and convert land, which is under leasehold to freehold without even involving the stakeholders? That is what has been stated in the report.

For the case of Aswa Ranch in Pader District, they got the land title in 2016 – I was already a Member of Parliament by that time but the District Land Board of Pader was not involved. The local community, the sub county local government – Nobody knows how that land title was given to the Uganda Livestock Industries –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I am surprised that Kiryandongo has not been mentioned. The district has faced a lot of challenges as far as ranches are concerned. More than half of the land in the district is actually composed of ranches. 

Mr Speaker, like the report indicates, these ranches are leased to individuals and immediately, they apply for change of land use. They are using the land for private businesses. In Kiryandongo, there are ranches that were restructured and given to people in 1995. However, even where the people have allocation forms, they cannot get leases for these pieces of land. The same land is again being given to the so-called powerful people in Government who evict people as soon as they get the titles. It is everywhere.

Mr Speaker, I request that the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries does more work as far as ranches are concerned and gives this Parliament or the Government of Uganda specific recommendations as far as ranches are concerned. Otherwise, as it is now, I do not think we are going to move a step forward because these ranches are already in the hands of very many powerful people, like the report has said. Some of this land is being used for sugarcane growing and others for private businesses where commercial houses have been constructed and different projects are going on – (Member timed out.)

3.58
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this report that has been quite elaborate. I hope that our debate today will nail the issue of these ranches effectively. I am very optimistic that in our resolutions, we will definitely get a way forward, which is strong enough to make sure that we rest the case of these ranches that has been disturbing the Parliament for a long time.

Mr Speaker, for us to realise the outcome of our effective debate, we should stress our minds back to the reason these lands were given. These lands were given from the different communities to benefit them in terms of breeding animals. When we ask ourselves whether that purpose is now being fulfilled, the answer is a big no. The purpose for which these communities gave these lands - to be breeding grounds for animals - is not being fulfilled. 

Therefore, the benefit is not being realised by the communities, leave alone the issue of the illegalities. Of course there are so many contestations in terms of the legality of these lands, which I do not want to delve into. However, the issue is, if this land, which has been given for a purpose, is not benefitting the community then we need to sit back and revisit the purpose.

In my view, instead of reverting the ownership of this land to the Uganda Land Commission, we should recommend strongly that the land is reverted to the district local governments so that we start renegotiating the purpose and the benefit of this land and how it should be utilised.

I remember very well that we appropriated money as a Parliament –(Member timed out.)

4.00
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and reiterate that it looks like Maruzi Ranch is going to be the next victim in the process of the so called privatisation policy; the idea of misguided distribution of national assets.

I have been following Maruzi Ranch closely. We had the National Livestock Research Institute in Tororo, which has been displaced in favour of mining. I understand that, that research institute was supposed to be relocated to Apac. Now if individuals are invading this ranch, where are we going to have that critical research institute where we would be investigating some of these diseases that are affecting the livestock sector in this country?

I would like to support colleagues who insist that this ranch should be preserved either under the district or under this Government. This land must be maintained to avoid any further destruction of national assets.

We are all aware that Government is already considering whether to bring back Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) and cooperatives - we passed the Cooperatives Bill and we want the Cooperative Bank to be reinstated. Very soon, we will also be saying, let us reinstate the ranches. We are moving in circles; we are not serious at all. Have we really sat down to evaluate ourselves? (Member timed out.)

4.02
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the work done. I recall that these stock farms started way back in 1967 and their purpose was breeding animals for the benefit of the areas where the farms are.

Since this has been overtaken by events, the land should revert to Government and the Government can decide the proper use of this land. At the same time, Government land must be protected from encroachers because there are people who are taking advantage of this land, especially the indigenous communities within the localities of those lands. Some can be called land grabbers but there are those within these areas who have taken advantage of the land and this has been going on countrywide. It is high time that we came out with a strong policy protecting all Government land from people who are trying to take advantage of Government assets.

Therefore, it is imperative that Government comes out with a good policy to protect its land because the purpose has been overtaken by events. I rest my case.

4.04
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for attempting to do some work on ranches and grabbing of Government land. I request the committee to look at Nshaara Government Ranch and Ruhengyere Government Ranch. These ranches are in Kiruhura and Mbarara districts.

Mr Speaker, in the ’60s and ’70s, we used to have Ankole-Masaka ranching scheme and these ranches were owned by Ugandans and Africans. You can imagine somebody from South Sudan or a Chinese being given two square miles of land in Nshaara to preserve the Ankole cows under the stewardship and watch of hon. Joy Kabatsi from Kiruhura District, as if there are no Ugandans. Prof. Kamuntu would have done better in these ranches. 

Therefore, this business of some people hiding behind others - if this Parliament is going to be serious, we should stop this and the committee should go ahead, investigate all the ranches and bring the people to order. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee and chairperson for the detailed report. In the report, mention was made of the crisscrossing of livestock and wildlife, especially in Nshaara Ranching Scheme, which neighbours Lake Mburo National Park.

It is true that the fencing, which was established when these ranches were being made, has been vandalised overtime. The valley dams, which used to contain water for animals in these ranches, are silted and during the dry season, the only water source is Lake Mburo, which is in the middle of the National Park. Therefore, cows cross for water and as there is no boundary, the animals also cross into the ranches.

The situation is compounded by the impact of climate change. The vegetation for the wildlife in the ranches as well as vegetation in the national parks has dramatically changed as a result of the impact of the climate change. Consequently, the challenge which is detailed in the report is true. Maintaining these ranches is very expensive. Rehabilitating and restoring them is very expensive.

On the tourism front, we are trying to introduce electric fences so that these animals are contained in the boundaries of national parks but still –(Interjections)– you will give me more time, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is your responsibility, not mine; your time is up. You stood to contribute as a Member for Sheema South.

4.08
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the committee. Governments come and go but this land has been there. Why is it that from the time we got independence from the British in 1962 such land issues were not raised until this Government came in to cause problems to lives of Ugandans?

It does not mean that I am criticising the NRM. What I am saying is that money is giving a bad influence to our nation. Those who have money go and displace any poor person and this is what we should be very careful about.

For example in Otuke in 2011, people in one community were killed because they wanted land - which has caused a lot of problems in our nation. Land issues are becoming more than money and money issues are becoming more than land. Government should come up with a good plan to do land demarcation so that no one should build a home or house on Government land.

4.10
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the two reports. These ranches were gazetted by Government for business purposes. In Uganda today, livestock business is very high and the demand for livestock products is high – beef and milk. It is true that these ranches have been redundant and are being encroached on by everybody. I am near one of the ranches and I know how these ranches - as the honourable minister said, the dams are silted and people have cut fences and everything.

I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should clearly come up with good regulations to manage these ranches. If it is to be given to investors, there should be procedures on how an investor should be given land for specific production either for beef or for milk.

If we continue running around in circles - the land is not utilised; we want products from livestock like beef and milk but we are not utilising these ranches; they are just being abused. People have even started acquiring freehold titles on ranch land, which is very dangerous.

They should give leases to potential investors to utilise those ranches and not just keeping in circles - (Member timed out.)

4.12
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report on the giveaway of ranches. 

I am going to specifically speak in relation to Aswa Ranch. As the committee chairperson stated, the issues are on ownership, size and benefits of the ranch. On the issue of ownership, the local community is claiming ownership of the ranch. It is said in our local places that Aswa Ranch was given for a period of 48 years. That time has elapsed and it is now the right time for the people to get back their land.

On the other hand, Government is also claiming the same ranch saying that it owns it. There is a man called Barnabas who is also claiming ownership of the same land. NAGRC is also claiming the same land. Therefore, it is important that we clear out the issue of ownership before we start off with any other business.

The other matter relates to the issue of size. While some sources talk of 164 hectares or 131 hectares, others talk about 36 acres; the size of the ranch is not clear. It is important that we open boundaries of the ranch so that even if we plan to fence it –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the subject under discussion is about land and especially the assets of the nation. Nobody would say that investment is bad, it is good but the question is: how does Government handle this business of giving investors land? If the ranch was to benefit the communities, how is the investor in question, helping the communities?

As leaders, we need to be serious because this land has been there since time immemorial and was protected by the Government for the posterities. Apparently, this land at Naguru - we gave it to an investor to build a satellite city or to build houses for the common people but what do we have on it?

Shimoni land was given away for some purpose. Is what has been built there the reason we gave away Shimoni land? We need to name and shame and be serious custodians of the properties of Uganda.

Tomorrow, we are going to be questioned as leaders of today on what we have done. Therefore, we need to start reprimanding the culprits there and then. I salute you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.16
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The person on the Floor of Parliament is also the Shadow Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I beg that you add for me one minute, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have just wasted your one minute.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: The spirit of, “To whom it may concern” has killed our country. Recently, I visited Kiruhura District; the ranches of Sanga, Ruhengeri and Nshaara. I saw many people and whoever I ask about who gave them permission to settle there, they would tell me they got letters from State House.

Mr Speaker, if you want to know the magnitude of this matter, you can only ask how much protection these people who take over the ranches have; they are always guarded by guns. So, whoever raises hands over them is chased away. The ordinary citizens of this country think that the protection of these ranches is only a preserve of Government but we are all Government wherever we go. 

Recently, I read in a newspaper that the forest cover of Uganda is only 8 per cent now. They continue cutting them in our presence. Therefore, until we make a comprehensive report with action, we are gone as a country. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. Let us support it and see what we can do. Otherwise, as a country, we are in danger. Thank you.

4.18
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. I share the concerns of my colleagues; these ranches were reserved for animal production and all the attendant benefits but we have given them away to investors.

Investment is good as a colleague said but once we give away these ranches to foreigners, we can no longer control what is being done on them. Some of them have even been turned into crop production. You have crops being grown next to animals yet these have pests. The chemicals that are being used to control the pests eventually will affect the animals. As such, we are at risk.

Secondly, giving away this land as a colleague said – the land should be leased; it should not be given to foreigners. There should be a firm policy as to how we give it away and also control what is there.

I pass by Lwera along Masaka Road; you find investors growing rice in a wetland and they just carry it away to their countries without control. You do not know how much has been grown or carried out, so we lose in terms of taxes. The land is next to Lake Victoria and River Katonga; chemicals are washed into the lake. We need to re-think –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I wonder why Mbarara Stock Farm is not on the list. There is evidence that the farm has been encroached on.

As if that is not enough, even the animals were taken away by the people whose names I will not mention but next time I will say them here. Mr Speaker, as hon. Rwakajara said, I am aware that most of these ranches have been there and some of them are redundant. However, the way they have been given out is not proper. I think people just come and grab the land.

The level of land grabbing in this country has reached another level; we need to do something. If we are to give out these ranches to the people, let us first give the Ugandans because they have the capacity.

There is land in Nshaara where the Indians were given two square miles. Ugandans are there suffering with their cows; they cannot get where to take them but those people have free land. They are enjoying life at the expense of Ugandans. I think we need –(Member timed out.)

4.22
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, me Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the two reports. 

I would like to say that we have to be conscious of the fact that although the population of Uganda is going higher and higher almost every day and Uganda has the highest rate of population growth, land is not increasing. It is the only asset we have that can identify us as indigenous people. 

Secondly, it is very clear in Article 237 of the Constitution – I happen to have been there; it was a very contentious subject of debate in the Constituent Assembly – we had one spirit that nobody should debate land. Land belongs to the citizens of Uganda. Therefore, much as we value investors, we must ensure that they must not grab all the prime land that we have yet our population is growing.

The past Government had come out with specific activities, which could be used and would also change the lifestyle of Uganda. One of them is agricultural farming and secondly, animal husbandry. Since there is this land, why are we giving out, for example, Maruzi Ranch for the purpose of palm tree growing when we could improve on agriculture and also animal husbandry?

Finally, I would like to say that Maruzi Ranch - I have specific interest as a person who comes from Lango – it is very clear that the activities have been fraudulent –(Member timed out.)

4.24
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the colleagues in thanking the committee for this great report.

It is unfortunate that we are receiving this and it is not only in Maruzi but the rest of these other ranches in the country. It would not take the President to go round the country to sensitise the population on wealth creation. Most of the things that he was emphasising were to utilise the little land that they have in animal breeding or fisheries and the rest of it.

Mr Speaker, Maruzi Ranch was strictly for cattle breeding and to train farmers on what to do. You realise that this is the land that was leased for 99 years. According to the report, the title has been tampered with about twice or three times. It was leased with conditionality; they were not supposed to sub-divide or sub-lease but they have done this. 

We have to interest ourselves as Parliament to know why it is that the land record as it is was of 1968 or 1969 but all this tampering has no record. Who is this person?

To make it worse, it is cattle keeping that is the greatest income earner that changing Maruzi Ranch into palm oil growing – palm oil needs a lot of water. However, if you went to Maruzi land, it is dry. Do you want to turn northern Uganda into a desert? What is our interest? Members, I feel we should make Maruzi Ranch –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did I pick Gulu District because somebody else is speaking as the Leader of the Opposition - I am advised, using the time of the Leader of the Opposition.

MS AOL: Yes, I have given a lot of my time to another person. However, I would like to also observe that originally - at least when growing up, I saw Aswa Ranch serving Uganda economically and was very viable. Now, you hear of people going with guns and then former members of Parliament being allocated land there haphazardly - what is it that we are doing to this country? Now that we are reviving Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), why don’t we focus on UDC? Definitely, these ranches will create more jobs for our youth. We will also relate well with the local people.

Look at the local people; they are looked at as animals - not Ugandans. Let us love our vulnerable people. They should be first class in their country. This Government and those ministers favour foreigners more than Ugandans. When we are in foreign countries, we are treated as second-class citizens, not first class. Let us also enjoy being first class in our country. You, ministers, if you do not take care, we will make sure that people look at you and –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the Leader of the Opposition talking about ministers giving out land at the expense of citizens without naming which ministers. Are all the ministers involved? If she cannot substantiate, Mr Speaker, can the Leader of the Opposition withdraw the statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to help us with the ministers you know who are doing it? (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: I do not know the list that is why I am worried, am I one of them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, when they say ministers, they are referring to the institution that you sit in and I am sure no minister will still take a single decision by himself or herself without consultation with the others.

4.30
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. It has been very clear. The people who are responsible for the destruction of the ranch are also known. They have done an injustice to this country.

Mr Speaker, what was the purpose of Government in establishing these ranches in this country? It had to do with cattle keeping and breeding of cattle. However, the purpose has changed to palm trees. If we are to carry out a cost benefit analysis of the two - the cows versus palm trees, you will be shocked and embarrassed as a Ugandan.

Mr Speaker, in my view, palm tree growing is going to be a liability to Ugandans more than a benefit. Imagine 99 years; that means the land has already been taken and this is where the problem is and I am concerned. The cows will give me meat, milk, hides and skins and you know this country is importing skins and hides from Kenya and yet we are giving out the land that –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for this report that has been very thorough and precise. Mr Speaker, the recommendation that the committee came up with is what the poor affected people at the ranch were considering together with the clear-headed people of Apac District.

Mr Speaker, this matter regarding Maruzi Ranching Scheme was very touchy. I remember as Lango Parliamentary Group, our visit to the ranch was foiled by a team that we later found to be compromised. The manner in which the affected people were handled was very bad. The way they were treated remains as history for that area; let alone the corruption that was involved in that matter.

In future, this Parliament, if a matter that is urgent –(Member timed out.)

4.34:
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to ask for your indulgence, because I am the one who moved the motion on this investigation. I wanted more time but let me first thank the chairperson of the committee and the members of the committee that amidst all the disturbance, confusion and threats, they were able to reach all the corners of Maruzi Ranch and I think the committee did a great job.

Mr Speaker, a question has been raised as to why there are a lot of issues concerning ranches and land. The answer is very simple; people with money move to compromise almost all government officials along the line and the moment they have oiled the process, they are able to do anything on the land irrespective of public interest. That is the only question that we need to deal with.

In the case of Maruzi Ranch, the purpose of the ranch in the lease agreement - the land was not supposed to be changed for any other use apart from beef production and animal breeding. In this case, the land use has been changed without involving the physical planning committee at both the district and national level.

Secondly, the Uganda Livestock Industries as it has been presented by the chairpersons of the committee, is a group of three old men sitting here doing transactions to the extent that a premium of about Shs 900 million has been paid to them. This is the same situation like for Uganda Airlines, where this Parliament had to sit and say, “Let it become Government property because Government is going to fund it.” I think this is what should happen in the case of the money that was paid to Uganda Livestock Industries; it must go to the Consolidated Fund. 

Mr Speaker, why is the ministry of –(Member timed out.)

4.37
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture for the work well done and to comment on the Ministries of Land and Agriculture. I do not know how they feel when they say that land was surveyed and given to three or four different firms. The Ministry of Agriculture failed to buy drugs for Foot-and-Mouth Disease, causing us to lose all our animals yet these ranches are supposed to have the breeds - I begin to wonder because these ranches are not productive; they are a liability to the country. 

My other issue is on local investors in the region. Why should we get people whose names cannot be pronounced instead of local investors taking charge of these ranches? The ranches are given out and we do not know the people that are taking them. Then we sit here proud that we are doing a service to Uganda and yet we are doing a disservice. 

Restocking is taking place everywhere but the animals that are being restocked are taken from –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon Government to learn to respect the recommendations of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I think that is something of key concern. Often we make recommendations but they are swept under the carpet. We shall be keen on what has come out of this debate. 

Secondly, for us to arrest the situation, we need to go ahead and arrest the people who are trying to arrest our economic progress by arresting our ranches. I think this is a very serious matter. We need the land to revert back to the original owners and start from the beginning because there is a problem. We need to act like the traffic police. If somebody is over speeding, we should wave him down and ask what the problem is as well as check his alcoholic content so that we straighten the situation.

The Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) should be given a vote so that they become powerful. They should be the ones to oversee these investments that are coming from Government rather than everybody coming to grab everything around. That will not be accepted.

Mr Speaker, we need to revisit the legal policy frameworks for the ranches. Do we have a clear policy on ranches? How are they supposed to be run? Do we have guidelines or criteria for somebody to access and become an investor there so that you do not go and change? For example, you could say that you are coming to ranch and then you start sand mining. We do not want that kind of situation. 

Before I sit down, I would like to say that most foreigners are working on behalf of many of our ministers and some big people in the ministries –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable member is that the ranches in Northern Uganda are no longer existent but there are ranches elsewhere. It is the responsibility of Government to restock these ranches like it has done elsewhere. Therefore, to say that the ranches have outlived their usefulness is wrong because it is the responsibility of Parliament and Government to give those ranches money and we increase on beef and milk production. Thank you.

MR AOGON: I knew that you were going to give correct information. Mr Speaker, I take that information – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your time is up. 

4.41
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. My area of concern is on the 50 years of leasing to this investor. This country has experienced an absolutely poor quality of investors. Once somebody is granted a lease of 50 years, legally and by implication, that person owns the land. I do not understand how the ministries concerned could grant an investor land before being assessed. At the end of the day, Ugandans look like they are the squatters. 

This does not only happen on ranches. Where there are minerals like gold, for example in Kassanda and Mubende Municipality, they granted land – in fact, I was reading the contract and it says that it is 99 years to an investor. At the end of the day, evictions have been executed. People’s rights, which are enshrined in the Constitution and are mandated to be enjoyed by Ugandans under Article 1 of the Constitution – (Member timed out.)

4.43
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I fully associate myself with the report of the committee; their findings and recommendations.

I fully support the recommendation of the committee that the titles that have been issued on Maruzi Ranch be cancelled with immediate effect. I agree with the committee that there must be fresh opening of boundaries to see whether our people are affected or not. If it is established that our people are affected, proper procedures should be followed and the affected persons properly and fully compensated. Assessments and valuations should be done. 

I also agree that the National Animal Genetic Resource and Information Centre (NAGRC) and National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) should coexist and that NAGRC should be given seven square miles and NARO 3 square miles. I fully support that recommendation. 

I agree with the committee that Atera Ranch, which was established a long time ago by our great son, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, should be revived. Government should fully fund the project of Atera Irrigation Scheme. I fully agree and associate myself with that recommendation. 

I agree that the Office of the Prime Minister should support the affected persons. As you know, many of our people are now affected; over 1000 families and their livelihoods have been affected. Therefore, the Office of the Prime Minister should support them. 

Mr Speaker, I agree that security, especially the UPDF, should stop forthwith –(Member timed out.) 

4.45
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My contribution is along the socio-economic aspects of the ranch. We all know that the most critical problem we are facing in the countryside is poverty. There is a lot of poverty and income inequality. This has hampered participation of many in the country’s economy. 

Whereas Government moved to liberalise the economy and divest itself from some of the businesses, it is not true that Government should be a spectator in the economic development of the country. Most of the businesses are owned by foreigners and Ugandan nationals are not participating fully; that is wrong. 

These ranches should be centres of excellence in the countryside. The communities should be beneficiaries, both as out growers and suppliers. One of the benefits of the ranches to the country would be to boost the national currency. Our shilling is very weak because we do not have what to sell in mass quantity and these would be some of the resources that we would use to boost the currency of the country. 
I implore this Parliament to come up with very punitive recommendations or resolutions to force Government to come up with a very clear policy because people are looking at us as a weak Parliament that has conspired – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The generals have not been standing up, so you are not on my record. I plan the way we debate so that I draw it to a conclusion. So, if you show up at the end, you disrupt my planning. However, I will allow each of you one minute.

4.48
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and make this statement. Land feeds and swallows us. The way and manner in which the wanainchi of this country are being treated in regard to land related issues is going to be the next cause of any uprising in this country. I beg to submit. 

4.49
LT. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to question the so called foreign direct investments. When a person comes and they are given five square miles and they displace 50 families - is this economy for the investors or Ugandans? Why don’t the Ugandans work with us so that it is an inclusive economy not an exclusive economy? Thank you. (Applause)

4.49
BRIG. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Land is a commodity and inevitably when you follow the forces of demand and supply, you are likely to find some of these issues. I would like to propose that we must have clear land use policies and legislations that will indeed implement these policies.

Secondly, if land that is either allocated or bought has occupants, we either have legislation to stop the allocation of that land or have clear policy on compensation. If it is there, why are we not implementing it?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I do support the committee recommendations. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.50
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak last before receiving a response from the Government side on the matter of the giveaway of Maruzi Ranch and other ranches in Uganda. I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving me her time so that I can discuss this matter at length.

I asked for this privilege because this matter is very close to me, both politically because I represent the people of Maruzi and culturally, because I come from that very subcounty and the parishes around Maruzi Ranch and social-economically, in terms of the wellbeing of the people of Maruzi.

This matter was brought to the attention of Parliament by my colleague, hon. Tonny Ayoo, sometime in January this year. The Speaker in the Chair then referred the matter to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I had the opportunity to accompany the committee to Maruzi. I organised meetings with the two subcounties where they attended and at the district headquarters. I also had the opportunity to interact with the committee when we met the President as Lango Parliamentary Group together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

However, I thought I should submit further on this, in terms of the issues raised and the discussions we have had. I share the concerns of my colleagues that have been expressed here, not only today but even yesterday about Kassanda, Apaa and land grabbing in many parts of this country. 

However, I thought I should say the following with regard to Maruzi Ranch. The first issue I thought we should clarify, which has been sucked in and which I have endeavoured to understand, is on the ownership of Maruzi Ranch or Government ranches. A colleague mentioned here that there have been many claimants on this land. We know that these ranches were established in the 1960s, they have land titles and there were leaseholds granted by the Uganda Land Commission. These ranches were managed by Uganda Livestock Industries, which has been defunct for some time. Nonetheless, the leases are still running.

Concerning the Government policy, I do not speak for Government but Government has had certain policy pronouncements and these ranches have been given to different people, investors, local and foreign. However, with regard to Maruzi Ranch, as the people of Maruzi, we have done our best to regain ownership of this land because the land was initially given by some clans around the area, one of them being my own clan. 

The area was infested with tsetse flies and people vacated the land because there was an epidemic of sleeping sickness. They did not know what was afflicting them but the land was vacated. Later on, the Government thought that they would get rid of tsetse flies by establishing a ranch on that land.

The ranch was established under Uganda Livestock Industries and Uganda Development Corporation, which has been defunct since 1986. Overtime, the land has been encroached by both the local people surrounding the area and people from other parts of Uganda - Lango, Acholi, Busoga, Bunyoro, West Nile, Sudan and Rwanda –(interjections)– yes, we have some pastoralists there.

Conflicts then developed because of the mixed cultures and people of different characters and the local people felt that they could not subsist together with these people. Their expressed wish is that the land be vacated. They themselves vacated –(Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. You have one minute to explain that.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was giving the history but I also have a personal matter that I would like to state on this case. 

Nevertheless, as I said, the local people’s wish is that the land should be vacated by the encroachers. They gave that land to the Government in 1968 and if the land must be given away by Government, it should be given back to them. 

We endeavoured to regain the land as the district local government and we failed. So when the land was given to the investor without our knowledge – because this was a Cabinet decision – our role was to sensitise the people to see how the community could get involved so that they could gainfully be engaged in terms of being outgrowers, having employment and socio-economic infrastructure like roads that would be constructed there. 

The matter was however politicised. It has become very emotive. There are lots of rumours, innuendos and lies that have been circulated. I have personally been targeted by both the local media and other detractors; the truth and facts have actually been the victim. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please. Let us listen to responses, please.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not happy with the honourable Member of Parliament from Kashari naming me. I hope the Hansard did not capture it. (Laughter) I pray that if the Hansard captured it, then it is expunged. I am the minister but I have not given any land away and I have no powers to do that. I do not think it was right that I was named. 

I would like to support what the committee has reported and I would like Parliament to take a decision on Uganda Livestock Industry. Is it defunct? Does it exist? We would like to know because I am also not sure. (Interjections) If it is limping as they have said, then what is it doing there? A decision should be taken about Uganda Livestock Industry because they continue to take decisions and we do not know whether they exist. Parliament should take a decision on it.

I would like to report that National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRC) is now moving very well and the breeding is actually taking place. They have taken up community breeding and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) has now allowed NAGRC to assist all those communities that are around the ranches. I think you are going to see a difference very soon.

Restocking will now be taken over by the ranches. You are going to be getting these animals from the ranches and from the areas where these ranches are. You are not going to see cows being moved from Mbarara to the north. The north will be supplied by the ranches in the north. (Applause) 

I must say that the problem has actually been the PPDA allowing tendering. So when they would tender, the people with money would be in Kampala and they would go and get the cows in the north and from everywhere. However, about two weeks ago, PPDA gave permission that we can now help the communities around the ranches. 

I also agree with the recommendation that NAGRC should get the seven square miles and NARO should get three. (Interjections) This was a recommendation by the committee and I support it. (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to get some clarification from the minister. In 2014 - if I remember well - we approved Shs 3 billion in this Parliament to restock Aswa Ranch. Up to now, the communities are not benefiting. We do not know the state of restocking Aswa Ranch. We only saw the local breeds there being guarded seriously. Even local leaders there are not supposed to reach the ranch. 

We would like to know if the restocking that NAGRC is doing is also being done in Aswa and we beg you to allow us to visit the ranch next week.

MR AYOO: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister whether in the process of changing the land use of Maruzi Ranch from ranching to palm oil production, the line ministry, which is Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was not involved in that process. And if the ministry was not involved, who was responsible for changing all this?

Secondly, as the minister is saying, very soon, restocking is going to come from the ranches. Are you telling us that for now, we should resolve in Parliament that we retain Maruzi Ranch as a ranching scheme and not go for palm tree production on the ranch? If the ranches are not there - Aswa is gone, Maruzi is gone - where will northern Uganda get the ranches for restocking and supplying these animals? 

MS KABATSI: I would like to assure the Member of Parliament that Aswa is now doing very well and the chairperson of the committee will tell you this, but we are not on the whole land as NAGRC. We only have and need 10 square miles of that to do our breeding. 

On Maruzi, I am beginning to wonder whether we are speaking the truth. I see all these Members here, especially the Member who has just finished talking - There was a big meeting on Maruzi which was attended by all the leaders, all the MPs, all the LC representatives. All of you were there and decisions were taken and you agreed with them. Why are you now giving Parliament wrong information? You are the ones who agreed that the land should be taken by an investor and then NAGRC and NARO should share 10 square miles. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which meeting was this? Do you remember the date? Where was it held?

MS KABATSI: Yes. This meeting was in State House and the whole Lango group was there. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Akena were there too and the whole committee on agriculture, which has just presented a report was there. (Interjections) The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was also represented there. A decision was taken by all. Honourable members, when we come to Parliament, let us speak the truth. (Interruptions)

MR AKENA: I rise on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it about Parliament?

MR AKENA: It is about the honourable minister who has just taken her seat.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Betty Amongi? (Laughter) She is the one who has just taken her seat.

MR AKENA: No, the Minister of Agriculture. Mr Speaker, the minister alluded to a meeting which was held in State House and I was mentioned as having attended. I can confirm that I attended. 

However, what the minister has missed out in the decisions which were made, is that for the palm oil project to go ahead, there was supposed to be an environmental and social impact assessment which was supposed to guide the decision. Up to this moment, we have not heard or seen that impact assessment but we are seeing the project going ahead.

Therefore, I wonder if we are proceeding well having the minister rope us in a decision. Our decision was based upon the environmental and social impact assessment of what palm oil growing in Maruzi would be. Let the Government lay on the Table that assessment so that we can look at it and speak from an informed point of view. Otherwise, we are not on the same page.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that correct?

MS KABATSI: It is partly correct and I think the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will explain it because it was done and given to you. (Laughter) 

5.07
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for the report. I also thank the Members for all the issues that they have raised.

Mr Speaker, we welcome the recommendations because most of the recommendations were made together with us when we appeared before the committee. We agree with recommendations on the issues of resettlement, the size of land corresponding with those in the title of 1968, as well as the return of the title from Uganda Livestock Industries to Uganda Land Commission.

I would also like to state that Members raised the issue of the criteria for giving land to private investors, which should be transparent. I would like to state that Cabinet has already set up a committee to come up with a mechanism to provide for participation of the local community from the area where the ranches are as a priority. The draft criteria are ready. 

Mr Speaker, some of the recommendations require legal reforms and I find it difficult to comment on them; for example, the committee said that land titles that are already issued should be cancelled. Under the Registration of Titles Act (RTA), there are grounds for cancellation of titles issued by Government. If you cancel a title that has been issued by Government outside the grounds in the RTA and section 91 of the Land Act, the Government will be penalised.

Secondly, the issue that the ownership should revert to the local community is a constitutional matter. I would like to refer Members to Article 239 of the Constitution, which says, “The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament.” 

In operationalising this Article, the Land Act clearly spells out the functions of Uganda Land Commission to hold all the land for Government, including Parliament of Uganda land, where you are seated. Therefore, if we say we want to change the ownership, then we must go for a constitutional amendment. The power is in your hands to amend the Constitution; I cannot handle that as a minister. 

On the issue of titles being issued from the headquarters, the Land Act and RTA give the power to register land to one officer only - the Commissioner for Land Registration. Therefore, the Commissioner for Land Registration has to give you authority. For the allocations – signing and giving of land – which is originating from the land boards, the power is decentralised. However, for that land held by the Uganda Land Commission and central Government, it is the Commissioner for Land Registration that is supposed to handle from the centre. Therefore, that particular recommendation of the committee ties my hands because it is a legal issue.

Mr Speaker, in response to the issue of the legal status of Uganda Livestock Industries, I would say this is an entity which is partly under the Privatisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They appeared before the committee and I think this House can link with them and see how to handle this with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

When the committee requested that we should retract the Shs 900 million paid to Uganda Livestock Industries, I linked up with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they indicated to me that they were the ones that oversee Uganda Livestock Industries and it is not yet defunct. They said it has a legal regime and it has a board. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said they had already given permission to Uganda Livestock Industries to spend that money. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could be able to answer this.

On the change of leasehold to freehold from Uganda Land Commission to Uganda Livestock Industries, again this is a legal matter. Uganda Livestock Industries requested for the conversion as far back as 2006 and there are very many correspondences up to the point when the Attorney-General cleared the Uganda Land Commission and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to covert the title from leasehold to freehold. As you are aware, the only person mandated to give legal advice to Government is the Attorney-General. Therefore, when the Attorney-General says “this is legal”, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development’s hands are tied.

On the issue of the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre & Databank (NAGRC&DB) and NARO, I would like to state that we are now working closely with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is important to note that Maruzi Ranch is not only going to be given for palm oil but NAGRC&DB and NARO are also going to continue working there. Somebody talked about the research project which was in Tororo under NARO; NARO is in Maruzi because that research project is moving from Tororo to Maruzi and NAGRC&DB is there for issues of multiplication. 

As Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we do not just allocate land. Before we allocate land, we seek consent from the line ministries. All the allocations we have made in Nshaara, Ruhengere, Aswa, Maruzi ranches and everywhere would have either been approved by Cabinet or would have had approval of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I gave copies of all those to the committee.

On the issue of fake investors, Cabinet has already issued a directive to me to cancel all land titles for investors who had been allocated land and had not developed the land within five years. Therefore, I would like to notify this House that the Naguru land title has already been cancelled. In addition, the title of land that was given to an Israeli investor in Mubende has been cancelled. If Members are aware of any investor with land that has not been developed within five years, I invite them to give me the list and I will be able to –(Interruption)

MS BETTY ENGOLA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification on this matter. First of all, I would like to know how Hillside Agriculture Ltd acquired its land title. We want evidence because there must have been communication to and fro, which evidence we have been waiting for.

Secondly, Apac District Land Board was intentionally skipped during this process because they had nothing to contribute and that is disturbing. As the Woman Member of Parliament for Apac District, I was not involved until the 16th when we moved a motion here and that was when the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development called a meeting and things started opening up.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I started by talking about the law, the process of allocating land and I stated the issue of Hillside clearly. The land held in freehold is not held by the Uganda Land Commission but by the Uganda Livestock Industries. Therefore, the process of giving that land was managed by the board of Uganda Livestock Industries not Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Every institution that has a title gives instructions to the Registrar of Titles in my ministry to do a, b, c, d. Therefore, when the terms and conditions were cleared by the Attorney-General and Uganda Livestock Industries, it was brought to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The Registrar of Titles then gave the certificate of title, which had been duly signed by the Chairman of the Board of Uganda Livestock Industries and the secretary.

What I am trying to tell Members is that a meeting was held with all the stakeholders in State House with His Excellency the President and this fact is fully captured in the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. All the stakeholders accepted that the livestock industry – (Interruption) Let me first answer the Member and then I will get your clarification. I will also get yours but let me complete.

It is only after the agreement in State House, in a meeting chaired by His Excellency, that Uganda Livestock Industries accepted to revert the land to Uganda Land Commission. They surrendered the title to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. At the moment, we are in the final stages and the delay is because we have to open all the boundaries. Otherwise, they have surrendered the freehold title, which will be changed into the names of Uganda Land Commission.

On the issue of why we are giving 50 years, the terms and conditions of the change will be five years, which is standard for Government. Five years is given to an investor with a development covenant of 49 years.

Regarding the issue of involvement, as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, our role is to give titles based on what the person or the owner of land has requested us to do. The issue of involvement should have been for Uganda Livestock Industries and the issue of sensitisation and awareness should be the mandate of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. The statements you are making concerning Uganda Livestock Industries seem to be conflicting with the information given to us by the committee. At the time the transactions were going on, Uganda Livestock Industries had become defunct and therefore, legally, it would not be recognised to transact any business on behalf of the company or Government. Therefore, I would like to know what legal status Uganda Livestock Industries had at the time these transactions were going on.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I stated very clearly that the Attorney-General wrote to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development clearing Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to legally deal with Uganda Livestock Industries as an entity under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I cannot answer that question. If Members require additional answers, they should call the Attorney-General and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Otherwise, as the Minister of Lands, Housing and Development, my role is to get interpretation from the Attorney-General and make sure that I have confirmed that the title held by a person is the right title and then we make transfers. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: The procedural matter I am trying to raise is: The minister has clearly stated that she is aware that by the time these transactions were taking place, Uganda Livestock Industries was defunct. She is now saying that it is the Attorney-General who should be held accountable for whatever decision was taken.

If you know that Uganda Livestock Industries was defunct, it is you to advise the authorities involved. Therefore, can you clarify to us what the status was at that time and why would the Attorney-General -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure but now you are on a point of clarification. 

MS OGWAL: The procedural matter is: Should we continue to discuss a matter, which according to the information available to us, is illegal? Is it procedurally right? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not heard of any illegality here so I would not like to draw conclusions that have not arisen from the debate. No one has said that anything is illegal; I have not heard that.

Honourable members, we need to be careful when using the word “defunct” because defunct can be by operations of a revolution or something like that; for example, when the East Africa Community got defunct, it was by operation of certain things. It did not have the opportunity to be legally vacated from the books and so it became defunct.

I do not know whether a company that is in abeyance can be called defunct. Whether it is in abeyance or under divestiture, I do not know whether you can call it defunct. There are companies that were wound up and you cannot say they were defunct. They were just wound up and so, you cannot say they are defunct. Therefore, sometimes we use the word “defunct” loosely and yet they carry a different meaning from what we think they mean. 

From what the minister has said - No, it is clear. You cannot say defunct when you do not know what defunct is. When an entity is existing, you cannot say it is defunct. Even if it is not functioning, you cannot say it is defunct. It is there even though it is not carrying out any activity, so you cannot say that it is defunct. Honourable minister, have you finished?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to conclude by saying that I never used the word “defunct”. I stated clearly that Uganda Livestock Industries Limited currently exists under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and has a board. Fortunately, hon. Cecilia Ogwal knows who the board chairperson is; he comes from Lango and he is a professor. So, they operate legally. It is the Attorney-General who has given this opinion and so as a minister and the ministry, once the Attorney-General has guided, we go with that. 

I would like to conclude with the issue of the environmental impact assessment. This has been done and I would like to request, Mr Speaker, that you give me time next week to come and present because I have another matter here tomorrow. I can maybe write to you and submit the environmental impact assessment report. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, Cap 98, section 22, deals with how companies that were initially owned by Government should be handled in the process of divestiture.

They list many categories but I am more concerned about class 3, under which are public enterprises which the state is required to fully divest in. Some of these enterprises were not fully divested; Government just put them under the Privatisation Unit to continue handling until final divestiture is carried out. Under class 3, there are public enterprises, which the state is required to fully divest from. If you look at No. 68 on that list, there is Uganda Livestock Industries Limited. It is not defunct; it is there in the law.

Honourable members, I will put the question to these two reports. I would like to remind you that in the debate on the ministerial policy statement, the honourable chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries made some similar recommendations. When we adopt these recommendations, they will have to be harmonised with the other ones before they are issued out.

Further, the minister suggested that we adopt some of those things here, deal with them and report to Parliament under rule 217. You do not say, “Do not do it because I cannot do it”; no! That is your business. If you cannot do it, come back and say, “We tried and found out these challenges and we are now reporting back under rule 217 on actions taken but we were not able to take any action under this.” So, please be advised accordingly.

Honourable members, I will put the question that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the investigation into the giveaway of Maruzi Ranching Scheme and the illegal leasing and grabbing of land belonging to the ranch be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question also that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the giveaway of land under state-owned ranches and stock farms be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report, adopted

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR AWARD OF GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the Members here. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014 TO 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the chairperson of the committee. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUMPS ALONG THE NEW BRIDGE ON RIVER NILE, JINJA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson is not here. Let us go on to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS ON THE OPERATIONS OF THE FISHERIES PROTECTION FORCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson is present. Is this report ready?

5.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRCULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report was presented but before debate could ensue, a Member raised concern about which legal regime the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) was operating. So, the Attorney-General was requested to give his opinion, which I think he did. It now remains at your discretion, Mr Speaker, to allow debate; I had already presented the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will then deal with that tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are you ready?

5.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Kenneth Ongalo-Obote): Mr Speaker, this is a report of the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. It is a bulky report and so, I will endeavour to summarise it without departing from the spirit of the report. 

Permit me first to lay before this House the minutes of proceedings of the committee as it considered this report, which contains:

    i. The report itself; 
    ii. Minutes of meetings;  and
    iii. Memoranda received from various Members and parties who appeared before the committee.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and documents that the committee used in support of its findings. Chairperson, proceed.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, Article 94 (1) of the Constitution states thus:  “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees.”

While the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda came into force on 10 November 2017, they are subject to an almost continuous process of amendment, that is necessitated by rule 172 (1) (c), which tasks the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to review these rules from time to time and to make such recommendations to the House for amendment as the committee considers necessary, for the satisfactory functioning and efficient transaction of the business of the House and its committees. 

Additionally, the committee is required to examine and advise the House on the amendments proposed to these rules by Members or other committees of the House under rule 172 (1) (d) of our Rules of Procedure. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline was directed to review the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in view of particular proposals as hereunder:

1. The Proposal to Create a Committee on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

This proposal was raised at the 18th Sitting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament, which was held on Thursday, 14 December 2017 during which a report of the delegation to the World Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals was laid before this House. 

Hon. Beatrice Anywar, the Member of Parliament of Kitgum Municipality, informed Parliament that she had made a proposal to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to consider the creation of a committee on climate change that would help to fast-track mitigation and adaptation to climate change. The Speaker directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine the possibility of creating a committee on Sustainable Development Goals to, among other things, handle the issue of climate change.

2. Proposal to Provide for Electronic Tabling of Documents

At the 26th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament, the Speaker informed the House that she had attended the 24th Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers which discussed, among other things, the crucial need for Commonwealth Parliaments to embrace electronic governance. 

She noted that some countries such as India were quite ahead in using ICTs in Parliament. She informed the House that the Parliamentary Commission wished to see a paperless Parliament by the end of the second session in May 2018. Thus, progressively, the Members of Parliament will be expected to use only their iPads in the Chamber. Furthermore, Parliament would be able to facilitate the public to contribute to Bills and policies online. 

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline was directed to adjust the Rules of Procedure to enable electronic tabling of documents.

3. Proposal to Revise Rule 144 on Consideration of the Budget Framework Paper (BFP)

At the 26th and 27th sittings of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 30 and Wednesday, 31 January 2018 respectively, the House considered the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for the fiscal years 2018/2019-2022/2023 in accordance with section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 144(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Procedural issues were raised, particularly under rule 144. The Speaker referred the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to review with the focus on the following issues:

    i) Whether the sectoral committees should present their reports to the House for consideration whereupon the budget committee would consolidate their views and thereafter, report to the House for approval of the BFP as per section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015;

    ii) Whether the sectoral committees should submit oral or written reports to the budget committee;

    iii) Whether the sectoral committees’ reports submitted to the budget committee should be signed in accordance with rule 201(1) of our Rules of Procedure;

    iv) Whether all the members of a sectoral committee were expected to appear before the budget committee to present their reports for consideration.

4. Proposal to Suspend Participation of a Chairperson in His or Her Second Committee

At the Ninth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 24 July 2018, the House constituted sectoral committees in accordance with rules 183 and 184 of our Rules of Procedure. The Speaker noted that Members who were chairpersons or deputy chairpersons to committees registered low attendance in the other committees to which they belonged, primarily because they had to chair meetings in the committees where they perform leadership roles. 

The Speaker directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to explore the possibility of reviewing the Rules of Procedure to suspend the participation of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons in the other committees to which they are designated for the duration of the time when they are chairing a committee. She was of the view that this would allow them to concentrate on performing their leadership roles as committee chairpersons.

5. Proposal to Sanction Committees for Failure or Refusal to Report on Assignment

At the 14th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Wednesday, 5 December 2018, the Speaker observed with concern that there was much work pending in committees, the bulk of which had exceeded the time provided in the rules or by the House for consideration by committees. She further observed that committees that delayed with work hardly returned to the House to seek leave for extension of time within which to consider their assignments and report back to the House. 

The Speaker directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to propose amendments to the Rules of Procedure, providing for sanctions to committees that refuse and/or fail to undertake assignments within 45 days or other stipulated or requisite time and yet do not seek extension of time from the House.

6. Proposal to Review Rule 11 on Parliamentary Commissioners

During the 16th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 11 December 2018, hon. Medard Sseggona, Member of Parliament of Busiro County East, raised concern over the procedure for nomination and election of backbench Parliamentary Commissioners as provided in rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, vis-à-vis the provisions in section 2 of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, No. 22 of 2006. The Speaker deferred ruling on this matter to a subsequent sitting.

During the 18th Sitting held on Tuesday, 18 December 2018, the Speaker made a ruling to the effect that:

    a) While section 2(2b) of the Administration of Parliament Act (as amended) requires “nomination of the candidates for election” as backbench Commissioners, the provisions of rule 11(4) and (5) of the Rules of Procedure provide for “designation” and “re-designation” respectively – an oversight on the part of Parliament – thereby putting the rules in direct contradiction to the Act, which was mandated under Article 87A of the Constitution to make that law. Nonetheless, to avoid ambiguity, the House would read the word “designation” to mean “nomination”.

    b) Rule 97(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides for secret voting in the House in respect of the election or removal of a person holding office under the Constitution or under a law made under the Constitution. That, in this case, the Parliamentary Commission is created by the Constitution under Article 87A, and is indeed operationalised by the Administration of Parliament Act. The tenure of Members elected to the command of the Administration of Parliament Act is two and a half years. 

The Speaker concluded her ruling by stating thus: “…by the command of the law, Members elected to serve on the Commission are nominated by the Government and the Opposition sides of the House. They are elected by secret vote in the House and serve for two and a half years.”

She directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to align the Rules of Procedure to the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act.

Scope

The committee set out to review the Rules of Procedure based on the following proposals, by order of the House:

    a) To create a committee on Sustainable Development Goals 
    b) To provide for electronic tabling of documents.
    c)  To revise rule 144, on consideration of the Budget Framework Paper. 
    d) To suspend the participation of a chairperson in the second committee to which he or she is designated. 
    e) To provide for sanctions to committees for failure or refusal to report on assignments.
    f)  Proposal to align the rules with the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act, with regard to nomination and election of backbench Commissioners of the Parliamentary Commission.

The committee enlisted the following methods of work:

The committee had meetings with key stakeholders. The committee also received written evidence from a diverse range of stakeholders and heard from witnesses across various oral evidence sessions. Witnesses included the following: 

    a) The Government focal person on SDGs - hon. Mary Karooro Okurut;
    b) Party whips 
    c) Chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of parliamentary committees; 
    d) Members of Parliament in their individual capacities also appeared before the committee. They are individually captured in the report.
    e) The committee also received submissions from parliamentary fora, especially the Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals and that on climate change. 
    f) It also received submissions from the Advocates Coalition for Development and Environment, a civil society organisation.

The committee received memoranda from hon. Alum Santa and hon. Majegere. The committee carried out a benchmarking study in Zambia and also visited the Parliament of India.

Mr Speaker, the committee made the following proposals with regard to the various assignments that it was tasked to undertake: 

The Proposal to create a Committee on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

The Cabinet SDGs focal person, the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, advocated for the proposal to form a committee on SDGs. In her view, it would strengthen and expedite implementation of the SDGs through linking with the coordination framework and other sectors to ensure coordination and alignment of policy, planning, budgeting and prioritization across Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) for sustainable development.

Arguments against Creation of a Committee on SDGs

All other stakeholders who made submissions on the matter, including individual Members of Parliament, the Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities and the Standing Committee on Human Rights, strongly rejected the proposal to create a committee on SDGs. Their main concern was that its mandate would clash with those of all sectoral committees and some standing committees, as the sectoral committees are well positioned to carry out strategic oversight and monitor each SDG and target under their jurisdiction. 

They also argued that it would be a waste of funds, particularly where the new committee was anticipated to duplicate the work of several other committees. Additionally, that the SDGs are a United Nations (UN) agenda that ends in 2030. They questioned what would happen to the committee if and when the UN moved away from the SDGS.

The Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals and the Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change also strongly rejected the proposal, submitting that should a committee on SDGs be created, then all Members of Parliament should be members of that committee, so that it would operate like the Committee of the whole House.  Others proposed that the chairpersons report on implementation of SDGs in their committees through the Business Committee and the Budget Committee where they are all ex officio members.

Creation of a Parliamentary Committee on Climate Change

Hon. Beatrice Anywar of Kitgum Municipality, citing international conventions on climate change, highlighted the importance of SDGs. She was specifically more concerned with goal No. 13 that focuses on climate action. She noted, with concern, the current and likely devastating future impact of climate change on Uganda, if not sufficiently tackled. She stressed Uganda needed stronger policy action by Parliament on climate change because it lacked coping mechanisms to global climate change threats.

She proposed that Parliament establishes a standing committee on climate change, whose main goal would be to ensure that all polices, budgets, Bills, and development plans of the Executive are responsive to the need for climate change mitigation and adaptation practices and policies. She proposed that alternatively, the name of the committee could be “Committee on Climate Change and Environment”. 

Hon. Anywar further acknowledged the Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change and expressed the view that the proposed committee on climate change could coexist with the Forum on Climate Change; the forum would not necessarily destabilize the committee since the forum did not have locus to stand on the Floor of Parliament to report on any matter.

The Advocates Coalition for Development and Environment similarly strongly advocated need for a parliamentary committee specifically on climate change, making arguments similar to those of hon. Anywar. The Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change considered the advantages of having a standalone committee on climate change, which were again in support of arguments made by hon. Anywar. 

Arguments were also made against creation of a committee on climate change. The Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change identified the institutional issues associated with having a standalone committee on climate change, which were mostly concerns regarding the sustainability of the forum vis-à-vis the proposed committee, for example potential competition for donor funds between the two. They were also concerned about the mandate of the proposed committee on climate change vis-à-vis that of the Committee on Natural Resources. 

Emphasis on Climate Change under the Committee on Natural Resources 

Views in Support of Emphasising Climate Change under the Natural Resources Committee 
The Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change proposed that while little about climate change issues is tackled by the Committee on Natural Resources, there should be a shift to give climate change special emphasis under the Committee on Natural Resources. 

They proposed the following strategies either singly or jointly:

    1. Increased technical staff specialists to handle climate change within the existing Committee on Natural Resources.

    2. Voluntary subcommittees on climate change established and recognized within the Committee on Natural Resources. 

    3. Modify the Committee on Natural Resources to become “Environment and Natural Resources Committee”. 

    4. Split the Committee on Natural Resources to extensively handle climate change by establishing a subcommittee on environment, which would cover climate change as well, and natural resources which would cover water, forests, land, minerals and petroleum. 

    5. Split the Committee on Natural Resources to create two committees on water and environment, and energy and minerals.

It is to be noted that the Parliamentary Forum on SDGs also proposed that the Committee on Natural Resources be split into two committees because it was ineffectively overseeing a large mandate.

Hon. Anywar was of the view that the very important and specialised role she had envisaged for the committee on climate change could not be performed efficiently by the Committee on Natural Resources that had a very wide mandate because climate change was a cross cutting issue affecting all sectors.

The chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources rejected the proposal to split up the Committee on Natural Resources, arguing that there was no justification for it.

Members of Parliament proposed that the capacity of sectoral committees to oversee the SDGs under their sectors should be strengthened as several MPs were not knowledgeable on SDGs.

Electronic Tabling of Documents

The MPs, while wishing to embrace this idea, in line with the trend towards a paperless Parliament and digitisation of information, received it with mixed feelings. Most Members expressed discomfort with the idea of solely laying documents electronically on an e-platform without doing it physically in hard copy. They appeared to trust written documents more, particularly for record purposes and in view of the forgeries associated with electronic documents.

Additionally, Members argued that electronic devices such as computers, laptops and iPads are not reliable in Uganda as they tend to get affected by outages in power supply and unreliable network connections. Therefore, most Members were quite happy with the status quo where Members lay documents on the Table in the House.

Consideration of the Budget Framework Paper 

(a) 	Whether the sectoral committees should present their reports to the House for consideration, whereupon the Budget Committee would consolidate their views and thereafter report to the House for approval of the BFP as per section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015: 

The majority of MPs who appeared before the committee found the process stipulated under rule 144 to be satisfactory; whereby each sectoral committee is required to submit its report on the BFP to the Budget Committee, which would thereafter scrutinise both the BFP and the reports of the sectoral committees and report to the House for approval of the BFP. 

They were generally of the view that it would be time consuming and a duplication of work for sectoral committees to report directly to the House.

(b) 	Whether sectoral committees should submit oral or written reports to the Budget Committee: All the MPs who made submissions on this matter were of the view that a report of a sectoral committee on the BFP should be written for purposes of the record, evidence, reference and certainty as to what is contained in the report.
	
(c) 	Whether a sectoral committee report submitted to the Budget Committee should be signed in accordance with rule 201(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament: There was a unanimous view that the report of a sectoral committee on the BFP should be signed and initialled in accordance with rule 201(1) by at least one-third of all the members of the committee in order to encourage ownership.

(d) 	Whether all the members of a sectoral committee were expected to appear before the Budget Committee to present their report for consideration: Most MPs were of the view that once the report of the sectoral committee was signed in accordance with the rules, there was no need for all the sectoral committee members to appear before the Budget Committee, based on the assurance that their views would have already been presented in the committee report. 

Additionally, the chairperson or deputy chairperson was in position to follow up any matters with the Budget Committee, particularly because under rule 170(2), they are ex officio members of the same.

However, some members expressed concern regarding the fact that while chairpersons of standing and sectoral committees are ex officio members of the Budget Committee, they are hardly invited to meetings of the Budget Committee, save for when they are specifically required to make a presentation, such as at the time of reporting on the BFP or ministerial policy statements or when the Budget Committee is harmonising reports of sectoral committees on the same. Indeed, some members questioned the relevance of rule 170(2) and its impact in view of the fact that rule 203 allows any Member to take part in the public proceedings of any committee without a right to vote.

Suspension of Chairpersons from their Second committees 

The Government Chief Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip were both in support of the proposal to suspend the participation of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons in the second committees to which they are designated. This was mainly for the reason that they were overloaded by their role as committee leaders, in addition to being ex officio members of the Business Committee and the Budget Committee.

The whips acknowledged that ordinary committee members equally registered low participation in committees, primarily owing to the fact that there were often clashes between meetings of sectoral committees and those of standing committees, thereby jeopardising the quality of work in committees.

They both proposed that each MP should be a member of only one committee, either a standing committee or a sectoral committee, although the chairpersons would additionally remain ex officio members of the business and budget committees. The committees would be reconstituted on a yearly basis. 

However, all MPs, including chairpersons who made submissions on this matter, advocated that the status quo be maintained. They principally cited the need for each member to at all times belong to a sectoral committee where matters of policy and budget are handled.

As a solution to the dilemma of a clash between activities of sectoral committees and those of standing committees, most MPs proposed that a rota be developed to allocate separate times or days for the two types of committees. While some proposed that this arrangement could be included in the rules, others looked to the clerks and/or the Business Committee to synchronise the schedules of committees across the board.

Sanctions for Failure to Report on Assignments

The committee did not seek stakeholders' views on this proposal because by the time the directive to consider this proposal was made, the committee had already concluded hearings on amendments to the rules.

Proposal to Review Rule 11 on Parliamentary Commissioners

As previously noted, the Speaker ruled on the matter of nomination and election of Parliamentary Commissioners, as opposed to their mere designation. She directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to align the Rules of Procedure with the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act, in this regard. Therefore, the committee was required to put the ruling of the Speaker into effect. This did not necessitate receipt of stakeholders' views.

Other Proposals for Amendment of the Rules of Procedure

Apart from the proposals for amendment that emanated from the House, individual Members of Parliament approached the committee with proposals for amendment of the rules. The bulk of these proposals were received in the course of hearing the views of Members on the proposals for amendment that originated from the House.

    a) There was a proposal for members of sectoral and standing committees to elect their leaders, as opposed to leaders being designated by the party or organisation in Government and the official Opposition party or organisation. This would mean amendment of rules 157 (6), (7) and (8) and 184 (6) and (7).

    b) There was a proposal for Parliament to elect its representatives to the Pan African Parliament. This would call for the amendment and/or implementation of rule 13.

    c) A proposal to open up to the public the meetings of the Appointments Committee. This would necessitate amendment of rule 162(2).


    d) A proposal for the reports of the Appointments Committee to be debated by the House. This would require amending rule 167.

    e) A proposal for vetting appointments, which is currently performed by the Appointments Committee, to be decentralised to relevant sectoral committees. This would require amendments to rules 160 to 169, among others.

    f) There was a proposal to amend rule 171 on the composition and functions of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) so that membership is reduced to a maximum of 25; and the functions include consideration of all other relevant reports that may not have emanated from the Auditor-General.

    g) We also received a proposal to define or interpret clearly the terms “Opposition” and “party in opposition.”

    h) Proposal to amend Rule 157(7), which is to the effect that accountability committees shall be led by Members designated by the official opposition party to provide clear and inclusive procedures catering for all the parties in opposition.

    i) The committee received a proposal for amendment of the prayer in the Rules of Procedure (Appendix A), to replace the word “manner” with the word “way”.

    j) Proposal to amend rule 221 to expound on the concept of Contempt of Parliament.

    k) There was a proposal to define “Parliamentary Privilege.”

    l) Finally, the committee received a proposal to provide more comprehensive provisions on sanctions for breach of the Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, section 3, which deals with observations, is mainly a repetition of what I have just read out, so I will leave that for Members to read at their discretion. I will move straight away to section 4 of the report, which is on recommendations. These are the proposed recommendations arising from considerations by the committee:

1. Proposal to Create a Committee on Sustainable Development Goals 

    a) The committee recommends using the established mechanisms already in place to scrutinise the Government's implementation of the SDGs. An additional committee would be a weaker rather than stronger instrument of scrutiny. Thus, in order to harmonise the coordination of SDGs implementation in Parliament, the assessment of progress on their implementation needs to be handled by all sectoral committees. 

Specifically, the committee recommends a review of the Rules of Procedure to assign responsibility for the assessment of progress on SDGs to the various parliamentary committees, particularly the sectoral committees.

    b) The committee recommends amendment of the Rules of Procedure to provide for a standing committee on climate change, which will provide oversight regarding responsiveness to matters of climate change, its mitigation and adaptation.

    c) The focal person on SDGs, currently the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister, should develop a customised checklist on SDGs for use by the relevant sectoral and/or standing committees of Parliament in monitoring and reporting on compliance to the SDGs. The focal person would also hold all relevant committees of Parliament accountable to report on matters of SDGs.
    d) The focal person on SDGs should present a status report to Parliament on the progress of the implementation of the SDGs by 1st April every year.

    e) Parliament should be involved in the development of the next National Development Plan (NDP) with clear guidelines of what the committees should do in the approval process. This shall ensure that all agendas, particularly the SDGs, are integrated in NDP III starting in the financial year 2020/2021.

    f) Parliament should implement the resolution that it passed on 22 September 2016 to reaffirm the role of Parliament in the implementation of the SDGs.

    g) Parliament should ensure training of Members of Parliament, committee secretariats and staff in relevant departments such as research and budget on issues pertaining to the SDGs.

2. Electronic Tabling of Documents

    (a) The committee recommends that the rules are amended to include a provision to the effect that once a report on a Bill has been uploaded on the parliamentary information system and a notification sent out to all Members informing them of the need to read the uploaded document, debate should ensue once the report is, at least three days later, laid on the Table.

    (b) Furthermore, Parliament should make use of its Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems to ensure that tabled documents are available online immediately. This may provide a substantial foundation for moving towards digital tabling of documents, that is, without the need for provision of a hard copy for tabling.

    (c) The committee recommends that in a bid to progressively go paperless, Members and staff of Parliament should take up measures to restrict the amount of paper used in Parliament in favour of e-technologies. Thus, documents should be printed out only if a hard copy is absolutely necessary.

Consideration of the Budget Framework Paper (BFP)

    (a) The committee recommends that Parliament follows the procedure outlined in rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure in consideration of the Budget Framework Paper, which is also the current practice. 

	In accordance with rule 144 (2), the sectoral committees should present their reports to the Budget Committee. Thereafter, in accordance with rule 144(3), the Budget Committee would synchronise and consolidate the reports of the sectoral committees in a holistic process of scrutinising the BFP by the Budget Committee. Finally, the Budget Committee would present a report to the House for approval of the BFP as per section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA).

    (b) The report of a sectoral committee on the BFP should be written (not oral), signed and initialled in accordance with rule 201(1), that is, by at least one-third of all the members of the committee. Furthermore, rule 202, on minority reports, applies to a report of a sectoral committee on the BFP.

    (c) The report of a sectoral committee on the BFP should be laid on the Table, before the Committee on Budget, in accordance with rule 201(1) and rule 144.

    (d) Presentation of a report of a sectoral committee to the Committee on Budget would be by its chairperson, deputy chairperson, or any other member designated by the committee for the purpose. However, any other member of a sectoral committee would not be precluded from attending that meeting of the Budget Committee in accordance with rule 203.

    (e) Following rule 144(2), it is the Budget Committee that would be required to lay on the Table, before the House, the reports of the sectoral committees on the BFP, as annexure to its report and minutes.

    (f) Parliament should desist from accepting documents that do not conform to the prescribed formats, and should ensure that budget information submitted is accurate, comprehensive and complete. This applies to the Budget Framework Paper, ministerial policy statements and others.

    (g) Parliament should not accept any new changes in the resource envelope that are outside the levels approved by Parliament, without a substantive motion.

    (h) The Public Finance Management Act should be amended to include a rule necessitating the submission of the approved BFP, taking into account the amendments to the BFP approved on 1st February under section 9(8) of the PFM Act. It is critical that the approved BFP be submitted to Parliament to improve on the reasonableness in economic revenue and expenditure forecasts as well as transparency on the part of the Executive.

    (i) The Budget Committee is urged to take improved measures to implement rule 170(2), which provides that chairpersons of standing and sectoral committees are ex officio members of the budget committee. For instance, the chairpersons ought to be invited to all meetings of the Budget Committee.

    (j) The committee recommends capacity building for Members to have a comprehensive appreciation of the structure of the BFP, its aim and purpose, as well as the role of Parliament in the budget making process

Suspension of Chairpersons from their Second Committees

(a) 	The committee recommends that the status quo be maintained as provided in rule 154(3), whereby each Member belongs to not more than two committees; the practice being that one is a sectoral committee and the other a standing committee. Additionally, chairpersons and deputy chairpersons remain ex officio members of the business committee (rule 173(2)) and Budget Committee (rule 170(2)).

(b) 	Amend the Rules of Procedure to provide for more effective measures to deter and punish absenteeism from committees. In so doing, provide a means to treat a chairperson or deputy chairperson with leniency if she or he is absent from the activities of his or her second committee.

(c) 	The committee reiterates the Rt Hon. Speaker’s ruling to the effect that parliamentary fora should not convene meetings at the same time that committees are expected to be meeting

Sanctions for Failure to Report on Assignments

The committee recommends amendment of the rules that mandate the House to proceed with handling matters that the responsible committees have failed to complete, to provide an option for the matter to be referred to a select committee, in order to enable the House be facilitated by a report.

Proposal to Review Rule 11 on Parliamentary Commissioners

    (a) The committee recommends amendment of the Rules of Procedure, in the following respects:

    i) With regard to nomination of the candidates for election -
    a) to amend the provision in rule 11(4) so that it reads the same as that in section 2 (2b) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, which clearly refers to nomination of candidates for election, which nomination is the responsibility of the Government and Opposition sides.
    b) to replace the reference to “re-designation” in rule 11(5) with “re-election”.

ii) 	With regard to the time of constitution of the Commission, the rules should be amended to clarify that this should happen during the “first meeting” of the first session of a new Parliament

Other Proposals for Amendment of the Rules of Procedure

Honourable members with proposals for amendment of the Rules of Procedure with respect to matters that were not referred to the committee by the House are advised to proceed under rule 68 of the Rules of Procedure, to move a motion on notice for amendment of the rules, accompanied by a draft of the proposed amendment, so that the motion may substantively referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair. Honourable members, you have listened to the report from the committee on the different presentations that were made to it. I now propose the question for your debate that the report of the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda be adopted. 

That is the motion for your debate. We will not start the debate now given the time. We will continue with this tomorrow. Honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at two o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 May 2019 at 2.00p.m.) 
