



Wednesday, 20 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just one issue to communicate. I received a letter of appreciation to Members of Parliament from the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, Office of the Prime Minister, for the resolution to include the Bunyoro-Kitara history in the new curriculum.

They say that the people of Bunyoro warmly associate with the Members of Parliament in rejecting the Ministry of Education and Sports’ explanation on the exclusion of their history on account that there is a new system to inculcate self-discovery for learners to acquire knowledge by themselves. Therefore, it is their hope that the National Curriculum Development Centre will expedite the implementation of the parliamentary resolution to restore calm and end anxiety, which the act of exclusion had created in Bunyoro. It is signed by the Prime Minister, Andrew K. Byakutaga.

Honourable members, there are just a few matters of national concern. I want to remind Members, again, that there are issues which come up and they are not of national concern; some are just constituency issues and they should be brought as questions. Therefore, I may not take all of them.

2.55
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to the inequality in enforcing the ban on holding prayers in places of worship during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

Madam Speaker, we remember that on 22 March 2020, an outbreak of the highly infectious coronavirus was declared in Uganda following similar outbreaks in other countries around the world.
Following the confirmation of a positive case of COVID-19 in Uganda, Government issued a number of guidelines in order to contain the spread of the virus by, among others, closing all places of worship and learning centres and banning large public gatherings. This was contained in rule 9 of the Public Health (Control of COVID-19) Rules, 2020. 

However, I note with concern that whereas there was a total ban on prayers in churches, mosques and in open places, the regulation is not uniformly enforced in all parts of Uganda. Certain congregations in Kampala, for instance, have continued to broadcast prayers from their respective places of worship while in upcountry districts like in Lira, and in the whole of Lango sub-region, the police have banned this; they have even arrested some priests and stopped them from accessing the church buildings in order to broadcast mass.

This inequality in enforcing the ban on holding prayers in places of worship gives credence to the view that there are double standards in enforcing the COVID-19 regulations in urban areas and rural areas.

Madam Speaker, my prayers to Government are: One, can Government ease the ban on holding prayers in places of worship and make it uniformly applied in all parts of Uganda.

Secondly, can the priests and a few members, maybe 10 in number, be allowed to attend worship for the sole purpose of broadcasting mass and other religious teachings on their respective days of worship - for Christians on Sunday, Muslims on Friday, and Seventh Day Adventists on Saturday.

Thirdly, while we appreciate the effort of His Excellency the President in giving out the guidelines for the nation to follow, religious leaders, especially Christians, are complaining; they are asking why he cannot start with prayers and then end with the national anthem because Uganda is well known to be a religious country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance is. I do not know who can help us on the management of prayers during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. Hon. Bahati, is there anyone who can guide us on how prayers are managed during the lockdown?

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for raising these important issues. We will look at them in the task force and then find an appropriate minister to come and respond to them.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Galiwango, two minutes.

3.01
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance in regard to the communication that the President gave us while easing the lockdown. 

Madam Speaker, we are very happy that our children are now going back to school. However, we would like some clarification on certain issues. We have some of our children who have been going to school using boda bodas, for example, and they travel very long distances, but boda bodas, as of now, are not allowed to carry anybody. Can the ministry advise us on the way forward for these children who have been using boda bodas to go to school?

Secondly, we have students in our villages who wake up at 5.00 a.m. and walk long distances so that they are able to reach school early. The curfew stops at 6.00 a.m., yet if they begin their journey 6.00 a.m., they will reach school late. We do not know how this is going to be handled. These students also leave school late and reach home at 8.00 p.m., which is already curfew time. How is this going to be handled? Our children need to be safe. We do not want them to be beaten by the Local Defence Unit (LDU) people because they will have to walk long distances to reach home. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we are happy that our children are going to be given masks before they go to school. However, I would like to know if they are going to be given one mask each. If it is one mask and they have to keep washing it every night, it may not drain well by morning. Are they going to have extras? If not, I pray that the ministry sensitises parents so they can secure some extra masks for their children.

Finally, I would like to know how final-year learners who live across the borders are going to be catered for. They are also supposed to report to school and sit for their examinations. These include primary 7, senior 4 and senior 6 candidates, and also final-year students of higher institutions of learning. How are they going to be catered for, given the fact that the buses are all – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the fact that there will be no public means of transport permitted at the border towns, how are they going to manage? Also, how are our children from the border towns going to come to Kampala or go to Mbale or any other areas to study when public means of transport are not accessible in those districts? I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, still on the same note, I just wanted to add to what my colleague, hon. Galiwango, has submitted. 

In the 40 border districts that were mentioned, we have students who cross the border to go to school. In Busia, for example, some students cross from Kenya to study in schools in Uganda. We wanted the President to highlight that. 

Again, nursery schools have lower, middle and top class and every nursery pupil in top class is considered a candidate. The President kept quiet about them, yet they would be moving from nursery school, which is under early childhood education, to the primary section, and this is a candidate class. What is the Government’s position on that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports, could you please advise us.   

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Galiwango for the concerns raised about the transportation of our children, masks and foreign students. 

Madam Speaker, soon after His Excellency the President gave guidance over the opening of schools, my ministry got engaged in quite a number of meetings, trying to develop the standard operating procedures, which will guide the operations of the schools. Very soon, the ministry will issue a statement, which will be presented here, giving guidelines on how the students will be transported, how the masks will be handled as well as foreign students.

I would like to request that we be allowed some time to finalise on the guidelines before we come back to share them with Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope you will not go to the media centre. These days, Government has a habit of going to address the country at the Uganda Media Centre instead of coming here. We want assurance that you will actually come and address the country on those issues from here.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the ministry, I would like to assure this august House that once we have developed the guidelines, we will come back here and share them with Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: What about graduates of nursery schools? 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, that will be part of the guidelines. When the time comes for us to share with Parliament, the issue of nursery children in top class will be addressed.      

3.09
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

First of all, I want to express my disappointment because many of us who have been concerned with this matter are running out of patience. Two years ago, on 3 April 2018, this Parliament passed a resolution to approve a bilateral agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan to pay Ugandan traders who traded with South Sudan but were not paid. That resolution was approved on 3 April 2018. The Clerk to Parliament communicated with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a response on that. A year passed, there was no response. 

On 25 March, the Clerk to Parliament again wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development drawing his attention to the resolution, which had been passed by Parliament re-affirming the resolution approved on 3 April 2018. I think there was a list of about 23 companies that had been verified by both countries. In that letter, the Clerk requested the minister to come and give the status of that issue to Parliament on 31 March 2020. 

Madam Speaker, we know we are faced with the COVID-19 pandemic but that was a directive from Parliament which, up to date, has not been implemented. My prayer is that Parliament takes a final decision on that matter because as we face the pandemic, the country really needs marketing for grains, yet most of our grain traders have been crippled because of that indebtedness, which was caused by bad trade with South Sudan. 

The Government of Uganda has already entered into an agreement to resolve that issue, and we would like to see our traders back into business. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to clarify to us the status of the Ugandan traders who sold their maize and other grains to South Sudan. What is the position of Government in regard to that matter? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the same matter where we had a committee or it is different? Where is the substantive Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? The last time he came here, he said he would come to answer this issue. Since then, he has disappeared. Hon. Bahati, where is your minister? 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I think this issue has been raised on the Floor of this House almost a hundred times. Yes, Parliament appropriated Shs 76 billion to help those who suffered under the South Sudan trade. When the minister was here, he was asked about it, although he did not come to make a substantive response - you had requested that he comes. 

The official position is that you give us time, since we still have one month to go before the end of the financial year, and we see how to sort out this matter. Maybe we can come back here tomorrow to give a final say about this matter because it has been going on for long and we do not want to continue debating this issue forever.

THE SPEAKER: So, are you coming tomorrow with an answer? Is the minister coming?

MR BAHATI: We will come tomorrow to answer this question.

3.14
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the plight of the people living along the shores of Lake Victoria. 

Whereas it is true that some people settled along the shores of Lake Victoria within a radius that is not acceptable in law, and Government has continuously asserted that they should get out of that place, the problem of the rising water levels on Lake Victoria and the increased rains have turned this situation into a crisis. It is so bad to the extent that even the designated landing sites have been badly affected. 

This situation has not only resulted into displacing people but it is also going to impact the fisheries subsector. This is because the state of these landing sites, at the moment, does not meet the minimum standards acceptable in the international markets where we have been selling a lot of fish. Secondly, some communities that have been staying within those areas have been displaced. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that the Government considers this as a crisis situation and assesses it to find a solution in order to avoid the negative impact to both the people and the economy – (Interruption)

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, the other time I was saying that while we pray here, I think we need fasting also. The issue of the waters is something that is very dangerous. The other time when the President was speaking, he said even the national task force should consider the islanders. Donations are being made, my brother is crying here – Sometimes I think it becomes a crime, Madam Speaker, when you direct something and it is not followed.

The President has gone to Kasese. It is my humble appeal that the Government should move to the waters and assess the situation there. People are hungry, people are displaced, they have nowhere to go. We are giving out food and helping others but we are doing nothing for them. 

It is my humble appeal that, Madam Speaker, you direct that Government should come and give us a statement tomorrow on how they are going to handle the issue of the islands before our people perish.  Thank you.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to specifically mention Kiyindi Landing Site, – (Interruption) – The roads have been cut off, like the one going to Busagazi Peninsular. It is the only access road that they have and if it is not worked on, people will still be cut off. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from you. In your preamble, you alluded to the fact that people have encroached on areas where, by law, they are not supposed to settle. Do your prayers extend to those people you alluded to? It would be against public policy if you are making a case for people who engage in such things. That is why I am seeking a clarification from you. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR DAVID MUTEBI: I would like to reaffirm that much as these people may have gone there while the Government was looking, they remain citizens for whom we can find solutions. To start with, we can consider places that are occupied legally but are uninhabitable.

3.20
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has made a decision to displace people settled in 68 villages at landing sites along Lake Albert right from Ntoroko up to Pakwach. The 68 villages to be displaced are those that exist legally with stamps, local leadership and Government institutions such as schools and health centres. The Government said that this is a mission to avert cross-border intrusion of the Congolese to the Ugandan side during this coronavirus pandemic. However, the Government has got soldiers who can guard the borders without necessarily displacing people who have nowhere to go. 

The Government has issued an ultimatum of 48 hours for people to vacate the said villages. There are no arrangements put in place by the Government to resettle the thousands of people being displaced. Madam Speaker, this appears to be an indirect eviction because these are villages, which exist legally with stamps, local council leadership and Government institutions. Our people are panicking; they are in a state of confusion. They have nowhere to go and they are being forced out of their villages with no option provided by the Government – (Interjection) – Madam Speaker, let me receive information from hon. Kaahwa as I conclude. (Interruption)

MS KAAHWA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I represent Kikuube District and we have landing sites on Lake Albert. Government is closing five landing sites in Kikuube District: Kachunde Landing Site, Busigi Landing Site, Kyenyanja Landing Site, Ususa Landing Site and Kiina Landing Site. 

There are so many people who live at these landing sites and these people hail from different parts of the country such as Kampala, Iganga, Arua and others. These people have nowhere to go. They have families; the women have children. They are stranded with no means of transport; they cannot move. I therefore request the Government to give these people time – at least one month – to prepare and leave these places peacefully. Maybe they should also be given free transport since the lockdown is still on. Thank you.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, these people are being displaced not because there are floods but because of the coronavirus pandemic. The Government is saying there is cross-border intrusion and that they are trying to stop the Congolese from entering into Uganda. However, the Government has soldiers to guard these borders and not necessarily displace the people.

My prayer to the Government is to stop this indirect eviction of people, and this House demands a proper explanation from Government on this important matter. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought these issues were similar but they are not. Concerning the rising water levels and the disappearance of the landing sites, I saw the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; I do not know whether there is anything you can say about this. Are you in a position to say something?

The second issue is on the eviction of fishing villages from landing sites. I do not know who is responsible for the evictions. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, tell us what to do with the people who have been displaced from the fishing villages.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start with the rising levels of our waters. 

The Government had all along left people to settle on the banks of rivers and lakes, to create economic opportunities for them. However, while we appreciate the disruptions that are being created by the rising levels of our waters and climate change, which is a worldwide phenomenon, allow me to inform the House that actually, Government cannot look on as people are being swallowed by water. It is on those grounds that we are saying the people must leave, so that the mistake of having settled at the river banks, within the radius that was decreed by Government, does not affect them, and their lives and properties are not exposed to catastrophe again.

On the villages that are on the border, it is not actually an eviction as defined in our laws. It is a displacement, which is different from an eviction. An eviction arises where there is a legal decree that people must leave that land. However, if the Government is rearranging the affairs to ensure that public health is preserved, borders are preserved and protected, it is not eviction as such but a displacement.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, want to state – (Mr Wadri rose_) - I will accept the clarification -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Whereas I accept the explanation you are giving, that it is in order to ensure the safety of our people along the common borders as far as their health is concerned, the clarification I would like to seek is, why is it selective?

Madam Speaker, according to the presidential directive, it affects 40 districts around Uganda’s borders, yet the issue here is only from Ntoroko up to Pakwach. It excludes other borders with other countries like Congo, South Sudan, Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania. It is selective. If it is about health protection, why doesn’t it apply to every border of this country but only applies to those other areas? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR WAIRA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, you are aware of Government’s fishing plant in Bugoto Landing Site in Mayuge. That fishing plant, which cost billions, has been swallowed by rising levels of water. If Government could put up such a project before even doing an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), why would the same Government blame people living near the lakes and say they are there by mistake? Government has not looked at its own mistake of putting up a multibillion project that has been swallowed by the water.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving way. I have two issues that I would like the minister to clarify.

One, people were settled in those affected areas and Government has been looking on for the last 35 years or so. In 1998, you passed a legislation called the Land Act, where you provided for lawful and bona fide occupants; lawful occupants being those who were settled by Government and whose eviction needs to be compensated. 

Secondly, you have talked about displacement; do you have a resettlement action plan to show where you are going to resettle those people and the facilities that have been put in place to ensure that their lives continue uninterrupted?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you may also answer why it is being done now, during this COVID-19 situation. I thought everything was to remain as is during the lockdown. Secondly, how are you transporting these people to wherever you want to take them, if there is anywhere you are taking them?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, those are difficult questions -(Laughter)- I ask for permission to come back and give a comprehensive statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when do you hope to come back?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, if you permit me, I will come back on Tuesday, next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Tuesday, next week.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, allow me to add something to what my colleague has just shared.

As you aware, we are faced with three problems right now. The first was locusts, followed by COVID-19, and now we have this rising water levels of our lakes. The rising water levels is basically caused by two reasons. One, Lake Kyoga was not drained or cleaned for over four years and some floating islands were not removed. That made the lake overflow into Lake Victoria and others. –(Interjections)- Secondly, human activity has affected –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Allow her to finish.

MS ADOA: Human activity has also affected our lakes. You find a majority of our people encroaching on the wetlands, including here in Kampala, like in Port Bell where water went into rich people’s sitting rooms and compounds. Right now, it has affected us as a country.

At a time when we are fighting COVID-19, the rising water has also come and there is no way we can leave our people to get into problems. For the last two weeks, for example, we have lost more than five people in Serere District where I come from, when they sneaked into the lake. Right now, Lake Kyoga is on holiday, so when they sneaked into the lake, they found that the water they expected to be at a certain level was not at that level and they ended up drowning in the lake. 

There are very many ministries involved. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Water and Environment; Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees; and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries are involved.

We have been having meetings to try to see how we can resettle those who have got into big problems, like the island that you heard that was submerged. We also have a challenge of settling the people who went to the landing sites for fishing and ended up owning the places around the lakes, which was illegal. However, even when it is illegal, we have to make sure that they are put somewhere. We have been resettling some of those people. Right now, the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness is handling the issue of Kasese; we are trying to resettle the people. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the reason we are trying to resettle these people or trying to ask people to leave the landing sites and wetlands is because their lives are in danger. Sometimes, some of them wake up and find that even their houses are full of water. So, it is better to ask our people around the lake to leave before the water becomes a problem to them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have raised your issues many times; they are pending. Let us do other things. Hon. Songa, you had an issue to raise. You should speak quickly on it and then we go to other work.

3.37
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On the 16th of April, I came here and raised the issue of an escalating situation caused by the war in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Yesterday, the situation worsened. If you look at page 32 of the New Vision newspaper of yesterday, it was also reported how the displaced persons or refugees are trying their best to cross to Uganda. Actually, a few of them – about 2,000 – crossed to Zombo and our soldiers took them back to DRC. I do not know whether that is allowed under international law. 

However, we know that we are facing the crisis caused by COVID-19 and these people are now camped behind Lendu Forest in Zombo District. They have no shelter and food. Many of them were killed on the DR Congo side and their houses were burnt. This situation has created a kind of dilemma. We are managing COVID-19 and His Excellency gave directives; how do we handle this dilemma to ensure that the women and children who are running away from this war are helped?

This war, as you have seen, is not ethnic; it is not an ethnic conflict. There are big people behind that war in the DR Congo and also outside DR Congo and it is affecting us here in Uganda. We really – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR BIYIKA: Madam Speaker, related to that, last week we also witnessed a land conflict which affected about 100 people, again in Zombo. My prayers are therefore as follows:

The Government of Uganda should gazette a place to resettle these displaced Congolese in Zombo District and supply them with food. They should ensure that there is shelter and other humanitarian support and also inform the United Nations agencies. Alternatively, they should be resettled in DR Congo to be taken care of by our soldiers on the Congolese side, in agreement with the Congo Government.

Government should send more troops and logistics to the border areas of Zombo, Nebbi and Pakwach to manage this situation. The roads are also in bad shape; the Ministry of Works and Transport should really pay attention to the road at the border, so that issues of surveillance, security and movement of logistics and goods can be quickened. The bad road will be a major factor hindering any support we want to give. Therefore, the road from Nebbi to Zeu to Vurra should be given priority because it will help to ease this situation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Prime Minister’s people here. Ministry of Health.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with our brothers and sisters from DR Congo for the war situation that is escalating over there.

Last week, I was in the West Nile sub-region and I met a number of leaders within that region, including those from Zombo, which my brother is talking about, and from my own district, Moyo. The district is already having the problem of the refugees and the escalating war which is forcing the people to run into Uganda.

However, looking at the situation currently caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is really a threat to all nations, and given the fact that our borders have been closed - we are not allowing movement of persons in and out of our boundaries - it has made it very difficult to intervene in such a situation where we needed to put a humanitarian face. We discussed this over and over again last week with the leadership there. I made it very clear to them that much as we sympathise with the mothers and children, - the population which is rushing to Uganda – the situation of COVID-19 cannot allow us to receive these people in Uganda.

As we much know the situation in South Sudan is really a big threat to us, likewise the one in DRC is also a threat. However, Madam Speaker, this discussion is probably to be handled at a higher level because it involves the heads of state, since the directive for the closure of our borders is from the head of state.

The Prime Minister might be in position to give a definitive response. However, for now, the response I gave to those people last week was that we are not in position to open the doors. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall ask the Prime Minister to come and give us advice on the way forward because the situation is real. We have to do something about it. So, let us ask the Prime Minister to come and update us next week on how to handle those people.

3.43
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make an additional contribution to hon. Connie Galiwango’s contribution. You know very well what many parents are going through. Many of them have been laid off from work. Some who have been doing small businesses are completely off, yet the term will soon begin as announced by the President.

Madam Speaker, there are some parents who still have school fees balances and when the new term begins, they will be required to pay those fees balances. I would like to inquire from the minister how the ministry is handling that. Have they had some engagements with head teachers on how that situation is going to be managed? I ask this because I see we are going to have a very difficult moment regarding fees. I would like to hear from the minister on how they are going to handle that matter. Thank you.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, colleague, for the concern. School fees is one of the issues we are trying to discuss because many parents have expressed similar concerns. We have not agreed on the position. As I said earlier on, once we have come up with a position, we will be informing the country. 

However, the idea behind this is that every registered candidate this year should go back to school in an environment that is conducive for learning. That is why we need quite some time before we come back to this House with the agreed position. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is okay, provided you come back before the schools start. We should know what to do before the children start.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I have already committed my ministry to come back here and share with you the guidelines before schools start.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness here? Okay, he is in Kasese. The matter will remain on the Order Paper for tomorrow.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTION TAKEN TO ENFORCE ADHERENCE TO BUILDING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOLLOWING THE NUMEROUS ACCIDENTS OCCURRING AT BUILDING SITES, THE STATUS OF COMPENSATION OF AFFECTED FAMILIES, AND STEPS TAKEN TO STOP THE OCCURRENCE OF SUCH ACCIDENTS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport was not here yesterday and he is still not here today.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT PLANS TO PROCURE FACE MASKS FOR ALL UGANDANS

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a statement to Parliament on the plan of Government to procure face masks for all Ugandans.  

As a matter of an update to the country, the Ministry of Health would like to inform the public that a lot of progress has been made during the 21 days of lockdown and thereafter the 14 days’ extension. We have achieved a lot. We now have a further extension of the lockdown period, until the 4th of June 2020. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda, as you may recall, registered an index case on Saturday, 21 March 2020 and to date, the country has got a total of 135 confirmed Ugandan cases of COVID-19 in addition to a total of 129 confirmed cases of foreign truck drivers. To date, 55 have fully recovered from COVID-19 and currently, there are 30 cases that are actively admitted and we are looking after them. Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have heard the preamble many times; just go to the issue of the masks.

DR MORIKU: Okay. Thank you very much for the guidance. Madam Speaker, the masks are garments that cover both the mouth and nose. In healthcare, masks are worn to protect either the user or the environment of the user, where there may be other people, against contamination by infectious agents.

Madam Speaker, there are two types of masks broadly. We have the medical masks and the filtering respiratory masks. These are made of unwoven fabric and they are designed to filter out about 95 per cent of aerosols - those are small particles less than or equal to five microns in size.

The rationale for using masks in the community is to prevent infected people from dispersing the virus as they cough, sneeze, talk or breathe. It is currently thought that the virus shedding peak is about two days before a person develops symptoms. As such, people without symptoms or just developing symptoms could infect many people before they know they are infected. With the current pandemic, everybody is a potentially infectious person.

Madam Speaker, the rationale for using masks is based on very many experiences from very many countries and many international organisations, including the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). 

The plan for Government of Uganda to procure face masks for all Ugandans - The Government of Uganda will follow the same procedure for award of contracts to all manufacturing companies that might have the capacity to produce the required face masks according to the laws of this country. 

Currently, the available capacity assured by Uganda Manufacturers Association members that are engaged in textiles goes up to 800,000 per day. That will translate to the number of masks that we need in the country. There is also a proposal to mobilise other small-scale producers under Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) and other local government agencies. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health will not only engage Uganda Manufacturers Association members who have got manufacturing companies in textiles, but other small manufacturing companies will also be engaged in this process.

For that matter, allow me to take this opportunity to thank the President, Parliament of Uganda and all the healthcare workers for all the gains we have achieved as a country.

As I conclude, allow me to appreciate the general public for adhering to the 35 presidential directives and guidelines by the Ministry of Health. On behalf of the Ministry of Health, we wish to appreciate the public and private sectors for their continuous support to the health sector. 

The Ministry of Health is in the process of procuring face masks for the public and has already given guidelines on the standards of face masks to be used. That is why I gave a preamble describing the standards. In the interim, we encourage those who are able to make face masks according to the set standards and to procure them privately, to do so.

The ministry continues to appeal to the general public to remain calm and practice the preventive measures; to wash hands with water and soap or use an alcohol-based sanitizer, to maintain social distance and always wear a mask when you are in public. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like to know how much money you are going to use buying masks for Ugandans. Secondly, did we budget for these masks?


3.50
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister. Last evening when I listened to His Excellency the President giving directives, the issue of public transport and private vehicles coming on the road was hinged to wearing face masks, which will be provided under his directive. He indeed told us that it is Nytil, Uganda, which is going to manufacture these face masks.

I would like to ask the minister; if it has taken so long for Government to pass the money, which we appropriated here to the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and district health officers, how long will it take this same Government to provide face masks for 42 million Ugandans? 

We are all looking to that time when we will all have them so that public transport and other businesses open and the public can move freely as the President directed. If it has taken so long for you to wire money to the districts, how about manufacturing and distribution of these facemasks?

3.52
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are dealing with a very serious matter but I have made an observation that the Front Bench has mostly Ministers of State.

For the benefit of my good friend, the minister, under the law, it is the National Medical stores (NMS), which is supposed to procure medicine and medical supplies. For your information, the National Medical Stores had issued a call-off order for manufacturers of masks under restricted bidding, whereby all those manufacturers who are known had been invited to participate in the process. Then there was a cancellation.

What happened is that there is a presidential directive to the effect that the process of manufacturing masks goes to Nytil, in case you are also not aware.

What is in issue is, whereas we do not have a problem with Nytil participating in the production, our contention is that they do not have the capacity to produce the masks required for all Ugandans within the specified time. For that matter, we are saying that guidelines should be developed by the ministry such that they are known and so that whoever has the capacity and competence to produce masks participates in the process.

This is what I think you should be responding to rather than the other issues that you are delving into. I beg to submit.

3.54
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister on two issues. One, you talked about engaging Uganda Manufacturers Association to make sure that these masks are produced. If it is just engaging them yet the President talked of two weeks within which the masks are to be distributed, aren’t we late?
Secondly, you talked about Nytil, which the President has highly talked about and recommended. At one point he said, “I don’t want any other mask apart from the one coming from Nytil.” I am happy that he changed his statement yesterday. Unfortunately, I did not watch the presentation.

You said that Nytil has capacity of producing 880,000 masks per day. Will we really catch up with time? 

Finally, I saw something on social media - maybe you will help me clarify - about the challenges that Nytil was facing regarding one of their machines that manufactures the face masks. Is this true or not? Should it cause worry? Thank you. 

3.56
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the minister’s statement, I thought she was going to talk about the companies that they talked about yesterday. The Minister of State for Health, hon. Nabbanja, told us that they were in a meeting with over 20 companies. I have not heard any company that has been mentioned.

We would not expect the Executive or Cabinet to disregard Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) rules under the guise of COVID-19. As we try to boost and also encourage locally produced goods - Yesterday we were urging Government to ensure that even our small companies; the groups of ladies all over the country – This is a very simple thing that can be made by many Ugandans and they can earn money out of it. 

However, it seems like they want to ring-fence a certain company for their own objectives and that is very bad in as far as Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) is concerned.

When it comes to schools, I wonder how they are going to distribute masks to schools when we know that they are talking of one mask per person. Some of us who are in schools know that we cannot give a student one pair of uniform because we know the repercussions. How can they say they are going to give Ugandans only one piece? In any case, if that piece is lost, definitely one will be in danger.

I think that the Ministry of Education and Sports can distribute these masks through education institutions so that when schools open, they get them from school rather than from any other place, Madam Speaker. 

3.58
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, yesterday, I was blessed to learn, through hon. Nabbanja, that there is a team that sat and turned themselves into purchasing officers and called upon companies that are going to supply face masks to Ugandans. Therefore, I would like to inquire from the minister whether what the President called frontline districts have special masks.

The way the national task force is handling COVID-19, the people at the borders are facing challenges; all the markets are closed. According to what the President said, even after the lockdown is lifted, the border people will still not be allowed to move. I do not know whether we shall fly; I therefore, need to know what the Government affirmative action is for the people at the borders.

I would like to use the same time to say that in April, the Committee on Health closed the food produce markets in Busia and as I talk right, cereals are rotting in the markets. I have requested the Government many times to give us at least five days for the businesspeople to remove their cereals so that they do not rot and begin growing but there is no answer. I need your help, Madam Speaker.

Lastly, we heard that a Chinese billionaire called Jack Ma gave a donation of face masks that were rejected in most African countries. I would like to get a statement from the Government concerning the masks that came to Uganda. Where are those masks? If they are here, are they not dangerous according to what we heard from Tanzania? They rejected them together with other countries in Africa. However, our Government has kept silent about them - (Member timed out.)

4.00
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister in her statement says that the normal procurement procedure will be followed. However, yesterday the same minister stated here that a meeting was held. She has not come out clearly to let us know how those who attended yesterday’s meeting were invited. We really want to know whether the procedure is being followed and whether there is going to be fairness. Thank you.

4.01
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened very well when the minister made the statement about the face masks. She said that Uganda Manufacturers Association will be able to manufacture about 800,000 masks per day, which means that they will need 52 days to produce face masks for the population of 42 million people in Uganda.

Schools and public transport according to the President’s speech yesterday will open in 14 days. Where will the country get masks for about 30,800,000 people?

Honourable minister, there is an increase in domestic violence in our country because of COVID-19. We need also to plan for health workers especially the psychiatrists to go to all our hospitals in order to counsel the people.

4.03
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker and honourable members, usually when hon. Moriku, the Minister of State for Health, comes to Parliament, she gives a well-researched paper with good information but this time I think she has faulted a bit - for the first time, she has slipped. She has not given us clear indication how these masks are going to be made available to 42 million Ugandans as the President directed. 

And, whether she really took into consideration if the timeline of 4 June will be met by the production of Nytil as the President guided yesterday that they will be the ones producing these masks. Assuming Nytil plus all other companies - the 20 that hon. Nabbanja talked about - produce 12,000 masks every day; assuming they worked three shifts producing these masks every day, that is 36,000. If you divide 36,000 by 42 million, you get 1167 days, that is almost three years. (Laughter)

Now if you add on this lockdown, every 21 days or 14 days, when shall we ever end? Hon. Moriku, please be very clear to us on the timeline and whether this deadline of providing masks to every Ugandan will be met - (Member timed out.)



4.06
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is the quality of the masks that we are manufacturing. 

Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a virus and when we talk about cotton textile, I do not know whether it is going to help us in any way to prevent this virus; otherwise, we could be creating another problem. I need to be guided on the quality and the capacity of the people who are going to make these masks. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.08
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, Uganda has 1.4 refugees currently in western Uganda, West Nile and other areas in Rwamanz, Koboko, Yumbe, Obongi and so on. We have categorised these refugees as urban and those that have settled in the community.

It has been realised that often than not, these refuges sneak from their area of settlement and go to their home countries for food especially the ones from Palorinya in Obongi District. Due to the insecurity, they sneak from Sudan at night and mix with the rest of the population that has settled. This has really caused a lot of problems in the sense that it has become very difficult for the RDCs to control the movement of these refugees. How will you be able to give out face masks to refugees who are always on the move? Thank you very much.

4.10
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government for not keeping a deaf ear over this issue of the great need of masks for the communities. 

My humble request is that this time round, we need to learn from our past mistakes. Sometimes, we come here with very good ideas and policies but at the stage of implementation, we spoil everything. As soon as we get these masks or if we choose to give them out, I am requesting that let us work with the local leaders like the LCIs. These local councils know everybody and can easily manage everything. 

I would like to give an example of the distribution of food. Madam Speaker, in some local councils, some citizens were left out simply because the local leaders were not involved. Even those who were involved were not empowered enough and they were not listened to. You find someone saying because so-and-so is living in a beautiful house – these people are tenants and sometimes, you find two families sharing a house. That does not mean that they can afford to pay that house, they own it.

Madam Speaker, I request that this time round, when they are issuing out masks, please, let them work with different local leaders; the youth leaders, the women leaders, the LCI councils and everybody. Thank you very much.

4.13
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out from the honourable minister, I studied some little science and I also do a lot of reading. I would like the minister to clarify for us the quality of masks in terms of effectiveness in viral spread prevention; the one I am wearing, the N95 that hon. Bahati is wearing and the one Nytil is manufacturing, which hon. Mbwatekamwa is wearing.

Science shows that these pure textile masks are not effective in protecting people against the coronavirus – the research so far done in protecting people against the coronavirus - unless there is a filter in between the cloth sheets. 
Therefore, I would like to find out from the minister, which kind of masks Nytil is manufacturing and whether it is going to protect the Ugandans we intend to protect. They may be thinking that they are protected when they are not. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.15
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After sensitisation from hon. Patrick Nsamba yesterday, I decided to come in with local content, but I am not certain if it is so effective. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, for supporting the ordinary producers.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, my biggest concern is; we are talking about masks being given to communities but before thinking about the community, are the frontline health-workers well catered for? When you move in our constituencies like Kasambya, there are no masks. The ministry has only concentrated on regional referral hospitals, where they are expecting maybe to put people who are suffering from COVID-19 but they have neglected all the health workers down there.

Honourable minister, we have seen people donating Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) but where are they going and whom are you keeping these masks for? Why shouldn’t you first think about health workers? I thank you.

4.17
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through you, I would like to get clarification from the minister about the two contradicting directives so far received. Last night, the President issued a directive that masks must be manufactured by Nytil and the Government must purchase them.

Today, she has said that those who are able can go ahead and purchase the right standard of masks. Which directive should we follow? If you are saying the right standard of masks, it is this time that you should tell the country the right sample we. If we get that sample and you are directing the country to buy - those who are able - why can’t you drop that purchase as a Government so that we can save those numerous billions of shillings, which we are likely to spend? 

Let the country buy the right masks so that we beat the deadline of 14 days and the country is unlocked. These are the clarifications I would like you to focus on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the minister can actually lay that mask here.

4.19
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Procurement has been decentralised and a number of things are procured at the local government. I would like to find out why this time masks are being centralised when even at district levels, we have DHOs who can guide districts to procure masks that can be used by local governments or by people within the districts.

Secondly, I come from a border district. We still have porous borders and some people have families across the border and they still cross. I don’t know what Government is planning on how to supply masks to those who cross from Kenya to Uganda.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I know Ugandans are very innovative. Why doesn’t Government just declare that people must wear face masks; and they give us right kind of masks that we should wear so that people who can afford are able to purchase masks. We will also support local governments to be able to procure instead of centralising everything, as decentralisation is being killed? I thank you. 

4.21
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister, Dr Joyce Moriku. First of all, we need to know the load we are carrying. How many masks does an individual need in a day? Should we use the same mask every day until the end of the lockdown? When is the lockdown ending? (Laughter)
If we go by the statement presented by the honourable minister, Government is not well prepared to handle the matter of the masks. 

Secondly, in my opinion, this is a mass problem and it also requires a mass approach, where many people get involved at the same time. That is the only way we can beat the deadline of maybe two weeks. 

Madam Speaker, we are talking about face masks made from a factory. Why is the Government not promoting the industries, which are spread outside Kampala? We have Pakwach Ginnery, Rhino Camp Ginnery and we produce cotton there. I visited Rhino Camp Ginnery and it has cotton. However, the ginnery has been run down. Government should use this opportunity to make our industry work to help us in West Nile respond to this situation by producing masks for ourselves.

4.24
MR PADDY KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, from your submission, it is quite clear that Nytil cannot produce the required masks within the required time. I wonder; when you look around, we are all wearing masks bought from the pharmacies. You are also aware that most of these masks are imported. All imported masks undergo the required tests by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Where do you want the importers of these masks to put what they have already imported?

Secondly, from your submission and yesterday’s directive by the President, this will be effective from the 26th May when public transport will be opened to the masses. However, previously, there was another directive that face masks become mandatory by the 19th May, which was yesterday. Isn’t that a contradiction? I seek clarification on that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister. However, I am a bit confused. As the honourable member has stated, the first directive was that in order to go to the public by 19th May, one had to wear a face mask. As I talk, my people in Rubanda and Kabale are being arrested for failure to comply with that directive. 

I am again shocked that, that directive was given without technical specifications. If you knew you had not given technical specifications for the right masks, how did you expect the public to think of what to do and buy the right masks? This is very unfortunate. 

We should not come up with regulations which we are aware are not going to be implemented because of reasons A, B, C or D. We know we are in a state of emergency; we know there can be emergency procurements but still, within the law, certain steps must be taken for you to make emergency procurements.

Madam Speaker, even for those specifications she has given, I do not think they have reached the intended manufacturers for them to put in their bids, unless probably you also prove that.

4.27
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a week ago, we went on an oversight assignment to Ntungamo, Isingiro and Buhweju. In all the three districts, 80 per cent of the health workers did not have masks and gloves. We have 35,000 health workers in this country and we know their locations. They are either in private or public health centres or even in mission facilities. 

If we are not able to take masks to health workers up to now, how can the minister, a catholic like me, come and just read a document, which she does not believe in? How can you say that in two weeks you shall do what you have failed to do for the health workers? 

I had to make myself a purchasing officer; I bought some personal equipment for the health workers and security personnel in Buhweju at the risk of being arrested and charged with attempted murder. Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that unless there is something that the minister knows and we do not know, I do not think this is possible. She needs to tell us the truth so that we help her.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have the Floor. I hope you will tell us why the Government has become very generous to the population. (Laughter) Just use a few minutes, please.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all my colleagues for the issues they have raised; their contributions and some of the clarifications raised. I am happy the issue of the science of face masks has been raised because I was going to start with it. Anyhow, I am happy to briefly elaborate on the types of masks.

Madam Speaker, we are living in a situation of a pandemic. This is no longer a normal situation. That means that for whatever we do and discuss, we have to adapt and devise mechanisms to live with this pandemic. The phenomenon of face masks has never been there traditionally and that is why I was bringing on the Floor of Parliament the types of face masks we have, specifically, in this country. 

We have got the N95 mask, which is basically the type used in isolation centres, for the removal of samples and handling highly infectious conditions. We also have the surgical or medical masks, which some of us are wearing now. These are disposable and one does not need to reuse them. We also have the type we are talking about, the cloth masks. 

The first two types of masks, traditionally, have been used in health situations by healthcare workers in surgical operations. The surgical masks and N95 masks are traditionally used in hospital situations. For the surgical masks, as you have seen, people who can afford them can wear them and that is why even here, many Members are wearing surgical masks.

Madam Speaker, these two types of masks, by and large, are not produced in our country; they are imported. I would like to say that the President made a statement some time back that there are already arrangements to ensure that, in the coming months, we produce these masks in Uganda and arrangements are going on.

The issue we are discussing on the Floor of Parliament, specifically, is about the cloth masks; the Nytil masks. I was trying to make a statement on the standard required for this type of masks. The double-layer Nytil cloth is made with a filter inside to filter up to about 95 per cent of the particles. 

One of my colleagues asked about the science behind that. I think literature has proved it. Very many scientists and professors in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) and many other places have proven that Nytil’s, when they are double layered and filtered inside, are able to filter the particles.

Having said that, I made it clear yesterday that the Prime Minister called a consultative meeting with Uganda Manufacturers Association. Considering the people who have potential to manufacture facemasks, they are able to produce a total of 800,000 face masks per day. That will translate to about 11.2 million face masks in two weeks, which certainly is not adequate. The question arose; how are we going to cover the population of this country?

What we have discussed and what I had already stated here is that we are zoning the country in such a way that once the first phase of facemasks is out, distribution will start as others are made to distribute to the other parts of the country. Therefore, the country is going to be zoned and it is going to be distributed in such a manner - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All of us in this Parliament have gone to school. By law, the National Medical Stores (NMS) is supposed to procure medicine and medical supplies. I have heard the minister say that they met somewhere in a group to look at the masks and that they have met the manufacturers. 

Is it procedurally right for the minister to continue saying that they are doing some procurement of medical supplies yet the mandate –

THE SPEAKER: They are purchasing officers. 

MR MWIRU: Yes, they have turned themselves into purchasing officers yet the mandate lies with the National Medical Stores, who have also issued out a bid. Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that we allow the mandate of a Government entity to be ousted by a certain group of people who do not even have the capacity to verify the quality of these masks?

On the issue of food, all the food, which has been supplied by the Government, was subjected to the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics (UNBS). This means that when NMS raised the specifications, it is through bids that they do specifications. Therefore, do the minister and the team have the competence to determine the type of mask as per how she is explaining? Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on how she is proceeding.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Could the honourable minister bring to this Parliament a sample of the masks she is describing so that as people’s representatives, we could inspect and see? Otherwise, we risk a situation where masks are produced in millions and a debate begins that they are fake.

Secondly, could the minister tell us whether the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is involved in determining those qualities of masks being made by Nytil? Otherwise, we have situations where Ugandans doubt the Government. The other time you issued fake condoms and people have resorted to using kaveeras in villages. (Laughter) We need to be serious on these kinds of things. Thank you.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to rise on this matter but since we are discussing a very important issue. The minister is trying her best to explain because we are getting these masks under very complicated circumstances. Actually, even if we use NMS, the process might take longer since there are a lot of procedures.  

Madam Speaker, the way we are proceeding is as if we are asking the minister to abandon that process and use the NMS, which might take longer. Why can’t we guide the minister so that she can preside over this matter? I feel that the minister is trying to do her best under the circumstances. However, the way we are contributing is as if the minister is making a mistake – (Interruption) - I am a Member of Parliament and so, I must be able to speak.

Madam Speaker, I think we must always try to understand the situation. Otherwise, the minister is trying her best. What I know is that NMS cannot manage to handle this matter in the way you are suggesting. I, therefore, think that we should guide the minister to preside over this matter and look at those who can produce, even if it is the NMS. However, we should not go through those procedures because they will take longer. This is an urgent situation and we need these masks as soon as possible. We should be mindful that there are a lot of procedures that we might not be able to follow. I, therefore, think we should understand this instead of trying to make the minister feel as if she has made a mistake – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please take your seat. Honourable members, I am surprised that there is a Member advocating to abandon the procurement process, which was laid down by the law of this House. Hon. Kiyingi -

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to call hon. Mwiru to order. I wonder whether he wanted the NMS to come to the Floor of Parliament to substantiate. Otherwise, as a procedural matter, we believe that the minister comes here to represent the system of Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question being asked is whether NMS, which is ordinarily tasked with procuring these items, is involved. Yesterday, we were told that 20 people were met by invitation, yet nobody knows how they were invited. We are only questioning the procedure. That is what we are asking.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I need to clarify that point. That was a stakeholders’ consultative meeting. It has got nothing to do with the procurement procedure.

Madam Speaker, NMS, UNBS and the National Drug Authority are part of the stakeholders, when there are issues to do with drug supplies and medicines. Therefore, the stakeholders’ meeting was not called to start the procurement procedure. 

The NMS has got the mandate to procure drugs in this country; medical supplies and all sundries. What we are talking about is personal protective wear, which falls under the mandate of the NMS. This is the body that is involved in the process of procurement. 

However, I would like to say that all the necessary procedures are being followed, including fully involving the National Drug Authority in the process – (Mr Niwagaba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: We need to close this matter.

MR NIWAGABA: It is very important. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I am in possession of a bid notice by the NMS dated 12 May 2020, for emergency restricted bidding for supply of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), disinfectants, masks and the rest.

I am also in possession of a letter dated 18 May 2020 from and people will be able to innovate the NMS cancelling the tender for supply of PPEs and masks because of a presidential directive. When do you hope to have the NMS actually commence the procurement of these PPEs, including masks?

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you would allow me to proceed, I think we are moving in the right direction that we have got a body that is mandated to procure all the drugs, supplies and protective wear in this country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that a number of clarifications have been raised and I have already clarified one of them. On the issue that was raised about Nytil, that clarification was made. That was the first time the President made that directive. However, yesterday’s directive and his statement to this country was very clear.

From yesterday’s statement, private vehicles have been given the mandate. Those in position to acquire the standard face masks should go on and acquire these face masks so that by 26th of this month, they are in position to start work within the country while for the entire country, we are in this process of procurement. In the next two weeks, we should be in position to distribute the ones for the public.

Madam Speaker, there was a question –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. We are talking about a very serious matter. I wish the minister could have a seat for just one minute. We are talking about a matter which is very important and I am very happy that the Minister for Finance is in the House.

We are not talking about who is supposed to do what. We are talking about a very serious public matter. We are talking about a matter where the country has obediently listened to the President and have been patiently waiting for when the country can move from where we are to where they can at least function normally.

One thing which is hurting this Parliament, as the representatives of the people, is that we have been told that in two weeks, the lockdown can be lifted but that would be subject to the face masks being available. This is our concern. 

The minister is not giving us the answer. So, what I want this House to guide the Government on – not so much the minister – is that these two weeks may not be sufficient or practical. I think that is what they should say; that it is not practical.

Secondly, the President has come out very strongly in condemnation of the institution of Parliament for turning itself into a procurement group to buy food and so on for those who are dying in our constituencies; we complied; we have listened. Now, you are coming here to say that as the Executive, you have the right to constitute yourselves into procurement officers. You have directed Nytil and that came from the mouth of the President and so on and so forth.

So, this contradiction is confusing the country. That is why I would like this institution to guide the Government properly. Can the Government be guided that we have agreed the Government will give the country free masks?

Secondly, can the country agree that there must be guidelines? There must be a procedure to advertise. There must be a procedure to pre-qualify. There must be a procedure to purchase these face masks. We want to know how much we are buying these face masks. What is the specification as the chairperson of the Committee on Health has just told us?

I am wearing this mask but I do not know the effectiveness of this one. The chairperson of the Committee on Health has just told me right now that it must have some layers and what-not. Now, we do not know; we are all looking like fools.

Madam Speaker, can we procedurally guide the way the Government is actually conducting itself in managing the COVID-19 pandemic? So much money is being received. Nobody has come to this House to tell us how much you have received in cash, how many vehicles have you received, how much food have you received, where did the food go; nothing. 

However, we know that the Shs 59 billion we gave the Government has gone towards buying rotten food and nobody has told us who is going to pay back the money we have lost; Shs 59 billion for buying the food. The qualified personnel and institutions have told us that 30 per cent or more of that food is contaminated; it is not fit for human consumption.

Therefore, I am here to say can we guide the Government? It is useless for us to continue listening to the minister when she is not leading us to any positive step in the management of these face masks. I would rather that we guide the minister to go back and come back tomorrow with the guidelines. We want to know when you have advertised. 

I have, in my constituency, Lira Spinning Mill. We want to know when you are going to revive it so that they can start producing face masks and so many other things that we have. We have the women groups which can make these facial masks. We can come up with 3000 in a day. So, can you tell us when we can do that? That is what we want to hear, not all these songs.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I will handle that. Zoom in on hon. Flavia Byekwaso; let us hear from her.

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, first and foremost for enabling us to be able to communicate from the comfort of our homes. I have been listening to the submission of the minister and I am only seeking clarification. If she could clarify to us on the criteria that they are going to use while zoning when they start giving out these masks.

I would rather that perhaps they go into segmentation, such that they guide us that maybe they will start with traders or a certain category of people but not zoning. That would look a bit discriminatory in nature.

The second clarification I am seeking from the minister is about the fate of the so many youths and women who had started producing masks. At the onset of this, the President encouraged Ugandans to start looking after themselves and not anticipating things from outside the country but to depend on their own production. Out of that, many took an initiative and started producing things that would be used during this period.

So, can the minister tell us what the fate is of those so many Ugandans who had started production but are not among the 20 registered companies or stakeholders that were talked about in the meeting that ensued in the Office of the Prime Minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stood up to give information after listening to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who was asking for information regarding a lot of happenings under COVID-19.

I was with the Prime Minister this morning and he has prepared a statement, which is going to talk about how the exercise of fighting COVID-19 has been undertaken. He will talk about the accountability of the funds. He will talk about the COVID-19 fund itself. A lot of information will be laid out tomorrow. I thought I should give the House information but also ask hon. Cecilia Ogwal to be a little bit patient and allow the minister, who is at the frontline, to tell us what they have prepared.

If Parliament can guide, we can happily accept improvements because all of us are trying to make sure that we save Ugandans. So, I just wanted to let my sister know that she has an obligation to respond to questions. Do not push her away; kindly listen to the ministers if they stand here to give you information. If you have any information to guide us, we will happily take it. We are together in it; all of us are together in it. 

Madam Speaker, that is the information I wanted to give. The Prime Minister is coming tomorrow to give - what I would like to say is that we have to learn how to be patient and listen to one another; hon. Odonga Otto.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministers here have not yet understood that the worry of the Ugandans - at least represented here - is that the resumption of public transport has been made contingent upon acquiring masks, which are to be manufactured by Nytil. Until everybody has those masks, there will be no public transport.

Those are the questions we are asking; that when are they going to be made? If I buy may own mask, will I be allowed to use it? Should I go with the Government of Uganda mask? Those are the questions, because people are tired of being in the lockdown.

Now, the conditions to which they are being told to wait are not in their control. Does Nytil have the money? Do they have the expertise? Do they have the materials? That is not in our control. However, we are now being told that until Nytil does so, we cannot move. Those are the questions we want you to answer.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To summarise, I would like to say that already the companies that have been met, it is clear that the amount they are going to procure per day may not be adequate. That is why we are getting other smaller companies.

However, the most important thing here is that we are already sensitising the public on how to use the mask so that once the masks are in place and distributed, the public will be in position to put the mask rightly, how to remove and importantly when to wash it. The Nytil mask we are talking about is a reusable mask; the one that you can remove after use, wash or make it clean, iron and reuse it.

Madam Speaker, yes, a lot of donations were made to us. We are very grateful. We are compiling. Just as the chief whip has said, at an appropriate time, accountability will be availed on this Floor to Parliament and to the general public.

As I sit down, I would like to conclude that we are grateful. If we all work together as this being the most important tool to prevent the spread of coronavirus in our community, we will see our community free of COVID-19. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just before you go. In this town, there are many young people who have made masks and they are selling them. I would like to know if they have been contacted and are part of the 20 stakeholders. We have people all over the streets making a living out of masks. How do they fit in?

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, that is very good information. Certainly, if we have the young people that have already made the masks, I will take that up to our ministry and the Prime Minister such that they should also be considered among the companies to be included in the company.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO WITHDRAW THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO USD 100 MILLION FOR FY 2019/2020 AND USD 90.0 MILLION FOR FY 2020/2021 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO THE HEALTH SECTOR AND MITIGATE NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON THE ECONOMY DUE TO COVID-19; AND USD 250 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND FOR BALANCE OF PAYMENTS SUPPORT TO THE BANK OF UGANDA

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 61 of our Rules of Procedure requires that if we are to withdraw anything that we have laid before this House, we should lay a proper motion. Therefore, this motion is moved in that context.

I, therefore, beg to move that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to withdraw the proposal to borrow up to $100 million for Financial Year 2019/2020 and $90 million for Financial Year 2020/2021 from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector and mitigate negative effects on the economy due to COVID-19; and $250 million from the International Monetary Fund for balance of payments support to the Bank of Uganda and to move a motion of resolution of Parliament to borrow up to $300 million -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you cannot move for the withdrawal and the new one at the same time. You first move the withdrawal and if it is seconded, we have a small debate to justify why you are withdrawing. That is because it is with our committee and they have started working on it.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? What is the justification? It is seconded by a number of ministers.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, whereas on 2 April 2020, we moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $100 million for Financial Year 2019/2020 and $90 million for Financial Year 2020/2021 from the International Development Association of the World Bank to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector and mitigate negative effects on the economy due to COVID-19; and $250 million from the International Monetary Fund for balance of payments support to the Bank of Uganda and the loan was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy.

Also, given the fact that we had requested the bank and IMF for extra resources but at that time, there was no indication that they could increase our allocation. And thereafter, International Development Association of the World Bank informed us that they have increased their funding proposal towards COVID-19 from $100 million for Financial Year 2019/2020 and $90 million for Financial Year 2020/2021 to $300 million in total for the Financial Year 2019/2020; that is the reason why we are moving to withdraw the previous one and be able to submit a fresh request, which we have already negotiated  with the two financial institutions, so that the amount of the money we are borrowing has changed and increased. That, in brief, is why we are seeking to withdraw the old one and replace it with the new request to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, any comments?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to my young brother and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I thought that the proper motion would not be to withdraw but to amend the original motion with a view to capture the increased amount you are borrowing, so that we handle it that way. Would it not then be procedurally right that the motion be substituted by way of a motion amending the earlier motion?

THE SPEAKER: No. It is better to withdraw and start afresh.

5.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The loan request was committed to our committee but before we could start work, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came up with new figures and we found it difficult for us to proceed on two inconsistent requests. Therefore, we requested them to harmonise the two papers. They told us that the first one was an estimate and the second one was fully negotiated.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, for us, once Parliament approves, we shall proceed and process the new one which is actual. I thank you.

5.02
Mr SAMUEL Odonga otto (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to withdraw an earlier proposal. 

In a normal family, when there is a crisis, the head of the family goes to the reserves. In Acholi, the head of the family goes to the granary. Some time they also have certain special food kept in the ceiling of the house for famine.

Therefore, can the minister tell us where our national reserves are? Today, there is borrowing for coronavirus. Tomorrow, it might be for cholera or floods. How are we running this country?

How much money is in the national reserves? This is a time when the country should be drawing from our reserves. Honourable minister, I challenge you - this withdrawal is for purposes of increasing the amounts to be borrowed.

Secondly, what is our debt portfolio to Gross Domestic Product (GDP)? It looks like it is the biggest approval. If this Parliament delays, they will say we are frustrating the work of Government. Every time, you make a loan request for borrowing. Can the minister tell us what our total loan portfolio is? We are 42 million Ugandans. Divide it amongst all Ugandans. How much will each Ugandan pay? When you come and tell us of seven million dollars, some people may not understand. Just tell us how much each Ugandan will pay and for how long. 

All you people who are running the country are aged. You are about to disappear from this planet and leave us the young generation to pay the money. How much is it before we can accept this withdrawal? What are you talking about?

5.04
Mr Michael mawanda (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come with a comprehensive report in respect to the status of the economy to help us plan properly. 

They have brought this loan request but we do not know what it entails to cover. If the minister had brought the report and we looked at areas that are in much need of a certain amount of money, then we would consider it.

Now they are withdrawing this loan request but bringing another. What does it entail? It would have been better for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to first bring to us a comprehensive statement in respect to the status of the economy to help us see what we can do.

That is why when a sick person goes to the doctor, the latter first carries out a test to find out – not necessarily that the patient will come and say, “I’m suffering from malaria,” when in the actual sense the tests will reveal a different sickness. The doctor will first ascertain the disease before they prescribe the exact medicine for the patient.

Therefore, it would be better if the minister brought a report. That would help us to prescribe the exact medicine that the economy needs. Thank you. 

Mr Bahati: Thank you, hon. Otto and hon. Mawanda for raising these important questions. However, I thought that at this stage, we are handling the procedure of withdrawing a motion that had been forwarded to the Committee on National Economy; to replace it with a new motion and therefore, not debating the substance of the whole motion. That is why we have the Committee on National Economy. Its duty is to look at it and come back. At that time, you can say; “We accept this loan,” or “We don’t accept this loan.”

On the issue of the reserves, we can get the exact figure tomorrow but that is not the way we handle or the way economies utilise reserves. It is not that when you have a situation like this you go to the bank and use up the reserves. 

I will make a statement on the utilisation of our reserves; how much we have. How we apply reserves and for what purpose and at what stage.

On the issue of the entire debt portfolio, we will be able to answer all these when the Committee on National Economy reports on these loans. For today, it is about the procedure to withdraw a motion and replace it with a new one.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Motion withdrawn.

The Speaker: You have to move a new motion. I would like to also clarify that the reason we rejected just an amendment is that in the first proposal, they were requesting for $219 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) and another $55 million also from the ADB.

In the second, they were requesting for $224 million and another $51 million. There was a lot of conflict in the figures. That is why we decide that they withdraw it and start afresh.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO BORROW UP TO USD 300.0 MILLION FOR BUDGET SUPPORT FOR FY 2019/20 FROM THE  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO THE HEALTH SECTOR AND TO MITIGATE NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF COVID 19 ON THE ECONOMY OF UGANDA; AND SDR 361 MILLION (APPROX. USD 491.5 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF) FOR BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND BUDGET SUPPORT TO ADDRESS THE NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF COVID 19 IN THE FY 2019/20

5.08
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I would like to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to borrow up to $300 for budget support for the financial year 2019/2020 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector and to mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 on the economy of Uganda; and SDR 361 million, which is equivalent to $491.5 million, from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), for the balance of payments and budget support to address the negative effects of COVID-19 on our economy. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Is it seconded? Okay, it is. I send it to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

5.09
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, there are two motions, which are procedural in nature. One was a motion of a resolution of Parliament to withdraw the proposal to borrow up to $219.40 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) and UA40.060 million, which is equivalent to $55.60 million, from the African Development Fund to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project (KCRRP).

We moved this one earlier but we realised there was a mistake on the figure while at committee stage. Therefore, we are withdrawing this and replacing it with a new one so that we avoid – as you know we are in the Karuhanga’s way of doing things so that we move things properly in terms of procedure. We do not want to go into litigation matters. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Is it seconded? The motion is seconded. Since there are no other comments, I put the question that that loan request be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Loan request withdrawn.

5.10
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): I now beg to move that a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to borrow up to $224.0 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) and U.A 37.54 million, equivalent to $51.0 million, from the African Development Fund to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project (KCRRP), be moved. 

I lay the respective documents for this House’s consideration.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, which one are you handling? Is it the one of $300 million?

MR BAHATI: No, we have finished that one, Madam Speaker. We are now on the one of US$ 224 - from African Development Bank.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, if it is seconded, it is sent to the Committee of National Economy for perusal and report back. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SUB-COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON COVID-19

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister wants to correct something on item 12. Let us finish with his loan and then we go back and finish our Bill.
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CORRECT A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITED STATES DOLLARS $456,370,000 MILLION FROM THE EXIM BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE UPGRADE AND CONSTRUCTION OF NATIONAL OIL ROADS UNDER PACKAGE 1 (MASINDI-KASANJA/PARK JUNCTION, TANGI (PACKWACH) JUNCTION-PARAA-BULIISA ROAD, WANSEKO-BUGUNGU ROADS), PACKAGE 2 (HOIMA-BUTIABA-WANSEKO) AND PACKAGE 3 (BUHIMBA-BULAMAGI-IGAYAZA – KAKUMIRO)
5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I just want to apologise for these procedural issues. The background to this is that when we passed a loan here a few months ago, the parliamentary resolution captured the total amount of the loan. However, this loan was broken down and the lenders wanted to know how much is for package one, two and three. Therefore, they requested that the resolution of Parliament should reflect that. 

The Clerk has looked at the documents and advised that the best way to go is to move a motion of Parliament to correct a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow US$ 456,370,000 from the Exim Bank of China to finance and upgrade the construction of the national oil roads under: 

Package one: Masindi-Kasanja-Park Junction, Tangi-Pakwach junction, Paraa-Buliisa Road, Wanseko-Bugungu Roads. 

Package two: Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko. 

Package three: Buhimba-Bulamaji-Igayaza-Kakumiro Road. 

Madam Speaker, I am moving under rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda, in accordance with Article l59 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 laid before Parliament a draft loan agreement for US$ 456,370,000 to be concluded between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Exim Bank of China to finance and upgrade the national oil roads under: 

Package l: Masindi-Kasanja-Park Junction, Tangi-Pakwach Junction, Paraa-Buliisa Road, Wanseko-Bugungu Road;

Package 2: Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko; and 

Package 3: Buhimba-Bulamagi-Igayaza- Kakumiro; 

AND WHEREAS the parliamentary Committee on National Economy, in its report to Parliament on 27 November, 2019, which report was debated and approved by the House, acknowledged that the total cost for the three road projects, exclusive of VAT and financed by China Exim Bank, is as follows: 

Package 1 is US$ 186,055,241; Package 2 is US$ 152,607,764; and Package 3 is US$ l17,715,103 leading to a total amount of US$ 456,378,108 to be borrowed from the Exim Bank of China; 

NOTING HOWEVER that there was on error occasioned in the computation of the total cost leading to the total loan amount being indicated as US$ 456,370,000 rather than the correct figure of US$ 456,378,108, which error was carried in the resolution of Parliament of 27 November 2019 authorising the loan request; 

REALISING THEREFORE that there is urgent need to unbundle the total amount authorised per package and further to correct the total loan amount authorised by Parliament; 

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves to correct this resolution dated 27 November 2019 to read as follows:

“Government is hereby authorised to borrow US$ 456,378,108 in accordance with the terms and conditions stated in the loan agreement from the Exim Bank of China to finance the upgrade and construction of national oil roads as follows:

    i. Package 1: Masindi-Kasanja-Park Junction, Tangi-Pakwach Junction, Paraa-Buliisa Road, Wanseko-Bugungu Roads of equivalent amount of US$ 186,055,241; 
    ii. Package 2: Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko US$ 152,607,764; and 
    iii. Package 3: Buhimba-Bulamagi-Igayaza-Kakumiro US$ l17,715,103.””

Madam Speaker, I beg to move to put this record correct.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, this motion is to correct the contents of our resolution of 27 November 2019. I put the question that the record be corrected as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019

5.20
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had stood over clause 2 yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday we stood over clause 2 and you directed that the committee goes back and harmonises with the affected parties who were hon. Mawanda of Igara East and the Minister of State for Trade over who should be the responsible minister for the Bill.

I would like to report that we had a meeting this morning with the affected parties and we made the following observations:
    (a) Whereas the object of the Bill is to provide for prioritisation of Ugandan citizens and resident companies in public procurement. This is already catered for in the recently amended PPDA Act under sections 50 and 59(a) on reservation and preference schemes and this addresses this matter. In addition, Madam Chairperson, skills and technology transfer to Ugandans is also catered for under Section 97(2)(c) of the Employment Act, 2006.
    (b) Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives has a department dealing with local content and implementing the Buy Uganda Build Uganda policy and has developed the necessary competencies. This policy has now been adequately provided legal enforcement under the recently amended PPDA Act under section 50 and section 59 (a).
    (c) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is already having related agencies and departments implementing objectives related to the provisions in the National Local Content Bill, 2019 particularly the PPDA Act, 2003 as amended and Investment Code Act, 2019.

Madam Chairperson, with these observations, the committee recommends that the proposed amendment on clause 2 by hon. Michael Mawanda be dropped and the status quo on the definition of the “minister” remain as is in the Bill.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, when we met with the honourable minister, we realised that there was a need to recommit clause 42 of the Bill. I would like to seek your indulgence whether we do it now or we pass –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, recommittal takes place at the third reading. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
5.24
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.
(Question put and agreed to.)
 (The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.25
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.26
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)


BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019
5.27
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.
 
THE SPEAKER: The question is that the Bill be read for the third time.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg the indulgence of the House to recommit clause 42 of the “National Local Content Bill, 2019”. 

Madam Speaker, we passed clause 42 of the Bill, which seeks to repeal sections 50 and 59(a) of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 yet the said sections are critical in the protection of domestically manufactured goods and services provided by Ugandan consultants and contractors.

My proposal is that we delete clause 42 from the Bill due to the following justifications: 

Section 50 provides for preference of Ugandan goods and services by Ugandan contractors and consultants as a way of giving them a competitive advantage, when competing for public procurement contracts with foreign manufactured goods, foreign contractors and foreign consultants. 

The competitive advantage is meant to spearhead the development of locally manufactured goods and services, a principle in line with the BUBU policy.

Section 59(a) provides for the operational mechanisms of how the preference provided for under section 50 is given at the time of procurement. Repealing the two sections, will disadvantage the Ugandans who locally manufacture goods and offer services, fail the BUBU policy, and therefore, the object and purpose of the National Local Content Bill. 

I, therefore, beg the indulgence of the mover of the Bill and the House to allow us to reconsider clause 42 by deleting the same. I beg to move.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, we hear the arguments of the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and we see no problem in his proposals. Earlier on, we thought local content being an affirmative action should be handled separately but like the Budget Act was not repealed by the Public Finance Management Act, we see no problem leaving the same requirement within the PPDA Act. 

Therefore, we concede.

THE SPEAKER: So, we delete this and reinstate the original position; 50 and 59 remain in the law? 

MR NSAMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Any objections? Hon. Mwiru, just for the record.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, the minister is getting wiser and I support the motion moved by him.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019
Clause 42
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Sections 50 and 59 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act remain part of our law.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Pubic Assets Act, 2003 provides, under Section 50, for preference clauses. Under Section 59(a), there is a provision that addresses preference schemes. These ones already exist in the PPDA Act, 2003. When we amended it, we did not repeal them. 

What clause 42 is seeking is to have these two sections deleted such that they are catered for in the National Local Content Act. What we are asking is that we delete this clause 42 such that Sections 50 and 59(a) stay as they are in the PPDA Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is what I said. Okay, let us delete clause 42. I put the question that clause 42 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, deleted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.33
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.34
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” and has deleted clause 42.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.34
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019

5.34
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)

Honourable members, I would like to congratulate hon. Oshabe and members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and this House. This Bill has taken a very long and hazardous journey. We would like to congratulate all of us and the country for finally getting this law. I hope that it will help us improve our situation, as a country. Thank you.

Let me allow hon. Bukenya to lay his report – just laying. Ooh! Yes, hon. Oshabe.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I am aware that we are rushing and hon. Bukenya needs to present. However, this is an exciting moment for me. I feel very excited that this law has been passed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. Since we started this law, you have been in support. The manufacturers – the producers – in this country and all who are concerned about the inclusive growth, where all Ugandans are part and parcel of the development, are proud of you. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the President for the guidance he gave us throughout the drafting of this law. Some people had confused him that this is a very bad law and it never needed to see the light of day. However, through the engagements we had with him, he guided on how this must be adopted. I would like to thank him for his contribution. I will be happier when he assents to this law for the benefit of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, your team at Parliament – the legal department – did a very good job throughout the discussion, drafting and making sure that this law comes to pass. Allow me to, in a special way, thank the director of the legal department and, especially the legal counsel, Tamale Mirundi. He did a wonderful job in making sure that everything that we agreed on was put in the law.

Madam Speaker, we had Members of Parliament: hon. Muyanja Mbabaali, hon. Edmund Ariko, hon. Maurice Kibalya and the rest that picked interest, including hon. – I will say – “National Dialogue”. They have been at the forefront of pushing for this. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba has also been there to make sure that this law comes to pass.

Madam Speaker, we had partners such as the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and the UNDP. The UNDP facilitated much of the workshops that we had. We had the Private Sector Foundation which is the direct beneficiary of this law. We also had the Uganda Manufacturers Association and all others that sent their contributions and concerns throughout the process.

Madam Speaker, we had challenges with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For whatever reasons that we do not know, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed this law. Probably this law may not work. However, I would like to urge the minister, who is here – hon. Bahati, I know you love Ugandans and I know that for all the things you do, you do them for the people of Uganda. We urge you to support this Bill, now that it is being domiciled in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, since the mover has not thanked us – (Laughter) – I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On a special note, this is the first Bill we have passed without benchmarking and doing any engagement in terms of workshop. We just relied on our experience over the years in handling Bills of this nature. 

Madam Speaker, it would be unfair for the member to thank the rest of the teams he worked with and he forgets to thank the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I would like to therefore, use this occasion to also thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives. Yesterday, we almost hit a dead end but they were able to harmonise their positions to enable us reach this far.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development works closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In this process, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development supported our consultations as and when we needed.

Lastly, thanks to you, Madam Speaker, for your passion about local content. You have time and again been asking us when this Bill would be presented to Parliament.

With these few remarks, I beg to inform the House that we have another important Bill, coming through and whose stakeholder is on us all the time - the National Payments Bill. I beg that in this remaining period we are given chance to handle it. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is already on the Order Paper. You do not need to worry - we need to go home.

MR NSAMBA:  Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Honourable chair, it was just an oversight. I never intended to skip the chairperson and the committee. Accordingly, honourable chair and committee members, thank you very much. The leadership of the chairperson this morning helped us very much to solve the impasse we had. It was really absurd on my side not to have thanked the chairperson and the committee that spared a lot of time to process this Bill. 
Lastly, I would like to thank the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and everyone. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SUB-COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON COVID-19

5.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY SUB-COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON COVID-19 (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The report has been on the Parliament website for the last three weeks and it was discussed by the National Task Force, last week. Therefore, I beg that I lay it on the Table and request that a member of the committee be given time tomorrow to ask the Prime Minister, when he will be presenting responses to the few specific questions in the report. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Interim Report of the Parliamentary Sub-Committee on Health on COVID-19. This is an interim report; the team is still working.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. I would like to thank the chair and members of the health sub-committee for the work they have done. They have gone around the country, visited facilities and borders. They have given full information to Government and Parliament. I would like to thank them for that.

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit but it is quarter to 6.00.p.m. We need to get home. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

