Wednesday, 25 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming the senior 2 students of Caltec Academy, Makerere, in Kawempe South, together with their teachers. You are welcome. (Applause) Yesterday we had senior one students so it seems Kawempe South is producing children everyday according to classes, but you are welcome. 

Secondly, I would like to remind the Leader of Government Business that certain statements were due from the Government this week. We are expecting a statement on the Iraq situation, the joint statement between the Ministry of Internal affairs and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; we are expecting a statement from the Ministry of Education on Namasagali University, and we are also expecting a statement on disarmament from the Ministry of Defense. So, I urge the ministers concerned to bring those statements tomorrow.

2.48
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Madam Speaker, there is also an overdue statement on Jinja Road. The Minister of Works said he was going to make some interim arrangements to make the Jinja-Bugiri road safe but we do not see anything happening on that road. 

Also, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development promised to table the disability policy before the end of May and in view of what may be happening tomorrow, I hope that can also be done. 

The Minister of Agriculture was supposed to give a statement on the banana wilt and cassava wilt; these are devastating matters, which I think should also be handled before we go to another one.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Further to what my honourable colleague has said, I am also wondering about unfinished work. I know most of the work appearing under notice of business to follow falls under various committees whose term will expire tomorrow. I will give an example. We instituted a committee and the Ministry of Works is supposed to give us a report on what transpired regarding the sinking of the ship. 

Two, at my personal level there were questions I put to the Minister of Works, which he attempted to answer yesterday but unfortunately he was indisposed. Are we going to save these questions or shall we drag the minister from the hospital bed before the House adjourns?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we normally do is to save the outstanding work so that we do not have a problem in the next session. So, whatever is outstanding will be saved tomorrow.  

2.50
THE MINISTER OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have raised a number of issues upon which government is expected to make a statement, and the relevant ministers are going to be prompted to do that except for the question on the issue of Iraq. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is still trying to harmonize and put together a government position on this very important issue. Therefore, the period you have given may not be enough for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We beg your indulgence that you put it off until a later date, until the Ministry of Internal Affairs presents a government position. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable minister, it was not I who set the deadline. This is what we agreed upon last week. It was an undertaking made by the ministries of Internal Affairs and Foreign Affairs. That was the undertaking they made. I was only reminding them that tomorrow is the deadline.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Honourable members should appreciate that this is a very important issue. Really a minister cannot stand up and make a statement on it until proper and thorough consultations are made. Either members are interested in getting a proper answer from the Government or they are just interested in a statement, which can be made. So we are pleading – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office rose to respond to the concerns of this august House regarding outstanding issues from the Government, I assumed he would come up with a responsible position. However, is he in order to stand up and insinuate that some of us are actually asking these questions out of probable sinister motives or inconsequential concerns?

Before you even call him to order, is he aware that on the same matter over which we are concerned, the people - 114 of them - left on Sunday evening for Iraq? We are wondering about their welfare. Is he in order to keep postponing the matter, keeping the patient in the theatre while he is looking for the correct methods of surgery?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding of the minister’s position is that the matter is so intricate. Before he comes back to give the answer he must be confident of everything he is going to say. He is still trying to organize his answer. That is what I understood from his answer.

MR AWORI: But you gave a stop order that nobody should leave the country. They are defying your ruling, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is because of the rumours and the misinformation that some members bring here - like the information that hon. Awori is giving Parliament now that people left - that we need to find out the exact position that we should present –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you issued a directive that the matter needs the attention of the ministry and that the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs will come back and report to this august House. He was also supported by his colleague, hon. Kagonyera and he said that if hon. Awori Aggrey had additional information he should make it available to the ministry, which I dutifully did. 


Is he in order to imply that I am giving you wrong information when I know for sure and he can check as a Minister of Internal Affairs with Entebbe Airport that certain passengers left at 4.55 aboard Emirates with a stop in Dubai on Sunday and right now they are being held between Dubai and Baghdad for certain irregular documentation? Is he in order to continue misleading this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very difficult for me because I did not know where these people are. I cannot rule on that because I do not know where they are. Yes, Mr Minister, tell us.

DR KEZIMBIRA: The information that hon. Awori is giving is not true. Nobody, as far as our information and ascertainment has given us, nobody has left. Hon. Awori should produce evidence to that effect because the information he gave me after Parliament here was mere speculation. My ministry has contacted the would be promoters of the project and we have a letter in black and white telling us that nobody has left, and nobody has been recruited up to now. So, hon. Awori should produce other evidence.

MR OMARA ATUBO: You will recall that last week when the Minister of State for Internal Affairs made a statement it was so incomplete that the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa, had to come to his rescue. It is on record. Hon. Sam Kutesa stood in this House and said the statement would be ready on Tuesday, which was yesterday. My source of information - and there is a Minister of State from Foreigner Affairs here - I am reliably informed that the brief by experts in Foreigner Affairs was submitted to the minister last week. So I really urge the House that because of the ruling of the Speaker, the matter should be put on the Order Paper tomorrow. If the Government is not ready then we shall come with an appropriate motion. 

But because it is Government, which does not respect motions and this House, I know they are going to ignore whatever we are going to say. And hon. Kagonyera has said, “Yes, we are going to ignore it”. So it is going to be on the Order Paper, and he is very happy about it because they ignore us. We pass motions here and government remains motionless. So we are going to proceed. It is going to be on the Order Paper and we are going to come up with an appropriate motion. Thank you very much.

MRS MUKWAYA: I would not want to be party - as a Member of Parliament representing Mukono South - to that statement that government ignores Parliament when actually government punctually pays Members of Parliament and facilitates them -(Interjections)- yes, I am paid on time. As a Member of Parliament I am paid on time; I am facilitated to do my work as a Member of Parliament. Is it in order for the member to insinuate that government does not respect Parliament when actually we are facilitated by government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member was talking about government ignoring resolutions of Parliament, not about our pay. 

In the distinguished strangers’ galley we have Members of Parliament from the National Assembly of Malawi from the Committee of Finance and Budget. They are here to interact with our Parliament to see how they can improve the budgeting process in Malawi. They are led by hon. Belson Lijenda, the Vice-Chairman of the Budget and Finance Committee. Please, stand up. (Applause) There is hon. R. Shawa, hon. Symon Kaunda, and hon. Nelson Chuthi, all Memebrs of the Budget and Finance Committee; there is Mrs Gladys Makwakwa, Clerk of the Committee; Mr Henry Chingaipe, Parliamentary Researcher and Committee Clerk; Mr Blessings Botha, Parliamentary Researcher; and Mr Stephen Mwale, Field Manager CIDA Project on Economic Governance. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

3.00
MR KAPKWOMU NDIWA (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter, which is national and international to some extent. It is an issue, which has been persistent since the late 1950s and that is cattle rustling across the borders of Uganda and Kenya. Of recent it has become so rampant that it is at a worrying state. On Saturday the 21st, last weekend, the raiders came and took off with 58 head of cattle and they wounded one of the LDUs. On the 22nd they again came and raided 52 animals, which were by consensus grazing on the Kenyan side of the border under the permission of the Kenyan security forces. On Monday the 23rd they returned to steal 8 head of cattle so in all we have 120 head of cattle stolen within these three days. 

Why do I say that it is a matter of international concern? On Saturday the 21st at least there was evidence that the people involved were Kenyan administration police and Kenyan police reserve personnel. There are exhibits. The dead who were on Uganda soil were taken to the Uganda Police station in Mbukwa yet to be transferred to Kenya for identification. The Kenya authorities already agree that the dead were members of the administration police and the Kenya police reserve. 

Funny enough the attack on Sunday the 22nd happened when the animals were grazing on the Kenyan side with the permission of the Kenyan security forces. As they grabbed the animals the Ugandan LDUs tried to respond but they were blocked by the Kenya general service personnel. Therefore, those animals just went magnetically to west Pokot. It is indeed with government permission and knowledge that the attack took place and the results were out. As we talk now the people are still in a lot of fear and they do not know what will happen next. 

The most puzzling thing is, once they grab these animals they just cross over to the Kenyan side and, therefore, there is no way our security personnel can actually pursue them, and the Kenya Government does not assist in such a matter at all. I do not know what the Government is going to do. The Kenyan side is actually disarming the Pokot at the moment and what they do is to retreat towards the Ugandan side. In so doing they cause a lot of havoc.  

In yesterday’s paper the hon. Member of Moroto constituency accused the UPDF of killing the Pokot. The question is why were they killed? These Pokot were killed on the Uganda side. So is it criminal or not to camp and rustle? I am not a literature student but I am told Chinua Achebe once wrote that when somebody comes to your house and starts defecating, do you wait for him or her to finish, you act immediately. The UPDF really had to take action and their duty is to protect the lives and the property of Ugandans. So I see no way the hon. Member for Moroto should say that the UPDF is actually guilty of that. 

I do not know whether the Minister of Defence is here? Can he give us the guidelines? When do the UPDF start fighting an enemy and when do our local defense units stop pursuing animals, which are evidently being driven away? Madam Speaker, this thing has gone on for quite some time but I do not know what the way forward may be in due course. I do not know whether the Government is in position to carry out joint operations as the Kenyans are doing on their side? 

I do not know whether the two governments can agree to retrieve some of these animals, which have been raided in this manner? When will these raids stop anyway? From the late 1950s, as I said, these raids have been on but it appears they are escalating now. I do not know how soon the Government will come to save the lives and the property of the people. 

Anyhow, the UPDF are being praised a lot for being disciplined. They do not cross the borders, they just hit back if they come along but in the majority of cases it is the LDUs and the home guards who have actually killed these people. The UPDF should not be implicated; they are well disciplined and they are on orders from the President. They should account for how many of those raiders they will have killed by the end of this month because the President is equally annoyed about what is happening across the borders. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.06
THE MINISTER IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here on behalf of the Government. First of all I want to thank hon. Kapkwom for raising this very important issue. As members realise he has mentioned several incidences that have taken place, some of which government forces have responded to and others, which have not been quite taken care of because of the problems involved. 

Of course we have a number of laws, which govern relationships between two neighbouring countries and I am glad to say on behalf of the Government that the relationship between the people of Kenya and the people of Uganda is a very cordial one. The two governments work together as much as possible to make sure that our borders are kept secure and peaceful but of course this is not to say that –(Interruptions)- Madam Speaker, I should be allowed to make this statement.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Mr Minister, proceed.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honorable member has raised a number of issues. This, as members will recognise, involves our Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Defence and indeed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Department of Regional Co-operation. Therefore, since we are not aware of these issues, there is no way we can make an appropriate arrest of them. I would like to request that government be allowed to first of all study the incidents that hon. Kapkwom has read; and secondly to consult our neighbors in Kenya and after that we shall be able to make a proper statement to this House. I thank you.

3.09
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, the hon. Member for Kongasis correctly pointed out that this problem has been going on since 1950. There were times when this problem almost died out. When Amin was in power cattle rustling from Kenya had died out. Then the policy was that if Uganda was raided, the Ugandan Armed Forces were to enter Kenya and return the cattle. If it meant going up to Nairobi, they had to go and return the cattle, which had been taken. 

I am surprised that the honorable minister states that he is not even aware that such a problem exists and he has got to make consultation with the Kenya Government.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: The hon. Mallinga is not right to say that we know nothing about what is going on; we do. I said we did not know about the incident the honorable member mention in detail, but we know that we have a problem along the border. Therefore, we even have a regular committee of corporation between the Government of Uganda and Kenya. I am going to ask hon. Lokeris to give the honorable members a little more information regarding this corporation along the border.

DR MALLINGA: I am not taking any more information. (Mr Peter Lokeris rose_) If the honorable minister is not aware of what is going on, he ought to know. It is your responsibility in this country. Who else is responsible? I do not want his information. It has never solved anything. What has it solved? The people who have been put in positions of responsibility do not do anything and the people suffer at the border.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Listen to the Minister of State, Karamoja.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Efforts and contacts are always conducted these days between the Kenyan Government and Uganda Government officials at the border. Hon. Kapkwomu has also attended these meetings. Even in this incident, contacts are there between the authorities of Kapchorwa and the Kenyan people.  

On the 4th June we are having a delegation of 40 people from Kenya to Uganda, to come and discuss so that we all join in the disarmament exercise. I invite our neighbour to come to that meeting so that we analyze those things. Otherwise, our relations, our contacts are very frequent and cordial. Thank you very much.

DR MALLINGA: I do not know how many meetings have been held over this matter. What we want is action; what we want is the protection of the people of Uganda. We take it so casually as if nothing has happened! The honorable minister ought to know that even when a bullet is fired across the border, he ought to know and do something about it. Ugandans are being killed; people were killed in Sebei recently and there is evidence that these people came from Kenya. You ought to do something dramatic about it to stop this. But instead Ugandans are at a disadvantage; we are at a disadvantage –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, in his statement, which is evidenced by what is recorded in the Hansard, hon. Kapkwomu even referred to interventions by the Uganda Government forces. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Mallinga, whom I dare challenge to tell us how much interest he has in this border conflict, to say that the Government of Uganda is not interested in the welfare and lives of its people when a Member of Parliament from the border has recognized the interventions by the Uganda armed forces? Is the honorable member in order to make those false allegations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

DR MALLINGA: I am still continuing, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mallinga, I think you have a problem with the minister, but sort it out later.

DR MALLINGA: Can I wind up, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us leave it. Let us wait for the statement.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.15
MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a personal statement. Before I do that I bring for you all greetings from Luzira.  

As you are all aware, some time back on the 20th of April some persons and institutions in their own wisdom thought they should keep some of us out of circulation. And as law-abiding citizens we obliged and so we were out of circulation for about one month. I am now happy that at least we are able to join colleagues here in this House and deliberate for the good of this nation.

Before we make the statement I would like to say that we were keenly following what was taking place in this august House because in jail we were provided with a television by some good Samaritans. So we were able to follow whatever was taking place and I am sure as I am talking now those people whom we left behind in prison are also following what is taking place in this august House.

By our Rules of Procedure, when matters are before courts of law we are not supposed to go into the merits and demerits. For that matter in our personal statement we are putting up, we have tried our level best – actually we have avoided completely the merits and demerits of our case. At this juncture I would like to request my colleague, hon. Reagan Okumu, to read the personal statement. I thank you.  

3.18
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a personal explanation by Mr Nyeko Micheal Ocula, Member of Parliament, Kilak County, Gulu District; and Mr Okumu Ronald Reagan, Member of Parliament, Aswa County, Gulu District, to the Parliament of Uganda. 

We are grateful to have been given this opportunity to make this statement in the House. As you are aware, we were arrested on the 20th of April 2005 and released on bail on the 17th of May 2005. We were indirectly informed of our arrest on the 20th of May 2005 at 4.40 p.m. from the CID head office. The Police informed us we were being taken to court for a murder charge after we voluntarily, as law-abiding citizens, took ourselves to the Director of CID. We learnt that the Director of CID wanted us and we were duly informed by the Speaker of Parliament.  

Many issues have been raised since our arrest. The Government through the minister’s statement in Parliament on the 21st of April 2005, which we watched; the New Vision newspaper, page 3 of the 23rd of April 2005; and the Red Pepper throughout that period raised matters, which almost tantamount to contempt of court although it was intended for the public court to judge us unfairly. 

On our part, we shall only talk about it after the judicial process is complete. We appeal for a speedy trial so that we can be relieved of the humiliation caused by this matter, as the truth will eventually come out.

Madam Speaker, in prison time slows down; the days seem endless; the cliché of time passing slowly usually has to do with idleness and inactivity. We, however, utilized the time to think for the nation. While in prison we asked ourselves whether one is ever justified in neglecting the welfare of one’s own family in order to fight for the welfare of others, and our country. We answered this by noticing that the doors of the democratic struggle are open to all those who choose to walk through them and by being Members of Parliament in the opposition for that matter, we have chosen to walk this path.  

The challenge for every prisoner, particularly every political prisoner, is how to survive prison impact, how to emerge from prison undiminished, and how to conserve and even replenish one’s own beliefs. The task of accomplishing that is learning exactly what one must do to survive. Uganda’s prison is designed to break one’s spirit and destroy one’s resolve. To do this the authority attempts to exploit every weakness, demolish every initiative, negate all signs of individuality, all with the idea of stamping out the spark that makes each one of us human and each one of us who we are; and it has been the intention of the framers of this charge on us to do just that. 

We have come out humble but strong and energized to pursue just politics. Something would be usually odd if a person is not liberal when he is young. For that matter, with our Christian beliefs and given our age, we sincerely and wholeheartedly shall, after the judicial process, forgive all those we know choose to persecute us this way. For once as country we must not live on revenge by paying back. Let this kind of thing end with us, but let justice prevail for every citizen. 

Honorable members, we watched you while in prison on the 21st of April 2005 debating a ministerial statement by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda on our arrest. We would like to thank all of you for what you contributed: hon. Byabagambi, hon. Capt. Matovu, hon. Ssekikubo and others in particular touched us and for once we felt Uganda still had a future with true nationalists above political belongings. 

We thank all of you who prayed for us, visited us in court and prison, wept for us, talked to us, send us money, messages and reached out to our families and constituencies. Your response changed our feelings about our arrest and todate we treat it as an act of individual in government. We would like to thank our party, the Forum for Democratic Change, and the members under the leadership of hon. Salaamu Musumba and Mr Sam Kalega Njuba, who were swift to act. 

We thank the entire nation the public, civil society and others who were generally concerned of our arrest.  It was until then that we discovered our leadership has impacted greatly on the nation and that Ugandans yarn for justice. We would like in a special way to thank our team of lawyers, Mr Sam Kalega Njuba, honorable Wandera Ogalo, Mr Yusuf Nsibambi, Mr Odong Opa, honorable Ben Wacha, Mr Rega Bakida and others who fought for our bail.  We thank the entire Acholi community the world over and our constituencies for standing by us for it was such a moment that we realized the silent followers.  

Madam Speaker and honorable members, with humility we would like to appreciate and thank the development partners in Uganda, and the diplomatic community. The international agencies, human rights organizations and foreign governments who stood and still stand by us for a speedy and fair trial, we thank them for visiting us in court and in prison. We are grateful to the prison authorities because through their professional skills they made us feel at home.  

On this note we would like to draw the attention of the House to some of the critical conditions in Luzira Upper Prison. As a Parliament we should speedily and urgently do something about it. These are some of the problems we faced as inmates together with other in Luzira Upper Prison: 

One, medical care is a big problem. Prisoners in most cases are only given prescriptions to buy their own drugs yet most come from a very poor background and cannot afford.

Two, overloading of the prison bus while proceeding to court. Prisoners are packed like fish without due regard to the Road Traffic Act leave alone the spread of contact and air-born diseases.

There is also the problem of bedbugs, lice and mosquitoes and Luzira Upper Prison has never been fumigated.

Feeding is the worst aspect because prisoners get one meal a day. Porridge is given in the morning; one meal is divided into two with mingled posho given in the morning and cooked beans in the late afternoon or vice-versa. The choice is to get posho and take it with porridge or wait for beans in the afternoon to complete your day. This is minus the poor quality and little quantity.

Upper Prison Luzira is overcrowded with over 2,800 prisoners and yet it was built for 600 inmates. There are over 300 condemned prisoners, and over 330 prisoners condemned by firing squad, that, is the military court martial. 

The last point is that there are more prisoners on remand, 1,700 prisoners, than those who are convicted. Some inmates are in remand awaiting court martial sitting because the chairman of the court martial is still attending a one-year course in Jinja. Many prisoners have stayed for over two to three years on remand while about 14 prisoners are already dead. They are being remanded by court martial for almost three years now, against the Constitutional Court ruling petition No. 6 of 2004 that they be granted bail. 

While we appeal to the Government and to our donor partners to improve prison conditions urgently, Parliament should use this budget session to give resources to the prison department. Otherwise, you could easily become a candidate any time. We thank the prison authorities for trying their best within the difficult circumstances whereby government gives them a very small budget yet it is the same government, which is holding many people on remand. Otherwise, a nation should not be judged by how it treats its highest citizens, the ministers and Members of Parliament, but its lowest citizens, the prisoners. Uganda treats her prison inmates like animals. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honorable members. For God and our country Uganda. (Applause).    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, under our Rules of Procedure this is a personal statement and so it will not attract any debate. However, I direct that the last part concerning the conditions in the prisons be directed to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to examine during the budget session. And honorable members, please, go there and act as witnesses. (Applause) Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, honorable members, you will recall that on the 15th of September 2004 a select committee was formed to look into the affairs of NSSF and this followed public outcry. I am glad to report that the committee has since completed its work and the report is read for debate. I would like to request to lay this report on the Table and copies are being made available to honorable members. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under rule 170 the report is supposed to be laid on the Table and ideally debate on it should not ensue before the expiry of three days to enable members to internalize the report. So, before the close of business today the reports will be given to you. You can go and internalise them and I will appoint a date for the presentation. Thank you. 

MR MWANDHA: In our Rules of Procedure, rule 185(3) requires that the chairman should also lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of his committee and I think it is right that he does so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I thank hon. Mwandha because you have been consistent on this particular point. Chairperson, when can we have the minutes of the proceedings?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the minutes are available and they can be laid on the Table tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will lay them on the Table tomorrow.

MR D’UJANGA: Yes, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Yes, Office of the Prime Minister?

3.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg your indulgence that I make a brief statement on an achievement that His Excellency the Vice-President made recently. 

As you all know, our Vice-President is by training a medical doctor and a specialist in epidemiology. Until he came to Parliament he was the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Makerere University, therefore, he undertook a lot of research in the field of medicine and epidemiology.

Recently, following his achievements in the study of diarrhoearal diseases particularly in children; HIV/AIDS infection and Tuberculosis; his achievements in managing collaborative research in various fields and programmes and his persistent work in fighting poverty among the people of this country, Case Western University in Cleveland Ohio awarded His Excellency the Vice-President the Degree of Doctor of Science. (Applause)

The degrees that you can earn at a university start at Bachelors, they go to Masters, they go to Doctor of Philosophy degree and Doctor of Science is the highest academic degree you can earn in the whole world. (Applause) Therefore, this House should know this and we recognize the fact that His Excellency the Vice-President is not just a political leader but he is an accomplished research scientist. (Applause) I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, do you want to say something about the Vice President? (Laughter)

3.35
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join Prof. Mondo Kagonyera for recognizing the achievements our gallant Vice-President made in the field of science. Many of us admire him and we would like to be like you bwana Vice-President but I also want to add my voice, on behalf of the people of Aruu County, to appreciate you and also recognize the tremendous achievements you have made.

I also want to join you in recognizing our MPs from Malawi. It is very timely they came to this Parliament today and it is also very timely particularly that the Vice-President is being recognized for such international achievements in the world of science. Malawi is a case in point of a country that has rightly rejected the third term –(Laughter)- and today is really a very big day for the Ugandan Parliament. It is also happening at such a time that when the Vice-President is being recognized internationally for having achieved – and you have just been Vice-President for two years and you have achieved such great honours. 

We urge you not to shy away, you can be a potential successor –(Laughter)- because some people have been there for 20 years but they have not been recognised. Probably we should liaise and make this achievement of the Vice-President and the presence of Malawi MPs to make a tangent and see how we can proceed. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

3.37
MRS MARY OKURUT (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to welcome the fraternity from Malawi and to congratulate the Vice-President. Worth noting is that the Vice-President has achieved a third degree so when we talk about the number 3 in this particular phase, the symbolism is not lost. (Laughter) 

I just want to congratulate the Vice-President. I also want to congratulate the people of Malawi for they got what they wanted. Similarly the people of Uganda will get what they want and what they desire. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, let this House note with appreciation the achievement of His Excellency the Vice-President, Dr Gilbert Bukenya, Member for Busiro North. Congratulations. (Applause). 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BILL, 2004

(Debate Continued.)

3.39
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues who yesterday thanked the minister and the committee for this Bill. It is such a good report that was presented.

It is indeed appropriate that an integrated and consolidated agricultural research system should be put in place because for practical reasons we know that research funding is always very scarce. It is not easy to come by. Therefore, integration and consolidation, when properly applied, will translate into maximum impact and benefit the country from whatever amount of funding may be available.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill is commendable. I find it very commendable for including a variety of stakeholders in research, particularly the private sector, the civil society and the ordinary farmers. This is indeed very commendable. I think it will ensure that various skills, traditional or otherwise, various plant crops and animal varieties, which are very good and essential, will receive the necessary attention for the benefit of this country. 

For example in Nakasongola County about 30 years ago there used to be a very handy maize variety locally known as Mwera igloo. This maize variety was characterized by being very sweet, multi-coloured, with a short cob and above all, quick to mature. It had actually adapted itself to the weather conditions of the area and it used to be intercropped with millet. But today that maize variety is under serious threat of extinction yet it used to come in handy. It would alleviate the hunger situation. Before the millet was ready for harvesting, the maize would be ready and people did not go hungry. 

Similarly, there are various nutritious grass varieties, which have also disappeared or are about to disappear. With the inclusion of the various stakeholders I think these important grass varieties and other crops will get their due attention and definitely will not disappear. 

In part II, section 7, the council is formulated. I find that the council has a fair amount of autonomy in its activities but in my opinion this autonomy is too much. It elevates the council to almost the level of an independent department or ministry and I think that threatens to choke the oversight role of the minister. 

In 7(i)(a) the Bill proposes that the council, among its various activities, will provide strategic direction. I thought providing strategic direction in research and so on would be the role of the Minister of Agriculture because the minister is the political head who has the strategic vision. He/she could definitely share it with this council and then the role of the council would be to translate this strategic vision into practical reality. 

I propose, Madam Speaker, that there should be some provision in the Bill for the minister to effectively exercise this role of providing the strategic vision and then letting the council translate it into practical reality.  

The council is also said to be able to harmonize agricultural research in the private sector. I would like clarification from the minister and the chairman of the committee how exactly this will be done without conflicting with people in the private sector who will be undertaking private agricultural research for themselves. How will this be balanced with intellectual rights and so on? 

Supposing a company carries out research to boost its competitiveness in this competitive world - in the agricultural sector? Will it be obliged to share its findings with the council or will it keep its findings for its internal consumption and to boost its competitiveness? I would like clarification on how this will be achieved without bringing in unnecessary conflict. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill is very good. It is very nice. I support it wholeheartedly. Thank you.

3.45
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the Bill on agricultural research. About 85 percent of our population still depends on agriculture for survival in this country. That forebears the support that government has attached to agricultural research and we as Members of Parliament have a basic responsibility to support and put a Bill like this one into effect. 

Without research in agriculture a lot of our population would be doomed. What we should be doing really is to strengthen the research stations we have. I would like to see Namulonge strengthened; I would like to see Kawanda strengthened; in the Eastern region we would like to see a place like Serere funded more and strengthened to do research into those crops that have helped that part of the country. 

Over the years, perhaps due to shortage of budgetary financing, these stations have not been funded as well as they should have been in the past and as such we hope agriculture will receive the priority and support that it needs.  

I just went through a report, which showed that of all the – I would call them farmers of this country - only about 10 percent are visited by the people who are responsible for expansion of agriculture in the rural areas. We should really work hard to see that our peasants - I do not know how we can include it in this Bill - that our peasants are visited by the people who are trained in agriculture, in order to increase production. I would like to see that we are ahead of the concerns of the people as far as research in agriculture is concerned. 

At the moment there is again a cassava mosaic coming and by the time we react it might be too late. We might go back to the 1980s when the whole cassava crop was wiped out in the Eastern region and we had a famine. So, I am one of those people who greatly think that we cannot advance in this country unless we address the problems of the majority of the people. As I pointed out, 85 percent of the people in this country practice some form of agriculture. That is where we should be spending the money. I hope that this year when we come to passing the budget agriculture will be funded better than it has been in the past. Thank you very much.

3.51
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for availing me the opportunity to make a few remarks on this proposed law. This country is supposed to be basically driven by the private sector as per policies of the Government, but the private sector is supposed to be very interested in agriculture and the related subjects. It is a pity that after 100 years of Africans being civilized we are moving in a backward direction in that we are running a totally disorganized economy. 

I would have expected not only the minister in charge of the sector but also the committee to have pointed out what is going to change this economy and cause a paradigm shift from a US $200 per capita income to US $2,000 or US $6,000; to do what other countries have done. If you look at the revolution of the German economy and the revolution of the Japan economy, these economies started realizing that for every zone, say we have 15 regions, every region should have a public university, which is involved in research. This was done in all regions, facilitating universal knowledge, yet we are actually moving at a snail’s pace. 

Since we built Makerere University, a renowned university in the whole world, I think it is now 100 or 50 years, there is no other renowned university coming up. Even Kyambogo is for yesterday; that is the second one. The third one – oh! The second one was Mbarara, nobody yet knows about it anywhere. Kyambogo is coming on board; the fourth is Gulu. That is actually not approaching the problem of agricultural research seriously. 

If we want to approach the problem of agricultural research seriously, I want to have a university in Busoga region, Jinja, the most populous area in the world –(Interjections)- I mean in Uganda. Of course it is in the world as well because it is where the highest density of people are being produced today on the African continent. So when I say the world, I am referring to the most backward area and I am surprised nobody is saying there should be a serious research institute in that part of the country. 

You look at Karamoja, a place that is highly disadvantaged, that is an area where somebody should be talking about setting up a university in the midst of the problem. We are talking about peripheral issues; these are specialized institutions actually meant to serve the country. It is a pity when you talk about the  -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. We are all aware that Jinja is an industrial town. The best research institution there then would be for industrial research and if we are to talk about research institutions for agriculture, then it would be befitting to put them in areas, which are really known for serious agriculture such as Teso.

MR WAMBUZI: Yes, the point, which I was articulating was actually to cause Dr Epetait to wake up so that he actually shows that he is listening. I will try to inform him clearly that today, even if you want to do industrialization, you must be very careful about the damage the industries are going to cause. Therefore, they are intertwined. Industry and agriculture or other sciences are supposed to be together. That is why when we were in Makerere in the 70s we insisted that we should not separate the Faculty of Technology from Makerere. Why? 

You know, when people study together all the problems, when they solve the problem, they attack all the problems of nature. So a university worth its name should really have most of the faculties on its campus. I expect Gulu will encompass agriculture, engineering and medicine. 

Similarly, I expect that the University of Mbarara should actually go ahead and do all the other aspects, including the humanities. A university in a third world country like this one should be a complete university with a complete package to attack the problems. 

I am saying this country is long overdue in having at least 24 government public universities. It is overdue and I should tell the Prime Minister, or the Vice-President who is here, that the sort of money you should be demanding for from our donor partners is that for pumping into serious universities in Teso. We should have a university in Teso, we should have a university in Karamoja, we should have a university in Lango, we should have a university in Acholi, we should have a university in West Nile, and we should have a university in Mbarara. There should be a university in Busoga for all purposes. Why? Because the only way you can change people is by creating serious research institutions in those areas. 

What do I mean by this? When the university is carrying out research, they change the people and they sell their research products immediately for utilization and for marketing. So, the most important thing, which I expected this Bill to say, is that, “There are going to be 15 to 20 universities as the centers for research, which are going to be licensed”. 

It is a pity we are talking about PARIs and ZARIs. When you make these PARIs and ZARIs and they are specialized institutions in fish, another one specialized in cotton and you distribute them around, then you are going to lose the focus because the ZARIs, the zonal ones, are also going to distribute the strength.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. I think the honourable member is being taken up by enthusiasm. Twenty universities doing research in Uganda cannot be funded. 

Secondly, it is the policy of this government to zone agriculture so that according to the zone, the particular crops can be researched and the farmers encouraged in those crops instead of one farmer growing ten crops. So, let us not be carried away by emotions. Let us try to be realistic to see what we can fund, instead of thinking of 30 universities in Busoga. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: I did not say Busoga; I said we need regions to have universities. Madam Speaker, if somebody thinks small, he will act small. I did not say Busoga; I said we need regions to have universities. If somebody thinks that he will shoot something by pointing down, certainly he can never shoot a bird, which is on the tree. 

The point, which I am making this afternoon, is to say we must think wide and big to conquer the calamity, which we are in. We are so backward as a nation, so backward as a continent that if we have people who think that if you start talking about two, three, four, five or six public universities you are being stupid. It is better you aim high in order to strike low. This is the point, which I am trying to say. 

Of course I have overstretched it in a way, particularly for Dr Mallinga because I know he is a bit slow. Therefore, you have to pull him a bit so he moves at the same pace with you. The point I am trying to put is that for example he is not very far from the region of Tororo. Tororo is one of the richest areas. If you go in the area around Serere, it has got uranium, it has got iron, and it has got phosphates. That is why I am telling you that it has got the biggest deposit of fertilizers. So if you want to talk, let us talk in the wide sense because there is no place in Uganda without endowments both of minerals and fertile soils. 

When you are talking about agriculture, almost every part of Uganda can actually carry out agriculture and every part of Uganda has got specialized minerals. If you go to Gulu, there is plenty of oil under Gulu or Kitgum. Go to Karamoja, it is very rich in minerals but it can also become a food basket if we only provided it with water. Now it is only a basket of meat and sick cattle. 

What I am saying is that if you put up a university in Karamoja you will make a serious change of civilization and you will see the impact of what will happen in Karamoja. If you put up a university in Lango you will be surprised what will happen in that area. You will get all sorts of marvelous things happening, so when you start saying that one university is enough, what are you talking about? It is 100 years since you were civilized. Do you still hope that one university will help you? If you want serious research to attack the market, what you need are serious institutions because the country is so backward that if we do not act now, we are going to have a very big problem.

Another thing, which I expected these people to have done, especially the committee, is who is going to protect people’s research? Right now everybody’s research is actually being stolen. This law is supposed to encourage the protection of researchers. The original way of doing things in other countries is research but as soon as you publish your research it becomes protected by the law. In this law, which we are trying to publish, nothing is mentioned. Therefore, if researchers are not protected, it becomes a problem. Why should anybody should wake up and do research if it is going to be stolen by a professor or a chairman of a certain council? 

DR MALLINGA: The hon. Member for Bulamogi is misdirected. The purpose of research is to propagate knowledge. When you publish your research it is protected. When anyone else wants to quote your work they get your permission and that is known all over the world. You do not have to protect - your concept of protecting research is, I think, misconceived.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, he knows very well that even people who are playing music in this country are not protected. The patent rights of people in this country – in fact you need to bring the patent law to this House because if you are talking about -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. He is right. We have to work on our copyright and patent law but I would like to inform him that we are also signatory to the International Convention on Copyright and Patent and some of us are in the process of tabling this law so that we can domesticate some aspect of it in order to protect what the honorable member is talking about. Definitely it will be looked into. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That reminds me that the Leader of Government Business undertook to find out what happened to the private members’ Bill, which hon. Oulanyah moved on these particular issues. Hon. Mallinga, there is plagiarism. I hope you are not encouraging Ugandans to do their thing and then other people steal it without acknowledging it.

DR MALLINGA: In the academic world, for example if the hon. Member for Bulamogi did research and published it, for me to quote his work I would have to get permission from him. That is the honorable thing to do. I cannot go behind his back and publish his work as mine; that is plagiarism. It is protected in the universities but patent is a different thing. When you discover something for public use and you have a copyright, your product can be protected for a certain period of years. Only then can people produce, for example drugs, and motorcars; if the honorable engineer comes up with a special design it will be protected.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to say that the private member’s Bill is still on and hon. Oulanyah, Mao, and myself are supposed to bring it up but like you have just said, we need a response from the Prime Minister because the Government was interested in being party to it. It will still come. It is on.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The member holding the Floor alluded to the fact that this Bill does not take care of patents but I just want to inform him that clause 43 of the Bill is very explicit on the patents and conventions. It is a long one; I will not waste his time to quote the whole clause.

MR WAMBUZI: That is why you heard me mentioning it. The law itself is simply hot air. That is why I expected the committee to have it on board to remind the whole House that much as you are talking of quoting the patent law in that book, actually the actual patent law is being defiled left, right and centre.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the member holding the Floor that some time ago NARO instituted a committee to work out modalities for intellectual property rights. So, I think it is in the making.  

MR WAMBUZI: I think we have stimulated some of the researchers adequately enough for them to brief us on what is going on, but I thought that there was something, which needed to be addressed.

Another point, which I want to know about, is on the reporting to the whole public. What sort of reporting are we going to receive from those particular PARIs and ZARIs in a continuous way? Once we pass the law and we allow this thing to be done, we expect to get a feedback. At the end of the day if we are going –(Interjection)- no, not at Parliament. If we are going to vote for these councils to receive money then we expect to see whom they are exactly going to report to and whether they are using the money according to this Bill.

It is very important for this Bill to give us a timetable of when the law will be enacted. With those few words I beg to support the Bill. Thank you.

4.08
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on the report. First of all I would like to thank the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the very good report.  

We depend entirely on research. Without research today we would not have good production in agriculture and our modernization of agriculture definitely requires a lot of research if it is to improve.  

My concern goes to the researchers themselves. The research profession is not very attractive work. It is an indoor job where you are not seen and whatever you do if it is not properly publicized, they tend to forget the people who are labouring to do the research. That means the researchers should be paid very well because their work is very tedious. Also, if a researcher has discovered a crop, which is really valuable, definitely such a researcher should be given an award in form of medals so that they are motivated.  

Our researchers are doing a good job. I can give an example of late Aluma who did a lot for agriculture; now he has died and nobody is talking about him. His family is going to suffer. Can we do something for our researchers so that they are motivated and they continue to do their work very well?

I am also concerned about the dissemination of information obtained from research. What is the procedure to ensure that this information reaches the farmer, the woman who is the village, and persons with disabilities so that they can use this information and improve their methods of agriculture? I think we need to improve the method of information dissemination to all the people, to all the parts of Uganda so that we make use of this information and the products, which are newly discovered.

There is what we call appropriate technology for persons with disabilities. I would like to see that the Bill addresses how we can involve blind persons and people who are physically handicapped, in agriculture. There is appropriate technology. I need to see that the researchers take time to also find out the best method of involving persons with disabilities in agriculture; the type of machines and the type of farming for them to do. For example the blind people, how many people have done research to find out how blind people work in the fields? I would like to see that this Bill addresses the needs of persons with disabilities. 

We are not benefiting from this Modernization of Agriculture because nobody knows our needs and nobody knows how persons with disabilities can engage in farming. So please, I hope that when this law comes out persons with disabilities will be considered. There is a small project on appropriate technology for persons with disabilities –(Interruption)

MRS WONEKA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I have listened to the concerns of hon. Baba Diri on how people with disabilities can use this law. This law is addressing research, which research is disseminated through a programme like the National Agricultural Advisory Services. When you go to those districts where NAADS is in operation, you do find people with disabilities have embraced this programme and they do participate seriously. This is what I wanted to assure my colleague about, that people with disabilities have not been left out.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you for the information. I would like to find out the appropriate mechanism, which you have put in place where persons with disabilities can operate machines efficiently according to their disability. Is it there? Do we have Braille information where I can read to myself the new information you have got? Do you have interpreters down there at NAADS to interpret for the deaf persons? These questions are not yet answered and I would like to see that they are answered through this Bill when it is passed into law. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to again support hon. Baba Diri’s position. Each time we have a law here she raises these matters consistently, but it seems nobody is taking an interest in what she is saying. Where are the provisions for the disabled? She has raised it all the time since she came to this House. I really must support her on this one.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): What Parliament can direct is that after the Bill has been passed it should be sent to Kyambogo. Kyambogo has facilities for Braille translation of any literature, and they have those facilities in the Special Needs Department. So this Bill can easily be translated into Braille and produced en mass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it should go beyond this Bill. Perhaps it should be like the certificate of compliance we have in financial matters because all the Bills affect the disabled; every thing we do here affects them. Maybe we need a certificate of compliance or a certificate of directives, I do not know but I think we need something to help the disabled.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support that. When we brought the Persons with Disabilities Bill here, one of the reasons was that we wanted to see the aspect of persons with disabilities mainstreamed in all our laws. We did propose in that Bill that where you have companies, which have a certain percentage of persons with disabilities, it should attract a tax rebate in order to encourage other entities to have these people working there. Persons with disabilities are really marginalized and discriminated against in all areas. 

When you come to the area of agriculture, it means that it perpetuates their poverty situation because when you look at the poor - the poorest of the poor - persons with disabilities make up the majority of our poor. Therefore, when hon. Baba Diri says what she says, I propose that apart from the financial compliance we should also look at the issue of persons with disabilities’ compliance in order not to leave out these marginalized groups. I thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I want to make a contribution to this issue of Bills being translated for people with disabilities. With due respect I think that the point hon. Baba Diri raised is right, but remember also that we have a good number of our people who do not read English and we have not been able to translate these Bills into local languages. So funds allowing, it is not only the people with disabilities but also those who do not know English will be able to understand our laws. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERLY AND DISABILITY (Mrs Florence Sekabira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My department has been in touch with the Ministry of Agriculture and NARO, in particular in the area of appropriate technology for farmers with disabilities. The late Dr Luma was one of the people we were working with, and engineer Odogola. The concern was over farmers who for example use wheel chairs or tri-circles. Can they attach a plough and go through the field? Can they attach a planter so that they can also be able to plant?

The other concern has been about the researched varieties. Is it possible for someone who is crawling to have a Mango to his level where he or she can be able to harvest? Is it possible for visually impaired persons to go through the field and get some work done? It had been worked on some years back with ILO but we need to improve on that, and the Bill could look at how best it can incorporate the concerns of farmers with disabilities such that research continues to take care of how best they can also benefit. NARO could be funded to look at some of these technologies they have in the agriculture, and to see how farmers with disabilities can benefit. 

Teso region was addressed; some work was done for it in my department. There are works in Soroti, and also in Pallisa. The ministry can build on that and they continue to ensure that farmers with disabilities do not lose out. Thank you.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, one other way of involving people with disabilities is to mainstream them for example when we were forming the National Agricultural Research Council there is a provision, which says there should be four representatives of farmers at least one of whom should be women. However, you can also say that at least one of the them should be a farmer representing people with disabilities. In a way that will cater for the interests of the disabled - may be an amendment can be put in the Bill?

4.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable colleagues who have made positive contributions to our report and I also want to report here that on behalf of the committee we are very grateful for the support you have given to research in this country and particularly agricultural research.  

My response of will first be of a general nature and then specific clarifications that were sought by honourable members will be clarified by the honourable minister.  

This Bill is intended to seriously carry out institutional reform, which will be in compliance with PMA requirements, in order to provide research services more effectively. It should incorporate the contribution of the private sector and the universities into the mainstream of agricultural research. We welcome this idea and we welcome the proposal. I think that is a step in the right direction. 

Another purpose of reform is to put the institution in a better, stronger and effective position than it is now. We believe that with the report and with the amendments that you have proposed to the Bill, the Public Agricultural Research Organization will be stronger and more effective, able to handle the challenges of agricultural research and technology development in this country.

I now want to appeal to the House - when the issue of genetically modified organisms came up yesterday I discovered that there was lack of information in the House about it. The whole issue was mixed up; the subject was completely mixed up and I think the Ministry of Agriculture should pay particular attention to this component, which affects agriculture because this us a very wide discipline. It does not only affect agriculture. It is a big science full of research and probably government should find time to be able to induct Parliament into this technology.

Finally, I want to clarify one thing. The hon. Members of Parliament from the Teso region have expressed concern over the way in which the Bill treated Serere Research Centre. Indeed it was not an accident. It was initially a deliberate plan because in the thinking of the Bill the people who identified the research institutions identified one public research institution per sub sector. As a result Serere was left out because they were convinced that the crop sector could be handled effectively either by Namulonge or Kawanda. 

Looking at the matter seriously, the committee urges the ministry to bring back on board Serere; and indeed we are grateful that the Government has cooperated and in the amendment Serere bas been included as one of the Public Agricultural Research Institutes.

The other area that we thought was appropriate was research on the rangeland, which somehow was down played. We thought it should be elevated and the farmers along the cattle corridor are now well taken care of with the arrangement that we have put in place. We are also grateful that the ministry understood the position and those areas of concern were incorporated into the amendment. Otherwise for the rest of the concerns, the specifics should be squarely handled by the minister. 

As I conclude I would like to urge the House to reflect very carefully on the amendments so that we leave the organization, which is handling public research, more effective and strong enough to face the challenges of agricultural modernization. I thank you all.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the chairman. I want to thank colleagues who have supported this Bill for your enthusiasm in research because without research we cannot develop. I will respond to six issues, which I think I need to respond to. The rest have been addressed in the amendment. 

Hon. Baba Diri, when you look at clause 43 on page 36 of the Bill, sub-clause (5), on discoveries it says: “Where any discovery, invention or improvement is vested in the council under sub-section 1, the council may award to the person responsible for the discovery, invention or improvement such bonus as agreed to make provision for financial participation by that person in the profits derived from the discovery, invention or improvement to such extent as the council may determine after consultation with the Minister and in accordance with the existing laws relating to intellectual property rights”.

Yesterday there was concern over coverage but I want to assure colleagues that we want to be everywhere. This system had collapsed and as you know NARO has been building it up. But when you look at clause 34, page 29: “Establishment of other public agricultural research institutes subject to section 65; the minister may, on the advice of the council, establish such other public agricultural research institutes as may be deemed necessary for the purposes of carrying out agricultural research”. When the ones we have identified now are firm on the ground then the council can recommend to the minister to pick on others from the list of research institutes.  

Hon. Mallinga, I am very grateful you captured the essence of the policy and why I am proposing that the individual research institutes should be semi-autonomous and body corporates to manage day-to-day research programmes. He emphasized that. The secretariat will facilitate the council, which has the board to handle policy, advisory and other issues.  

Hon. Muruli Mukasa was concerned over how the council will report. In this bill NARO has always been reporting to the minister and the minister to Parliament because that is one of our institutions. That will remain the same.

To add to what the hon. Minister in charge of Disability has said, my officers have this to add. NARO has a programme to work with people with disabilities and they have run several courses. People with disabilities have also developed appropriate technologies and this should continue.

There was a concern over how we are going to strengthen these institutions and this is what I have to add. A functional analysis was done recently and in support of institutional capacity building there was a recommendation, which is being implemented. Yesterday you saw in the papers that NARO was advertising to get new scientists. Annually there will be a five percent increase in that over a period of 44 years to get to the maximum level of 768 staff from the current 611.

Yesterday our Deputy Director General wanted to clear the issue on GM foods and this is what he had to say: “The technology being referred to is known as terminated gin technology. This technology is not in Uganda nor is it in the world as yet. MONSATO Company was stopped from commercializing this technology as a result of public concern”.  

The maize seeds, which my colleague mentioned yesterday, are for hybrid maize. Hybrids are not GMs. Hybrids are very good and high yielding varieties, which must be fully supported. This is the only type of seed, which can get farmers out of poverty. The rest we shall address in the amendment, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I put the question that the National Agricultural Research Bill, 2004 be read a Second Time.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BILL, 2004

4.32
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to take you back but we shall start by amending the long title. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one comes at the end.

Clause 2

MR ODIT: Okay. Clause 2, on page 5, delete the definition of “advisory committee” and the justification is that it should accommodate the various amendments proposed in the Bill thereafter.

On clause 2 again, page 6 -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honorable chairperson, you are saying we delete “advisory committee” and substitute it with what?

MR ODIT: The definitions  should be deleted completely.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The whole of that is deleted?

MR ODIT: Yes. We continue on page 6, clause 2 still, delete the definition of “council” and insert the following new definition. “Council means the governing body of the National Agricultural Research Organisation.”  The justification is that this is because the Council is the governing body of the apex.

Continuing with clause 2, delete the definition of the “executive secretary”. The post is not necessary as each of the institutes will be semi-autonomous and there will be no need for another umbrella organisation to coordinate their affairs.  

Clause 2 again, delete “council” appearing on the third line of the definition of National Agricultural Research System and insert “organisation.” This is a consequential amendment.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the interpretation section of clause 2 be amended as follows: one, by deleting the words “advisory committee” as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then we go to “council; you re-defined the name.  Honourable members, I put the question that the word “council” be re-defined as proposed by the chairperson.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the words “executive secretary” be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And that the National Agricultural Research System means all those, and you delete the word “council” and substitute it with the word “organisation” as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, there was another amendment, which I think did not come out clearly. That is on the definition of “Zonal Agricultural Research Institute”, the very last definition in clause 2. We had agreed that it should be Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute.  So it should read, “Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute means a Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute established under section 32”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the phrase “Zonal Agricultural Research Institute” be amended by adding between the words “Research” and “Institute” the words “and Development”.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 as amended do stand part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 5, sub-clauses (1) and (2) delete “Council” wherever it appears and insert “Organisation”. In sub-clause (3) delete the entire sub-clause and insert the following: “The organisation shall comprise of the council as its governing body, the committees of the council as its specialised organs, a secretariat for its day to day operations, and the Public Agricultural Research Institutes and the Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute as its public research service provider”.  

MRS MUKWAYA: I support the first amendment, but I want to move an amendment on the second amendment to say that, that amendment in sub-clause (3) should stop at “a secretariat for its day to day operations”. 

Madam Chairperson, the additional part is already catered for in clause 32, and when we get there that amendment will be redundant.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, excluding “public agricultural research institute and zonal agricultural research and development institute” from part of the organisation is a bit difficult to conceive, because if we are considering public agricultural institute as part of the organisation, it should be seen in that totality. After all, we have specified that this research institute will be a service provider for public research. The committee felt that it would be appropriate to bring these institutions under one umbrella. That is why our amendment was presented the way we presented it. So I am finding difficulty in accepting the minister’s new amendment.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what about her submission that the matter is provided for and therefore will be redundant here?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, the amendment that I am going to propose alongside what we agreed with the Chairman is that “For purposes of this Act, there are established public agricultural research institutes as provided for in the Third Schedule to this Act as semi-autonomous agencies under the policy guidance of the National Agricultural Research Organisation for the purposes of providing agricultural research services.” That is why I find that if this is carried, what is here is redundant. But if we want to have both of them I have no problem, I was just saying for drafting purposes it is neater that we have no repetition in the Bill.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the report of the Minister but to also invite her to remember the discussions we had especially when we were talking about the organisational structure. The committee thought for purposes of clarity since this Public Agricultural Research Institute and Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute are part of the organisation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, first I put the question that wherever the word “council” occurs in sub-section 5 it will be substituted by the word “organisation”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, under the same clause we insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “The organisation shall establish a forum for collaboration with other research stakeholders including but not limited to; universities, private sector and private researchers”. 
The justification is that these are consequential amendments as a result of the decision to name the apex body as a National Agricultural Research Organization and to make sure the rest of the entities interested in research are linked up with the council. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I just want to invite my chairman to look at page 12 of the Bill clause 7(2); that one is already catered for in the Bill. So, the amendment is not necessary. (Interjection)- page 12 clause 7(2) “In carrying out its functions as a forum for agricultural researchers in Uganda the council shall convene a meeting at least once a year of representatives of agricultural research service providers, farmers, private sector and civil society and other stakeholders for the purpose of discussing issues relevant to agricultural research and setting agricultural research priorities”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, is this not sufficient to cover your needs?

MR ODIT: Yes, I agree with the Minister, but this provides for a forum not the function where these stakeholders can get together and we are defining who are the other stakeholders to constitute this forum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable chairperson, this provision says, “in carrying out its functions as a forum for agricultural researchers in Uganda, council shall convene a meeting at least once a year of representatives for agricultural research service providers, farmers, private sectors and civil society”. 

MR ODIT: Then for that matter I concede and accept the Minister’s amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.
 
Clause 6

MR ODIT: Clause 6 on page 11, delete the word “council” and insert “organisation”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No objection, I think. I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR ODIT: Clause 7 sub-clause (1), delete “council” wherever it appears and insert “organisation”. This is a consequential amendment as a result of the need to have one secretariat. 
In 7(b) insert clause 1(b) delete the word “collaboration” and insert the word “consultation”. The justification is that the council is not independent but inter-dependent with other bodies. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I agree to the consequential amendment of the council, but I want to plead with the chairman that the Uganda National Scientific Council has delegated research in agriculture to NARO.  So, if you have a delegated function it is only right that you collaborate with the person who delegated you, do not consult. That is why we put here collaboration because this is a delegated function of another council to another body.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any strong reason to that one chairperson?

MR ODIT: When you delegate, one would expect that the lower organ should be able to consult, but in this case probably since we are creating a fairly autonomous organisation, the best way to treat this amendment is the collaboration that the Minister is proposing. So, I have no problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7(1) be amended by substituting the word “organisation” for the word “council”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

Madam Chairperson, in clause 8 on page 12, delete the word “council” wherever it appears and insert the word “organisation”. These are consequential amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS MUKWAYA: In paragraph (d) the chairman has missed out that we delete the words “license” appearing in the first line. It is feared strict licensing requirement may stifle agricultural research; we agreed with the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you want us to delete the word “license”?

MRS MUKWAYA: And licensing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, clause 9 requires redrafting, and sub-clause 9(1) will be redrafted to read as follows: 

“The council shall consist of the following members- 
(a) an eminent Ugandan scientist who shall be the chairperson of the council appointed by the minister;

(b) the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry responsible for Finance and Economic Planning;

(c) the Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for environmental protection;

(d) three persons with experience in agricultural research representing the universities, public agricultural research institutes and private agricultural research institutes and private agricultural research service providers at least one of whom shall be a woman;

(e) the chairperson of Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST);

(f) two distinguished agricultural scientists who are not members of the organisation to be nominated by the management committees and approved by the council;

(g) the director of crop resources in the Ministry of Agriculture;

(h) the director of animal resources; 

(i) the commissioner for fisheries; 

(j) the head of the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, 

(k) one representative of the agro-industries nominated by the agro-industry association and approved by the council;

(l) the director general; and

(m) four representatives of farmers at least two of whom shall be women elected in a manner prescribed by the minister, recognised farmers groups or organisations.” (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes hon. Baba Diri?

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment to clause 9(m). He says four farmers among whom are the two women and one person with disability. Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Clause 9(1)(b).

MRS BABA DIRI: 9 what?

HON. MEMBERS: Clause 9(1)(b).

MRS BABA DIRI: 9(1)(b) okay. So, I would like to add persons with disability. I do not want to increase the number, but I would like to use the number, which is already there. If we have two women then it should be at least one person with disability out of the four.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, we had already agreed in the debate. But before we go to the amendment of the chairperson, I wanted to move an amendment to 9(1) because the committee was concerned about who will appoint the council. It is vague. 

So, the council shall consist of the following members appointed by the minister. On the submission of the chairman, I am only agreeable to sub-clause (1) paragraph (a) that actually an eminent Ugandan Scientist and paragraph (f) two distinguished agricultural scientists who are not members of the organisation to be nominated by the management committees and approved by the council. The rest of what he has submitted is in clause 9(1)(a) to (k) of the Bill. 

So, I propose that we retain what is in the Bill because all those people are maintained and we amend paragraph (b) to say “four representatives of farmers at least two of whom shall be women among whom one should be a person with disability…” –(Interjection)- Yes, because two women –(Interjection)- Yes. “four representatives of farmers at least two of whom shall be women, out of the two one should be a person with disability.” (Interjection)- the drafters will know how to put it, what –(Interjection)- Madam Chairperson, “four people out of whom one should be a person with disability.” The drafters should put it that way because I do not want to increase public administration for NARO to eat up the money for research. So we retain the number four out of whom one will be a person with disability. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now honourable minister, before you go there, you have said that you agree with 1 (a), you are not interested in (b), (c) and (d) and you go to (f). But when I look at the Bill, the permanent secretaries whom you proposed are not the same as those who are in the chairperson’s proposal. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes. Madam Chairperson, that is why I am saying that you cannot go in a ministry for policy matters and you go to commissioners, and the like. It is the Permanent Secretary who should delegate. So, in the Bill we are putting there the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture. But the PS Environment is not necessary, he is just increasing –(Interjection)- Yes, there is research for forestry, which is catered for under the Forest Authority. What I am saying is that you remove the commissioner, Director Animal, etcetera, in the Ministry of Agriculture and replace those for PS, Ministry of Agriculture as in the Bill. 

I am also saying that the chairperson should be an eminent scientist without even stating it. Prof. Kayanja is an eminent scientist but to feel comfortable, I have conceded on that. 

I am also conceding on (f); two distinguished agricultural scientists who are not members of the organisation to be nominated by the management committee and approved by the council. When you add those two to what is in clause 9, it is okay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are you still sticking to your position?

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I do not know why the Ministry of Natural Resources should not be represented. The Minister is saying that since Uganda National Forest Authority is represented on this Board, there is no need for a representative from that ministry. Is that what the Minister is alluding to?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe let us hear from a committee member.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  This is a council, which is going to be a real steward of agricultural research in this country, and if we have to strengthen agricultural research and come up with clear direction in all sectors affecting agriculture, the committee thought it prudent to have a strong and knowledgeable council. We do not want the Kabalega case to come up again.  We want to add a lot of strength in terms of knowledge. That is why we thought that a technocrat on fisheries should be there on his own merit, on crop, on animal rather than leaving it just to a PS to see who is to delegate, because sometimes one sector may miss out in the strategic planning for research. 

We did debate these issues with the minister and her technical team in the committee and I thought we had agreed. I am rather surprised that we are beginning to change goal posts. I am appealing to you honourable minister that this representation is really in good faith to strengthen the council and ease your work. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Speaker, unless this amendment is a vote of no confidence in my PS -(Interjections)– Yes, let me start by that, because he has all this time been directing agriculture in this country and we have never failed to be represented in meetings of NARO. I have evidence.

Two, Madam Speaker, in clause 9(1)(e), I am moving an amendment that - The chairperson of Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST) has not been attending meetings because he has argued that, NARO is a subsidiary of a council. He has always delegated the Executive Secretary. That is why instead of the chairperson, I am replacing him with the Executive Secretary, UNCST to effective representation.  

Madam Speaker, I can also add here that I went to Tororo Research Institute where the Director of Animal Resources was representing us effectively, but there were policy matters, which were never brought to top management because they were never reported through the Permanent Secretary, and we were at a loss. Even my colleague, hon. Mary Mugyenyi can – This is the only council where juniors are going to be represented at a council and report to the Permanent Secretary. This is the only structure that I am seeing here. 

I plead with the committee to leave the Permanent Secretary, Agriculture, the Chairman of UNCST - I called him today and he agreed that if he is replaced with the Executive Secretary of his organisation – Madam Speaker, why I am rejecting paragraph (j) and (k) is that when you look at the Bill on page 13, under representative from the private sector, we should not pick from the private sector; they have their mechanism of choosing representation on board.  

When you look at paragraph (d), here the committee is choosing one representative of agro-industry nominated by the Agro Industry Association and approved by the council. Our recommendation is much better, Madam Speaker. A representative of the Uganda Non-government Organisations Forum, because there are other NGOs, which are not agro-based, who are participating in agriculture. So we should allow them to have representation as and when the need arises. 

We should not tie their hands in the law, because if you find that the person we have put here does not attend meetings, should I come back to Parliament to move an amendment? That is my problem. Give a better flexibility for the constituency to find a suitable person to represent them on the board; we are not leaving them out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just want to know. Is the executive secretary for this council a professional or an administrator?

MRS MUKWAYA: He is an administrator, but I have not checked. However, the chairman has refused to attend meetings of NARO. He says he delegated the research agriculture to NARO, so he cannot sit in their board meetings. That is the dilemma that I have. That is why he has given me the Executive Secretary, or we just say a representative from UNCST and we leave it at that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because I am an administrator, I do not know what they have been doing in that meeting.

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the minister that the Executive Secretary of UNCST be brought on board, because the Executive Secretary is the Chief Executive of the council, he is the operational person of the council, he is the custodian of policies of the council, and he is in a better position to translate such policies into the agricultural sector.

Secondly, I would also like to agree that the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture should be here. I think it was an omission. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture should be a member of the council.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Esele, what do you say about the PS for Environment Protection and that for Finance? Also advise us on those.

DR ESELE: The PS Finance for obvious reasons should be there, Environment Protection, yes, because that is responsible for forestry, so he should be there.  If our problem is the numbers, then I would propose that we substitute the PS Agriculture for Uganda Co-operative Alliance. Madam Chairperson, I think it was a serious oversight that we missed out the Permanent Secretary for Agriculture. This officer has to be there.

On the representation from UNCST, if the Executive Secretary is an effective representative, then we have him. After all, he has been representing the interests of UNCST on this Board for all these years. For reasons, which we have not been able to know, the chairperson has not been a very responsible representative, so we hope that the spirit of the Executive Secretary will still be carried. For that matter we can accept this amendment that the Executive Secretary, UNCST can take on the place of the chairperson of UNCST on this board. But for the Permanent Secretary of Agriculture, it was just an oversight.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, supposing one day you get a head of this national council who is interested in attending meetings? You are saying this one has refused to attend meetings. Why don’t you say a representative of UNCST, then they can delegate formally? If the head wants to attend in future, maybe he will attend.

MR WAGONDA: Madam Chairperson, I quite agree with you, but I think the consideration by the chairperson of UNCST was that he would be attending NARO meetings of which he would be party and then he would have to sit again as chairman, UNCST. There could be possible cause of interest, which I think he was trying to avoid, whereas if the Executive Secretary attends, he is his subordinate; there is no conflict of interest in that case. I think it could be neater to have the Executive Secretary of UNCST represent the Council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable chairperson, you have abandoned the Executive Director of NAADS because it is not the proposal.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I am rejecting their amendment and sticking to my amendment and only agreeing to 9(1)(a) where they have persuaded me that we should say that he must be an eminent scientist. I reminded them that Prof. Kayanja who is the chairman of the Board was appointed without even putting it in the law, but I have no objection. 

Then, Madam Chairperson, I said that instead of 9(1)(e) because when you look in the Bill, on page 14, the Director General, the Executive Director of NAADS, and the Executive Secretary, UNCST, are ex-officio; they do not have a vote in that. That is why I was saying that all these people they are bringing here - I said that the chairperson is okay, four representatives with the amendment of hon. Baba Diri, one of whom shall be a person with disability, a representative from the private sector without choosing, tying these people’s hands, a representative of the Uganda Non-Governmental Organisations Forum, three persons with experience which is in paragraph (d), it is already catered for in here. They had left out a representative of the local authorities nominated by the local authorities, because extension research in the structure of NARO, their outputs is through the local government because these are the people who reach the people. The farmers are in local governments, they had left that one out, and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance. 

In the Bill, Madam Speaker, we advise on how best the council can borrow under the Budget Act and these laws of borrowing. Then the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture to replace paragraphs (g), (h), and (i). Cooperative Alliance is already catered for under the private sector, paragraph (k) is already addressed in the non-government organisations, the Director General NARO is already here.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So honourable chairperson, can you tell us whether you are giving way so that we do not really have to go into a small battle over this.

MR ODIT: I do not see any difficulty with this new amendment by the Minister, and for that matter, I accept it.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, really without appearing to be insensitive to a section of our society with disabilities, hon. Epetait told us that this council is meant to be highly technical.  So for us to insist that there should be disability in this we would rather deem that –(Ms. Nayiga rose on a point of order_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I was going to rule even before the order but let us hear from the Minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERS AND DISABLED (Ms Florence Nayiga): Madam Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt my senior colleague, but is he in order to insinuate that people with disability are never technical when he really knows very well that disability comes anytime in life? Some of us are agriculturalists; I went through an agricultural college. We have farmers like the farmer in Mukono who sits on NAADS. He is trained, professional farmer, is he in order? We are 10 percent of the population; 10 percent of his constituency are farmers with disability, and if we went there you would find some technical farmers with disability. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Arumadri, in this country we have some of the best brains from the disability constituency and you have seen them at work in this House. So really, it is out of order for you to suggest that the disabled constituency do not have sufficient qualifications to work on these bodies.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam, I really beg your pardon. I think I have been completely misunderstood if sections of our society with disabilities have got this competence, let us deem that they all be incorporated but to insert it in the law that it is a must, I think we are really overstretching this matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, hon. Arumadri. Have you ever had to talk to a deaf person, do you know how to speak the deaf language or to read Braille?

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, let me concede on this. I thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, for avoidance of doubt I thought we would be very clear on hon. Baba Diri’s amendment, and I propose that we change this from naming it “members of the council” and calling it “composition of the council”. When you look at clause 36, you are talking about composition yet clause 9 is talking about the members of the council. But that is really up to you.  

On hon. Baba Diri’s presentation, we have four representatives of farmers at least two of whom shall be women, that principle should be maintained. But she also improved it and said at least one of these four should be a person with disabilities. So, Madam Speaker, for avoidance of doubt I just wanted for us to maintain those aspects, two of whom shall be women and one out of the four should be a person with disability.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honorable Members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the Minister.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, we want to introduce another sub clause 9(2). The director general shall act as a secretary to the council.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Justification?

MR ODIT: The Director General shall be the secretary to the council.

MRS MUKWAYA: It is already given, so it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 12, delete “members of the” appearing on the first line.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To what effect?

MR ODIT: This is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson and council?

MRS MUKWAYA: I object to this amendment, Madam chairperson, because when you remove it, it does not make sense. When you remove the phrase “members of the”, then what do you have? Because when you say “the chairperson and members of the council” you are just saying that the chairperson and other members shall get this. So if you remove members of the council, are we retaining only the chairperson?  So, I am rejecting it on those grounds.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, what is the justification?

MR ODIT: I think the Minister is right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 14 delete: 
(a) the phrase “member of the council” appearing at the beginning of the clause, and 

(b) delete the word “council” appearing on paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (e) and (f)and insert “organisation”  and 

(c) Insert immediately after the word “secretariat” appearing on the third line of paragraph (e) the following: “and employees” of the Public Agricultural Research Institute. This amendment will enable the council to create uniformity of terms and conditions of service for employees of the Public Agricultural Research Institute. 

(d) Insert immediately after paragraph (f) the following new paragraph: “Appoint on the recommendations of the management committee the chairperson of a management committee and a director of a public agricultural research institute”. The justification is that there is need to give oversight function in the appointment process to the council.  

MRS MUKWAYA: While I support the first amendments of inserting the new paragraph, I think colleagues will remember that we said that all the scientists should be centrally appointed this amendment here does not reflect so. So, I want to propose to them that we insert a new clause to say, “Appoint the directors and research scientists of a Public Agricultural Research Institute but in exercising this function the council shall ensure full participation of the management committee of the respective Public Agricultural Research Institute in the entire process”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do you have any problem with that?

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, too many words again full participation, I do not know whether it is appropriate but the idea is okay. I do not know how it can be shortened, it should be reformulated but the idea is acceptable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There were two amendments, the chairperson proposed that we delete the words, “members of the” from the heading and also from the main clause. I put the question that the words, “members of the” be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended by introducing a Clause proposed by the Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that under clause 14(e) the word “secretariat” be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR ODIT: In sub-clause 1 of clause 15, delete the word “council” whenever it appears and insert the words “the secretariat”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think you did not reformulate it.

MR ODIT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: May be it shall be a secretariat.

MR ODIT: Yes that is what it should be. In sub-clause (2) insert the following: “There shall be a secretariat. The secretariat shall be headed by a director general who shall be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the council on such terms and conditions to be specified in the instrument of appointment”. 

The justification is that there is need to give the minister some oversight function in the appointment process of the director general.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson is proposing that under clause 15(1) we recast it to read, there shall be a secretariat which shall be responsible for the day today operations of the council. Is that it? I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then there was also a small amendment in 15(2). I put the question that clause 15(2) be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 16(1) delete the word “council” wherever it appears and insert “secretariat”. The justification is that these are consequential amendments. In paragraphs (b), (c), (e), and on the second line of sub-clause (2) delete “council” and insert “organisation”. These are consequential amendments.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question.

MR ODIT:  Madam Chairperson, clause 18 in sub-clause (1), delete “council” and insert “organisation”. It is a consequential amendment. And in paragraph (b) of sub-clause (3) delete “council” and also insert “organisation”. It is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that under clause 18 wherever the word “council” occurs, it be substituted by the word “organisation”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20

MRS MUKWAYA: There is a consequential amendment to delete “council” and insert “organisation”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that under clause 20 the word “council” be substituted by “organisation”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, clause 22 in paragraphs (f), (i) (j) and (n) delete the word “council” and insert “organisation”. That is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 23 sub clause (1) delete the word “licensed” wherever it appears and insert the word “registered”, and delete the word “council” wherever it appears and insert the word “organisation”. Deletion of council is a consequential amendment. 

In sub-clause (2) delete the word “licensing” and insert the word “registering”. The justification is that “licensing” might stifle the participation of the private sector in carrying out agricultural research.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25

MR ODIT:  Clause 25 insert clauses 2 and 3, delete the word “council” wherever it appears and insert the word “organisation” as consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR ODIT: Clause 26 in paragraphs (d) and (e), delete the word “council” and insert the word “organisation” as consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR ODIT: In clause 27, Madam Chairperson, delete the word “council” wherever it appears and insert the word “organisation” as a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, the entire clause 28 should be deleted. The justification is that there is no need for another body to carry out a function that can easily be carried out by the apex body and the management committees of the Public Agricultural Research Institute.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 28 be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29

MR ODIT: Clause 29, delete the entire clause as a consequential amendment arising from deleting clause 28.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No objection, Minister?

MRS MUKWAYA: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 29 be consequentially deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30

MR ODIT: Clause 30, Madam chairperson, delete the entire clause. This is a consequential amendment arising from deleting clause 28.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 30 be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31

MR ODIT: Clause 31, Madam Chairperson, delete the entire clause. The function proposed here is now being shared between the council and the management committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be consequentially deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, delete Sub-clause (1) and insert the following new sub-clause:
“For the purpose of this Act, there are established Public Agricultural Research Institute as provided in the Third Schedule of this Act”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment as a result of deleting clause 28.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to add to the committee’s amendment that “For the purpose of this Act, there are established Public Agricultural Research Institutes as provided in the Third Schedule to this Act as semi-autonomous agencies under the policy guidance of the National Agricultural Research Organisation for the purpose of providing agricultural research services”.  

MRS KULANY: To include Zonal Agricultural Institutes, which have been omitted, that is, Bulegeni Research Institute and Buginyanya. Madam Chairperson, I think this is an oversight in the sense that Arabic coffee is grown around this area; it is a major cash crop for this country and as far as I see these zones, it is not going to be catered for. Being a major foreign earner, we would request that the two research centres where this crop is grown be considered in these Zonal Agricultural Research Institutes.

Not only that, Madam Chairperson, we also grow Irish potatoes, wheat, and barley, which are all highland crops and we feel as a zone, we are not being catered for. But if these two agricultural zones are included, I think all will be well.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, I accept the Minister’s amendment, but this proposal appears on the schedule and we had recommended in our main report.  I think when we reach it we shall be able to handle it.  

DR MAKUBUYA: I need some clarification from the Minister. This clause 32(1), are we saying that we recognize existing Agricultural Research Institutes or are we establishing them by virtue of this Act? Because if you are establishing them by virtue of this Act, it does not seem to be coming out; you seem to be just recognising. What is it that you are trying to do in 32(1)? I think it would help the drafting people finally.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, when we pass this Act, we are repealing the NARO Act, and because of that, when you come to clause 34, we have known that we cannot take on and revamp all the research institutes that we have now. So for now we shall start with those named in the schedule, and on the advice of the council, the Minister can bring on board others under clause 34.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you happy, Attorney General?

DR MAKUBUYA: I understand what my predecessor in office is saying. Therefore, I think finally it will be drafted in such a way that the meaning is that there are hereby established.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed by the chairperson and the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 32 sub-clauses 2(b) and 3(b), insert immediately after the word “Research” the words “and development” and wherever they appear in the entire Bill. It should be “Research and Development Institute”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 32, Sub-clause (2) and (3) be amended by the inclusion of the words “and development” between “research and institutes” as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR ODIT: Clause 33, the Committee proposes that we delete sub-clause (3). The justification is that this will ensure that the PARIs being members of the organisation are under the direct supervision of the organisation, and it is also a consequential amendment following the amendment of clause 5 on the composition of the organisation.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Before you go there, don’t you think you need to amend the Title of clause 33?  I thought that you might want to add the word “and development” to read “operation of Public Agricultural Research and Development Institute” in clause 33 before you go sub-clause (3).

MR ODIT: Yes, I think that is right.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, the amendment that the Chairman moved to add “and development” only applied to clause 32(2)(b) and (3)(b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: PARIs do not deal with development?

DR EPETAIT: Clause 32(2)(b) would now read, “Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institutes.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why I am asking, do the Public Agricultural Research Institutes not deal with development?

DR EPETAIT: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so you are seeking to delete (3).

MRS MUKWAYA: While I support the deletion, after deleting I want to insert a new sub-clause reading like this; “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14(f)(1), a Director of Public Agricultural Research Institute in the performance of his or her functions is answerable to the Management Committee of the respective Public Agricultural Research Institute.” 
We agreed with the committee to make Directors of Public Agricultural Research Institutes accountable to the Management Committee and to create functional linkages.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, if we are talking about deleting clause 33(3), I think I need some explanation why it must be deleted because it is talking about the power to enter into contracts.  Where is this power provided for, otherwise you incapacitate these organisations. Don’t you want them to enter into contracts? Maybe I am not following, but if it is not provided for somewhere else you may be incapacitating them. After you have passed this then they cannot even enter into contracts for supplies, logistics and so on and so forth. Do you appreciate the import of what you are deleting?  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, this has been a protracted war and I thank my colleague – My officers have reminded me that actually when I delete, before I introduce what I read, I should have introduced instead of what is in the Bill that, “Each Public Agricultural Research Institute shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and may sue and be sued in its own name, and do things as a body corporate may lawfully do.” I think that will answer what the Attorney General was saying; and then after that I will add the first one that I read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which is the first one you read?

MRS MUKWAYA: The first one I read was that, “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14(f)(1), a Director of a Public Agricultural Research Institute, in the performance of his or her functions, is answerable to the Management Committee of the respective Public Agricultural Research Institute to create functional linkage,” because we have the Council as the overall apex organisation with the secretariat, then we have the institutes with their management committees. So the management committees should have a functional linkage with the Council as the institutes have a functional linkage with the secretariat.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, this is now the most difficult amendment because it creates a situation where we now have two layers within the organisation. If the Council will also expect the Director responsible for a PARI to administratively report to the organisation secretariat and the main organisation, which is a body corporate, is the Council, then we again create a number of bodies corporate at a lower level. This is where we really need the assistance from the Attorney General to give guidance so that we do not get into legal complications where a PARI can be sued in its own right. Now what would be the relationship between these PARIs and the main body corporate, which is the council and the organisation?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Indeed the Minister put it rightly that this is the most protracted debate now. We may have to remind ourselves that in clause 5(3) we spelt out the composition of the organisation and listed several components of the organisation, and we recognised that the organisation is a body corporate. We thought as committee that it would complicate work of the organisation if several legal entities are again created within the same legal entity. 

That is why we thought the PARIs really should be acting. They can enter into contracts but still as part of the organisation because the organisation is already a legal entity to which they are members. They can enter into contracts but we fear that if each individual PARI again is to become a body corporate the supervisory role and the functional linkages are going to be lost out. This is where we had the longest debate with the Minister and her team and we really think in good faith that the PARIs would be acting for and on behalf of the organisation when entering into legal contracts. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: In terms of transparency and accountability I would like to support the Minister because in bodies corporate as it is a public, directors must be accountable. In that case, you evaluate and know how much you have done a day today, in management they make decisions even work easier so that the operations becomes quicker. Like the directors of Public Agriculture Research Institute they must be accountable in those linkages so that even when they are operating they have to know so that they make very good decisions.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, it is well known that even currently there are bodies, which are not body corporate in their own line, but which can enter into contract under the general enabling law that set up the supervising bodies. For example, a hospital has a management committee, it can enter into contracts but under the general authorisation of a local authority; there is no disability at law to enter into contract merely because a hospital is not established as a body corporate. 

In real terms, Madam Chairperson, if Makerere University is a legal entity; if you had Mulago Medical School as another legal entity, you had MISR as a separate body corporate; you could easily have problems of who has jurisdiction over who. We have had a recent case where MUBS was challenging the authority of Makerere University, even before MUBS had its own separate existence as a legal entity. Indeed we have made a clear distinction that PARI’s will be under management committees, and to make that distinction, we have said the organisation shall have a board to clearly indicate that the management committee shall be subordinate to the board of the organisation. 

Our fear in real management situation is that the PARI’s could grow horns and become uncontrollable by NARO and we were avoiding to create a NARO, which is stripped of its authority, a NARO which is stripped of its coordinating role. The whole inception of creating NARO in its original form was to bring all these PARI’s to be coordinated by the apex body of NARO and that is why the committee has taken the position it has on this matter.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members of the committee, supposing this institute wanted to maybe received an endowment from some other institution abroad, would you stop them just because you want NARO to be the one to enter the contract? Suppose they negotiate an endowment for their particular institution, are you going to say, you cannot do it, you wait until NARO agrees?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Chairperson, there must be order in the way matters are done. Just as on the scale of government Ministry of Justice may solicit for assistance, but for coordination, it is Ministry of Finance, which is the borrower. It is the Ministry of Finance, which is the receiver of all aid on behalf of the Uganda Government. We have not disputed that. 

The fact that NARO retains the authority over the funding does not take away the right of these PARI’s to access funds, no, it is only that the PARI’s must be fully accountable to NARO. I have been a Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture before and we had problems of some PARI’s, which were receiving funds and were not declaring those funds to NARO and they were carrying out research, which was not even known to NARO. Now, we must avoid that sort of thing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the Attorney General, please advise us.

DR ESELE: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of this committee and I must say that I was one of those who initially was absolutely opposed to the corporate nature of institutes. But I have had widespread consultations and the results of these consultations have forced me to change my mind. Research is expensive and in Uganda resources are never enough, we get specific research problems that relate to specific research institutions.  

For example we are having coffee wilt which is directly a responsibility of Coffee Research Institute. We have banana wilt, which is directly a responsibility of Kawanda Research Institute. Now, because of the limited resources some of these institutes may not be able to handle the research as required. This Bill under clause 54 provides that the institute can borrow funds. Now there is no way these institutes can borrow funds unless it is a legal entity. 

Secondly, we have a management committee for each institute provided for under clause 37 with functions. It is going to be difficult for this management committee to develop appropriate policy for the specific research institutes unless they have all the powers as a corporate institute. 

Thirdly, in clause 35 we detailed out the functions of the research institutes particularly in paragraphs (a), (b), (d) and (f). The institutes will utilize the resources without undue restrictions from the secretariat when it is a body corporate. 

Madam Chairperson, we are going into zonal agricultural production. Under zonal agricultural production, the research institutes are going to play significant roles. Just as under a decentralization system, the districts are bodies corporate and then they are doing a good job on their own. The institutes as bodies corporate will also do a good job.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Madam Speaker, hon. Dr Esele is a Member of the Agriculture Committee and the position presented by the chairperson is a position of the committee. Madam Chairperson, the presentation of my honourable colleague who happens to be my OB seems to be a position of a minority report, which is not written. Is it in order, Madam chairperson, for the honourable colleague of the committee on Agriculture to present a minority report, which is not written and attached to the major report? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I appreciate the technicalities involved in our Rules of Procedure. But I think it is incumbent upon us to make a good law. So, you know, we have been exchanging the ideas here beyond the committee. So, maybe we need to defer this particular matter for advice? 

MRS MUKWAYA: First of all, Madam Chairperson, when I made my submission, which was written, I stated very clearly that the committee with the Minister agreed to disagree on this issue. Yes, it is on record. And we said it would be the House - they would submit their position because even some members of the committee were supporting me while others were supporting their own position. So, we said when we come to the Committee it would be full debate for the House to take a decision. And I promised that I was going to consult the Attorney General. 

And Madam Speaker, the Members of the Committee submitted that even as we talk now, institutions can borrow. I have found out from none other than the Secretariat and the chairman of the board to this effect, that the view held in some circles that the PARIS under the present arrangement can enter into contract is wrong. The only legal signatory to any contract in the present NARO Act is the Director General of NARO.

Madam Chairperson, this law is not grounded from the blue; it is grounded in the policy that Government approved, and one of the principles in this Bill is separating public funding from research service delivery. 

I would draw your attention, Madam Chairperson, to part 7 on page 37 - Agricultural Research Trust Fund. In there, you will see that there are monies from Parliament, there are monies as loans from Government; there will be grants which will be competed for by both public research institutes, civil society, private sector and individual farmers as long as you are going to do research, any surplus and so on and so forth. 

You go to clause 46(a) for funding core activities of research, to create endowment with which to support competitive grants. Already in Serere, NARO has tried out how competitive grants should work and we have borrowed a leaf from that pilot project to facilitate this. And Madam Chairperson, as we talk now, it is for everybody to go and see that some people are mixing two issues. 

Some people want the secretariat to control research institutes, but I am talking about coordination. The two are not the same. NARO has been powerful and controlling institutions, but some of the institutions that I have visited are well nourished, others are not well nourished. So we are saying that let the institutes themselves present their programme and activities to the council. Once the activities have been agreed on and the budget, the money should go straight to the institutes for day-to-day operation for research.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to continue with Dr. Esele’s debate. I was one of those people that did not support this position of Government. But indeed after wide consultation and looking at examples of institutions that have been left to be independent, I think that I have had to change my mind upon conviction.

Madam Chairperson, we can use an example of decentralization. When decentralization was first introduced, many of us were not quite sure; we were apprehensive about how districts would be able to operate independent of the central government. Today, what we have seen is more efficiency, independence, and growth. Therefore I think that we should give the PARIs an opportunity to be independent and be able to acquire land indirectly and I think through that we could see more efficiency just like we have seen more efficiency through decentralization. I thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you can see from the report, out of the 25 Members of the committee, 19 endorsed and this is a record number of Members endorsing the report. Madam Chairperson, since members seem to be changing their minds at this time after wide consultation, I am getting a feeling that it could be important that we widen this consultation, we go back to the committee and come back with something more concrete. 

Madam Chairperson this is a very important law we are trying to make. If we mess it up, we are messing the entire sector. And I am really surprised that after a lot of concessions this committee had given the ministry, at this material time we are having changes here and there. I really move that we refer this Bill back to the committee and have more discussions and we come back with something more concrete.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know the reason why the report comes here is for the input of the other Members of this House and they do not have to agree a hundred percent with the committee. You have seen here the chairman abandon some of his amendments, which came from your committee after hearing from other members. That is why the report comes here. (Hear! hear!). 

So, for me, I have no problem deferring this particular clause for one night. Lets proceed with the others and continue with the consultation. 

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to correct the impression portrayed by the honourable Minister that some Public Agricultural Research Institutes (PARIS) are starved; the others are opulent.  

The proposal of the committee does not in any way prejudice the ability of those PARIs to access funding.  What we are saying as a committee is that whereas the Director General shall be the Accounting Officer, the directors of the PARIs will be sub accountants and already there is a law on public finance, which lays out the functions of accounting officers and sub accountants; it is very clear. The two will be able to operate without any difficulty, including entering into contracts– (Interruption) 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, my committee would appreciate that even what he is submitting was through a protracted law. I had to go to the Attorney General to give me exactly his view. The amendment, which we are going to move, is as result of my consultation with the Attorney General. 

It is unfortunate that Parliament must appreciate that in this new arrangement there are going to be competitive grants. Madam Chairperson, do not send me back to the committee because we agreed that it would be the whole House -(Interruption)- yes, we disagreed and I reported on this issue. So, it can only be the Attorney General who is the adviser of the State to report back. 

The issue at play is: How will the PARIs compete for the competitive grants without a legal status?  That is what I want him to help me to do because individual researchers in the institute cannot compete for money as individuals. So, that is the crux of the matter.  You can request the Attorney General to help me. That is the issue. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Attorney General.

DR. MAKUBUYA:  Madam Chairperson, I think it is hon. Odit who said this is the crux of the matter. I agree that it is the crux of the matter.  There is no controversy over giving powers to contract to these institutes because that can be supervised. But the amendment moved by the honourable Minister is proposing that there is a major corporate body provided for in Clause 5, and by virtue of the amendment in Clause 33, you are going to have other corporate bodies. This means corporate bodies within a corporate body.  That is a serious matter.
 
Madam Chairperson, I have proposed that we sleep over it, because you could easily be prescribing for problems -(Applause)– between the institutes and the major organisations.  

I would propose that we defer Clause 33. I am sorry that the Minister does not want to be sent back to her committee –(Laughter)- but in that case, you can make an interim arrangement to look at the implications of having corporate bodies within a corporate body. You could really have problems. We need to go into it when we are very clear on what we are doing.  I propose that we defer it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, I will only add one rider that the Attorney General gives us a solution tomorrow because that is his work.  So, I will not send the Minister back. It is your work to give us a solution. So, we defer this matter. But, honourable Minister, we were told that the committee is very happy with her and now – (Laughter)– So, please hurry up the consultations. The Attorney General will report to us tomorrow on Clause 33. Let us proceed. 

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am coming once more to talk about the composition of the management committee for the Public Agricultural Research Institute. This is a very important institute; if you see the functions, that is where they identify problems of the farmers; that is where they plan; that is where they fundraise. It is very important that people with disability are represented here.  

I am, therefore, requesting and urging the House to accept that among the three farmers, at least one person with disability is included in both national and zonal institutes.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Minister, do you have any objection?  Okay. I put the question that Clause 36 be amended as proposed by honourable Baba Diri.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have another on Clause 36? Okay.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 36 (a), we should insert “and development” in the first line after research. The current RDCs are already working to develop these institutes. This amendment will capture that aspect.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which sub-clause are you talking about?

MR ODIT: Clause 36

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 36 (1) and (2)?

MR Odit: Clause 36, the main paragraph; that is the heading there.  Insert between research and institute the word “and development.” So that it should be a composition of management Committee of Public Agricultural Research and Development Institute.  Is it not?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable Chairperson, I asked you before whether you did not require amending Clause 33 by adding the word “and Development.” You said, no you did not. But now you are adding “and development” to the management committee. Now, I do not know.  

DR EPETAIT:  Madam Chairperson, I think the amendment is referring to sub clause 3. The main paragraph of sub clause 3, after the sentence “In case of the Zonal Agricultural Research” insert “and development institutes”.  The same amendment applies to (b) and (c) of sub-Clause 3.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, I put the question that Clause 36(3) be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 36(3)(d)- delete sub clause 3 (d) and insert the following:  “a representative from the district local governments served by a particular zonal Agricultural Research and Development institute.”  This amendment is done to avoid having very big management committees.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I do not think I have got you; can you come again. You want to delete (d)?

MR ODIT:  That is 36(3)(d). We are saying that you delete a sub clause 36 3(d) and you insert a new one to read as follows: “a representative from the district local governments served by a particular zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute.”  One representative from the local governments within the zone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  One representative?

MR ODIT: Yes.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chairperson. My understanding of these zonal agricultural research institutes is that they serve more than one district. I want the chairperson of the committee to help me understand how exactly these districts would arrive at this representative. Is this where the Minister would probably like to put in the guidelines or regulations?

MR ODIT: I think, hon. Alaso is right, the regulation will come from the Minister. But I think the local governments also have their system of identifying representation in public organisations.  So, she is right, the Minister’s role will be effective in guiding the local governments how to come about with a representative of this nature. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  But you are asking ten districts to identify one person? 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, we are giving that flexibility so that we have smaller management committees. As we talk now, the management committee in these institutes are depending on the institutes to facilitate them and yet the initial intention of the law was for them to go and mobilize resources.  

So, what we are proposing here is that- let me give an example of Mukono, which is at centre of 12 districts.  These districts will rotationally sit and appoint that person who would represent them either annually or bi-annually and then rotate the representation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, you are saying that already there are clusters of districts, which are known, so they have to organise themselves?

MS ALASO:  Madam Chairperson, I was just suggesting, how about the idea of the host districts having a representative in the management committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  The host? No.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, this is the problem. Those institutes do not belong to the host districts; they are public organizations. 

Secondly, with Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Centers, these are for the zone.  So, it is only by accident of location that they are established in a particular district, but they belong to the entire zone.  So, this arrangement is quite perfect; we have no problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question the Clause 36(3)(d) be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Sub clause (4), the committee proposes that we delete sub clause (4) and insert the new sub clause to read as follows:“ The members of management committee shall recommend to the council for appointment a person as their Chairperson.” This is to enable the council to appoint a chairperson of management committee on the recommendation of the committee.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I have not understood.

MR ODIT:  The Chairperson of the Management Committee – the committee relates to the council at a higher level. So, in this case, the chairpersonship of the Management Committee should cease link with the council. The council should have the opportunity to appoint the leader at this lower level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, the council will appoint on behalf of the management committee?

THE ODIT: Yes, but the management committee recommends that they nominate names amongst themselves. The council can be able to appoint this person as the chair of the management committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I now put the question that a new sub clause 4 be introduced as proposed by the Chairperson.  I also put the question that the original sub clause (4) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36

MR ODIT: We are still on Clause 36. There is another amendment after sub clause (8). The following new sub clause should be introduced: “The Minister may by statutory instrument alter the composition of a management committee of a Public Agricultural Research Institute as and when necessary.” This is in order to allow easy change of composition of management committee. 

In sub clause 6(e) delete the word “Minister” and insert the word “council” to give the council an oversight role.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  What is the justification?

MR ODIT: The justification is to give the council its oversight role over the management committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the person of the Minister altering the membership?

MR ODIT: The Minister should be given the latitude to allow ease of change of the composition of the management committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will be a new sub clause (9)? 

MR ODIT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that a new sub clause (9) be introduced as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, the clause is about Statutory Instrument. Is this not cumbersome, prescribing a mode on how to organise a management committee, the Statutory Instrument through the gazette. Why don’t we just give the Minister administrative powers? She will do it by some other public Act; but a statutory instrument, I do not know. But the Minister seems to be happy. So, I am not sure -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a public institution; don’t you think the public would like to know what the Minister is doing?  Why should the Minister sit quietly in Entebbe and make changes?  The Minister is happy, but I think –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I think the committee can trust what the Attorney General is recommending, but if they do not trust that I will put there my people and leave what is there. But I argued that it would cumbersome; they also argued that I needed to be protected. So the House can decide.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: The composition of this committee’s is prescribed in the law. The proper way to do it is through some legal instrument. That is why we are asking for a statutory instrument because we do not want our Minister to be embarrassed when she is publicly challenged for an administrative action taken without backing of the law.

PROF. KAMUNTU: When we do not have subsidiary legislation on statutory instruments sometimes it is better to spell it out in law so that both sides know what is expected.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But also, I do not expect the Minister to wake up every morning and make changes arbitrary.

So I put the question on a new sub clause 9 as proposed by the Chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR ODIT: Clause 37, Madam Chairperson, insert the following phrase immediately after the word “shall” in the second line to read, “Shall be the governing body in respect to the operations of respective Public Agricultural Research Institute”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a small problem of numbering, I do not know exactly where you are.  Let us assume this is 37 (1) a, b, c, d.

MR ODIT: Clause 37, if it is one, then after that last word “shall”, you continue and you say, “shall be the governing body in respect to the operations of Public Agricultural Research Institute and shall…”, then you get a, b, c, d.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I just want to appeal to the Chairman that what the committee intends to insert is already catered for on page 29 under Clause 32 (4): “a Public Agricultural Research Institute shall be under the general supervision of its management committee. It is already catered for; so this one will be redundant.

MR ODIT: So, I concede that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Clause 37 do stand part of the bill- (Interruption)- there is something?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to insert immediately after paragraph f the following paragraph: “review and evaluate performance of all staff of Public Agricultural Research Institutes.” The justification is that this is an added function for the management committees following the deletion of Clause 31.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection?

MR ODIT: No objection.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there any further amendments under Clause 7?

MR ODIT: There is another amendment in paragraph (b). Insert after “out” the phrase “in line with policy provided by the council.” That is the last part of that paragraph.

Justification is that this will give the council its oversight role. Paragraph d insert the word “support” between the first word “of and staff”. So this will be support staff.  

Justification: The management committee should be limited to appointment and discipline of only support staff because these lower organs of management cannot appoint the scientists, they can only be appointed by the council.  Thank you

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, there are several amendments on Clause 37, which I am trying to remind our chairperson, on page 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe the Chairman is getting tired.

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, insert immediately after paragraph h, on page 33, the following new paragraph: “in collaboration with the council, formulate and design the human resource development and development programmes for the Public Agricultural Research Institutes. 

The next paragraph which should be introduced is: “prepare for approval by the council three years research and manpower development plans for the Public Agricultural Research Institute”.

The last paragraph should read as follows: “develop and implement agricultural research information management strategy for the Public Agricultural Research Institute and facilitate sharing of information amongst the Public Agricultural Research Institute.

The justification is that this is an additional function for the management committee following the deletion of Clause 31.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 37 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR ODIT: Delete 38(2) completely.

The justification is that it is just redundant following the deletion of Clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This goes for sub clause (2) and (3).

MR ODIT: Yes, delete sub clause 3, “the advisory committee” or members of”, that phrase appearing in the first line. Replace the word, “Minister” with “council”.  This is a consequential amendment.
(b) In the sub clause 4 delete “either” appearing on the first line or “member of the advisory committee” in the second line and “either the advisory committee” appearing in the third line of paragraph. Replace the word “Minister” with “council”. We have run through the entire paragraph.

Justification: These are consequential amendments and there is need to reduce the ministerial involvement where it is the council responsible for appointment and discipline.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the word, “advisory committee” be deleted wherever it occurs in Clause 38. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I also put the question that in Clause 38 (3) the word “Minister” be substituted with “council”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR ODIT: Clause 39, Madam Chairperson, delete both “the advisory committee” appearing in the first line of the Clause.  The justification is that it is redundant because of the deletion of Clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 39 be amended by deleting the phrase, “the advisory committee”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR ODIT: Clause 40, delete sub clause 3. The justification is that it is already provided for in Clause 47 of the bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the sub clause 3 of Clause 40 be deleted as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR ODIT: Clause 42, delete “council” appearing in paragraph (f) and (g) and insert “organization” because these are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the clause 42 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 43 delete “council” wherever it appears in sub clauses 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and insert “organization” because these are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 43 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR ODIT: Clause 46 (1), insert immediately after paragraph C the following new paragraph: “for funding of innovative agricultural research”. The justification is that these are consequential amendments.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR ODIT: We want to introduce a new paragraph– (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are not deleting anything; you are introducing a new one?

MR ODIT: Just introducing a new one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a paragraph (d) be introduced as proposed by the Chairperson.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR ODIT: Clause 47, delete “council” wherever it appears and insert “organization”. In paragraph (e) delete “license” appearing in the first line and insert “registration.” Delete “licensees” appearing on the third line and insert “registered persons.” These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 47 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR ODIT: Clause 48 in sub clause 4, the first line delete “council” and insert “organization.” In sub clause 5 on the first line delete “council. These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 48 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 48 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 49 delete “council” appearing in sub clauses 1, 2(a), 3 and 4. These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that-you still have another amendment on Clause 49?

MR ODIT: Delete “council” appearing in paragraphs a and c- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting the word “council” or “organization”?

MR ODIT:  “council”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50

MR ODIT: Clause 50, delete the word “council” appearing in the first line. There is “council” and another word “the”; the two should be deleted. This is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR ODIT: Clause 51 in sub clauses 1 and 5, delete “council” wherever it appears and insert “organization.” These are consequential amendments. In sub clause 2 delete “the Secretariat of National Agricultural Research Organization.” 

The justification is that the secretariat has now been subsumed into the only secretariat provided for at the apex body.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the Chairman did not include Clause 3 as one of the clauses that have a word, “council” to be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 51 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51 as amended agreed to.

Clause 52

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 52, delete the word “council”. There are two words there to be deleted. And (b) in line two delete the word, “its” and insert the word “their”. The justification, these are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52 as amended agreed to.

Clause 53
 
MR ODIT: Madam Deputy Chairperson, Clause 53 delete the word “council” wherever it appears. These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53 as amended agreed to.

Clause 54

MR ODIT: R-draft Clause 54(1) as follows: “The organization may, with the approval of the Minister given in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance, borrow money from any source as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge of the functions of the organization”. 

And Clause 54(2) “A Public Agricultural Research Institute may, with the approval of the council given in consultation of the Minister, borrow money from any source as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge of its functions”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are only breaking this into two.  Is it not?  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I do not support this amendment because it violates the accounting procedures.  I want to plead with Parliament to retain Clause 54(2) b. When you look at Clause 54(2) b, they are saying that the Public Agricultural Research should borrow as long as they have consulted me. But the Constitution is very clear on borrowing; it is the Ministry of Finance.  So what is in the law provides for both the organisation and the council to borrow in the normal known procedure of borrowing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you subjecting the approval to the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of Finance?

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Chairperson, when you look at page 12, they are introducing Clause 54(1), which reads:” The organization may with the approval of the Minister given in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance-”. 

Now when you come to Clause 54(2), it reads: “a Public Agricultural Institute may, with the approval of the council given in consultation with the Minister borrow money from any source”. 

I am saying this violates the normal routine, and yet when you look at the bill itself, Clause 54, if now you delete this sentence, which reads: “The council, the Organization and a Public Agricultural Research Institute may, with the approval of the Minister, given in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, borrow money from any source as may be required for the meeting its obligations or for the discharge of functions of the council, the organization and the public agricultural research institute under this Act. 

Madam Speaker, it is a known procedure that while Parliament and committees can approve in principle, the drafting is for the First Parliamentary Counsel.  So, I am saying that let us agree in principle that the drafting should be left to the known technical body. So, the technical body has advised that what is in the bill is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, are you strongly opposing that amendment?

MR ODIT: Since there are no serious consequences, we can go by the Minister’s position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 54 do stand part of the bill.
            
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I know that we have already passed this Clause 54(2). The amendment that was proposed, we kind of left it out.  But I was just wondering if it does not have a direct relationship with what we stood over, just in case we might need to look at it, depending on the opinion that will be given tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, it does not have any relationship?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, this is the normal drafting for powers to borrow. So, even if you send it back to the First Parliamentary Counsel, they will return exactly this.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, Clause 55. I put the question that Clause 55 do stand part of the bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 55, delete “council” appearing in the first line of sub-clauses 1 and 2. These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 55 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR ODIT JOHN: Clause 56(1) should be redrafted as follows:  “The Director General shall be the accounting officer, charged with the responsibility of accounting for all money received and its utilization, the use and care for all the properties of the council”.  

Clause 56(2)(a),“The head of each Public Agricultural Research Institute shall be a sub-accountant for all money received and its utilization, the use and care of all properties of the institute he or she heads”.  

Clause 56 (2)(b), “A sub-accountant referred to in paragraph (a) of this sub-clause shall, for accounting purposes, be directly responsible to the accounting officer referred to in sub-clause 1”.  The justification, there is need to have a centralized accounting system for all monies of the council under the over all accounting officer.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question on Clause 56 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 57, in sub-clause 1, delete “council” appearing in the first line and insert “organization”. 

(b) In sub-clause 4, delete “council” appearing in the third line and insert “organization”.

(c) In sub-clause 5, delete “council” and insert “organization” as these are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 57 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58

MR ODIT: Clause 58, delete “council” wherever it appears and insert “organization.” These are consequential amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 58 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59

MR ODIT: Clause 59, delete “council” and insert “organization”, and delete the entire sub-clause 2.  Justification: This is in line with earlier decision. This is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 59 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 60(1), delete “council” where it appears and insert “organization.” These are consequential amendment. In sub-clause 2 (b), delete “advisory committee” appearing on the first line. This is a consequential amendment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 60 be amended as opposed by the Chairperson.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 61
 
MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, insert the following paragraph immediately after paragraph (d): “Prescribing the procedure and criteria for the election of District Administration Representatives and the Chairperson of the Management Committee.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be introduced in Clause 61 as proposed by the Chairperson.
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 61 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR ODIT: Clause 62, immediately after paragraph (a) insert clause (1), a new paragraph which reads: “any member of the Council.”  This is a consequential amendment.  In paragraph (c) of sub-clause (1) delete “an advisory committee or a member of the Advisory Committee.” This is also a consequential amendment. Delete the entire sub-clause (2); this is also a consequential amendment.  Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, when I read clause 62(1)(a), it is saying, “any member of the council.”  Now, the proposed amendment is again to insert immediately after (a) a new paragraph reading: “any member of the council.”  It sounds rather repetitive. So, I think the first amendment proposed by the Chairman is hanging.

MR ODIT: I think that amendment is withdrawn; it is redundant. It is already catered for under paragraph (a).  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Clause 62 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR ODIT: Clause 63(a) delete sub-clause (1) and insert the following new sub-clause: “All property and assets, which immediately before the commencement of this Act vested in the dissolved National Agricultural Research Organisation for use as its headquarters shall vest in the organisation.” 

Clause 63(b), delete sub-clause (2) and insert the following new clause: “All other property and assets vested in the dissolved National Agricultural Research Organisation shall vest in the respective Public Agricultural Research Institute.”  This is to ensure smooth sharing of assets between the apex body and the Public Agricultural Research Institute.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 63 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR ODIT: Clause 64(a) insert sub clause (1) and the phrase “Subject to sub-section (4)” immediately before the first word “any.”
 (b) Insert sub clause (2) and the following phrase: “Subject to sub-section (4)” between the word “doubt” and the comma.  
(c) Insert sub clause (3) and the phrase, “Subject to sub-section (4) immediately before the first word “any.”  
d) Replace sub-clause (4) with the following sub-clause: “On the coming into force of this Act, any person who was an employee of the National Agricultural Research Organisation may opt to continue in the employment of the National Agricultural Research Organisation.”  

e) Insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: “A person referred to in sub-clause (4), on opting not to continue in the employment of the National Agricultural Research Organisation, shall be paid his or her terminal benefits in accordance with the terms and conditions of his or her employment.”  This is to allow the absorption of current NARO staff into the new organisation and payment of terminal benefits to staff that might opt not to be absorbed in the new structure.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I want first to reject amendment (a), (b), (c) and (d) on reason that they are subjecting these sub-clauses to a sub-clause whose subject matter is not related.  They are saying that in sub-clause (1) insert “Subject to sub-section (4)” immediately, but when you read sub-section (4). Let us start with sub section (1). We are talking about succession: “Any agreement or similar agreement made under the National Agricultural Research Organisation Act repealed by section 66 shall continue in force until terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement or arrangement.” 

 They want to subject that to sub clause (4), which reads:” Where a doubt exists as to which institute under this Act corresponds to an institute existing immediate before the commencement of this Act, the matter shall be determined by the Minister”.  

The two are not related because the other one is carrying the agreements and contracts currently held between NARO and any other person.  

Sub clause 4 is talking about- for example, if Namulonge has been handling crop, but Serere has also been handling cereal.  So, sub clause 4 is saying that you can say that all people who are dealing with crop should move to either Serere or Namulonge in order to consolidate the manpower. So the two are not related.  

But they continue also to say that, in sub clause 2,  “For avoidance of doubt, any person who was the employee of a National Agricultural Research Institute immediate before-” this is talking about the personnel. Where they are subjecting it, it is talking about institutes; so is sub clause 3.  So, the subject matter is not related. 

That is why I am saying we retain what is in there because each sub section is talking about a different subject matter. Sub clause (1) is talking about on going agreements; Sub clause 2 is talking about- I am going to move an amendment to correct this. 

What the Chairman is saying, under the public reform, all the new organizations should own all the employees until anybody is given an offer and one refuses- (Interruption)- yes, the choice should be - you take me on until I reject to be part of you and then I should be entitled to my benefits.  

But what the Chairman is proposing is that you object even before you are taken on- (Interruption)- yes, so the option should be given. You first go to the new organisation then an offer is put to you, either you reject and you opt out; you will be entitled to your terminal benefits. That is why I want to move an amendment.  

So, I reject the first a, b and c because the subject matter are not related. I am opposing this amendment because I want all the people who are under NARO to be taken on by the organisation, be offered employment, they reject and they are entitled to benefits rather than –(Interjection)- yes.  So, Madam Chairperson, I want to move an amendment on the Chairman’s amendment –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you said you have rejected them –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: What?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought you said you have rejected the Chairman’s amendment?

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, and I want to move my own amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, have you also rejected part (e) of this proposal?

MRS MUKWAYA: I saying that I am rejecting a b c and d, because they are subjecting these sub-clauses –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To something unrelated?

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, not related. But I am saying that I am also objecting to d and e. I want all the people now under NARO to go into the new organisation. They are offered employment; they reject it. That is the amendment I want to introduce when you give me permission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you insisting on your amendments?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  If we looked at the original bill, sub-clause 1,2,and 3 on the succession, they are talking about personnel. I beg to submit that following the same argument of the Minister, sub-clause 4 is not related, because they are talking about the institutes and yet we are talking about succession.  I do not know whether you appreciate my observation, because sub-clause 1,2and 3 are talking of personnel; sub-clause 4 is standing on its own.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we have now covered the Minister’s side, you are now saying that –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: I also want to observe that- (Interruption)- yes, the amendments to those sub-clauses, which have been subjected to sub clause 4, seem not to be talking of the same subject matter. I am still at loss.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you withdraw them? Okay, they are now withdrawn. Minister you can now proceed with your proposals.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, in order to answer hon. Dr Epetait, sub clause 4, because we have created an apex body which has subsumed the board and some functions of the secretariat, while some functions of the secretariat have gone down. So, you are going to be restructuring according to the agreed restructuring organization; so there will be repackaging. That is why people should be sure from this new law that is sub clause 4 is important. 

Now, Madam Chairperson, I want to delete 64(2) and insert the following: “The organisation shall, on the effective date of its operations, accept into its employment every person who immediately before the commencement of the Act was an employee of the Secretariat of the National Agricultural Research Organization and who was given an option to serve by the organization and has opted to serve as an employee of the organization.” 

(b) “A person who is not accepted as an employee of the organization is entitled to terminal benefits in accordance with existing terms and condition of the employment”.  I think that takes care of the committee. We were trying to write the same thing, but I thought that this one is clearer. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It appears the committee has no objection. I put the question that Clause 64 be amended as proposed by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 65 agreed to.

Clause 66 agreed to.

The First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule agreed to.

The Third Schedule

MR ODIT: Madam Chairperson, Third Schedule, insert in part 1 immediately after item 5, the following new item: “National Semi-Arid Resources Research Institute.”

(b) Insert immediately after the word “research” wherever it appears in part II “and development”.

(c) Insert immediately after item 5 of part II the following new institutes: Nabuin Zonal Agricultural Research Institute and Mbarara zonal Range Land Agricultural Research Institute. Justification is to accommodate the needs of the various agro-ecological zones in the country and create an additional National Semi-Arid Resources Research Institute. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Chelangat Kulany.

MRS KULANY: Madam Chairperson, I was assured that Buginyanya Research Center would be included but it is not there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, what has happened to Bulegeni and Buginyanya?

MRS KULANY: Oh, Bulegeni and Buginyanya.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I am not forgetting Bulegeni. Serere can do what Bulegeni will do for now. What we wanted to capture was the pastoral areas. That is why we are bringing Nabuin, which is in Karamoja and Mbarara. When we make these institutes sound, we shall come back and pick on these ones. Madam Chairperson, I want my colleague not to be worried. 

Kituza, which is a national Coffee Research Institute, is supporting Bulegeni as their site multiplication centre. So, Bulegeni is active as we talk now. So, I want to appeal to my colleague that at an appropriate time under that powers that have been given to me, I will be advised by the council to take on Bulegeni. Let us take –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable Minister, earlier the honourable member submitted here that the crops, which are grown in the highlands, are completely different from what we grow in the plains and other places. And I sort of got the impression that Bulegeni was still on.

MS WONEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Mt Elgon is a highland. You have the districts of Kapchorwa and Sironko, Mbale. Coffee is very central to Elgon Zone in as far as their livelihoods is concerned. In this highland there is Arabic coffee. 

Madam Chairperson, when we talk of research, we are talking of people’s livelihood especially on Mt Elgon. You are talking of coffee, which is central in their lives; it is their source of income. 

Madam Chairperson, when you are talking of research, you are talking of pests and disease control; you are talking of high yielding crops; you are talking of climatic resistance. You know drought resistance, the soils; you are talking of the quality of whatever you are producing. Serere cannot address the highland crops. Serere is low land and I am sure everybody who has done their geography are aware of what I am talking about. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Minister wants clarification?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I know now, my colleague, the people she represents have heard. Yes- (Interruption)- but Oliver, we were with her on the open day in Kituza and she admired the work that is being done on upland. We were told that the researchers were taking the coffee there and it was doing very well. I think it has been recorded that the council to be appointed should work very fast to make these institutions stand on their own so that we can pick others. 

MR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The fears expressed by hon. Kulany and hon. Oliver Woneka are practical. What we have as being processed in Kituza by way of research may not necessary be what is on the highlands. 

The worst example is that UCDA supplied coffee seedlings from western Uganda highlands. They flourished within the first few months, at the time of the first flowering; the seeds just dried up straight away and the farmers are currently uprooting them. So, their fear is actually very, very strong indeed; something must be done. And Buginyanya had initially been reserved for the Mt. Elgon Zone of the Arabica coffee, which actually needs to be revitalized. Their reasoning is quite genuine.

MRS KULANY: Madam Chairperson. We are talking about a population of 1.2 million people in this zone and currently we are getting it from Kenya. If Kenya one day closes its border, the people on Mt Elgon will cease to grow maize, which is their main cash crop and main food. So, if we are talking about research, please, you rescue us now. If you do not put us there, we are not voting –(Laughter)

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I would like to move that while I appreciate these zonal agricultural institutes, the names where they belong should be put there. So, that from a glance I can place where this institution is. This committee and people who deal with agriculture presume that all of us know where the National Crop Resource Institute is. I do not know whether this is the Namulonge; whether it is Kawanda; whether it is the other one where the National Fisheries is; whether it is in Jinja or Entebbe. The National Forest Resource Centre and the National Livestock, whether this is in Mbarara or something different. 

So, I would propose that we name where this institution is to be placed so that from a glance I can tell whether my region is represented or whether something is in the right place. So, I would like to propose that these five national institutes, the places where they are located should be included in this schedule, Chairperson.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Likewise we in the north, especially West Nile, we are not mentioned anywhere. Where do we belong?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable Minister, do you have a fundamental objection to Bulegeni and Buginyanya, one of those two?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, let me give information. Arabica coffee shall be handled at Buginyanya as a satellite of crop research institute. But there are also – I am being informed by NARO that institutes like Bulegeni, Buginyanya and the others are not lost. What are we talking about here, Madam Chairperson; do we want effective research, or we want distributive research and no results? We want for the time being to equip these institutes so that they give us sound research. 

Like I presented a paper here, Madam Chairperson, about the tsetsefly issue. In Tororo we are handicapped with concluding research on tsetse fly and the strain we have from Buganda to Busoga is climbing up very fast to link up with the one in West Nile and the two places are different. 

My worry is what if these two places strain – I am not a scientist, strain would join and marry. When they get married, I will have a complication and yet what we need is our social partners who have given us all that is needed. We need a breeding ground; I have secured Ugshs500 million to do that. 

So, honourable members, let us first beef-up these institutes to a respectable level. Then under this sub-clause that the power is empowered I will pick others. Otherwise, we shall spread out nothing. 

Madam Chairperson, I want also to submit that, if you went to Serere now, our cotton sector is suffering because they could not raise Ugshs 40 million to extend a power line – machinery that would select and sieve seed.  Yes- (Interruption)- these are issues.  So, it is not a matter of spreading out, let us consolidate; after consolidation we shall pick others.  I am not locking out anybody. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you and the Minister for that clarification.  But, Madam Chairperson, I think the issues raised by members are legitimate in that, for example, we come from areas- I am talking about Kyenjojo district, which has one of the oldest mother gardens for tea research called Rwabitaba.  

In the year 2003, all of us Members of Parliament from this area were invited by NARO to support them in their bid to rehabilitate this particular mother garden; they have different types of tea. At one time, this particular research institute at Rwabitaba, which is located in Mwenge North, was serving the whole of the East African region. It was very sad for us who were there to see how the laboratory and the whole research institute have been abandoned; and yet, tea, as you know very well is really the mainstream of this particular region; Mukwano and others have established very big industries.  

Madam Chairperson, we get really perturbed when we do not see this particular institute not reflected. When you look at, for example, the ones listed, the six, Kacwekano is really in southwest, but the whole area of the mid-west, especially on the area of tea, is not reflected.  

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like the Minister to take these issues very seriously, because although she may have scarce resources, there may be need to look at the regional aspect as well as the different crops. Because as you know tea is one of the main cash crops that Uganda exports.  So, I would like to plead with her that we look at this schedule again taking into account our concerns.  I thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: I think, hon. Dora and others are aware that tea and sugarcane were liberalised and research is done by the private –actually Mukwano invests a lot of money into that research.  But I can also submit, my honourable sister here should support me that when we went to Kituza- Kituza does research in coffee, palm oil, cocoa and tea; and under the strategic intervention people have carried out research in tea and have actually revamped the original good tea –if I may use those varieties which are being multiplied at Kituza.  

So, I would invite my colleague to read the Tea Authority law, because we have repealed the law and we have created another law, which is in hand now and I cannot have. Yes -(Interruption)- which has said that research in tea, sugarcane and others is done by private sector.  But Kituza is doing research in tea.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the members to appreciate that it is not possible, given our pocket, to have a research institute for every crop that we are producing in this country. I mean the cotton people could say the same, coffee, tea, sugarcane and maize.  

Therefore, we must at one time or another accept that we need to concentrate and continue to operate these satellite centers.  What we are saying is that we are not going to close the research centers that are there now. These are going to continue to operate as satellite centers for the main research institutions, zonal and institutional that we have created.  

I, therefore, want to ask and appeal to you to support the committee and the Minister on the proposal.  Otherwise, if this House was full, every corner of this country would be asking for a zonal center, they would cease to be zonal; they will actually be district centers.  I thank you, Madam.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Actually what the honourable Minister who has just been here has said will not do, because in the case of tea- Uganda Tea Growers Corporation was being managed in Kampala, but tea is actually grown in the western region and the biggest and largest tea plantations are in the Tooro region, mainly Mwenge North.  

Uganda Tea Growers Corporation had to shift its headquarters to Fort Portal because that is where tea actually was grown.  Now, for purposes of research in tea, for the distinguished Minister to say that Kituza will be enough, is not good enough either.  We are saying that where a particular crop is mainly grown, infrastructure and possibly research should also be done locally in that area so that the varieties and whatever is really developed for the whole nation and for the purposes of export- (Applause)- you cannot claim that you can do research in tea in Karamoja where it is not grown, is it not?  You have to do it in an area where that particular crop is predominantly produced.  But, of course, I support the Minister and I hope that she has an answer to that -(Laughter)- I thank you.

MRS WONEKA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am supporting the Minister in this bill all the way except in this particular schedule. It is true I have been to Kituza with the honourable Minister, I have been there many times and Kituza is here in Mukono; it is just a few miles out of this town. 

 We are talking about a zone, which is on Mt Elgon.  I am not speaking specifically for the people of Mbale to hear me, Madam Speaker. I am talking about the livelihood of the people on Mt Elgon.  

When we are talking about research, especially in this particular area, Madam Speaker, the production and productivity of coffee and all those other crops, wheat, barley, which are grown on this particular mountain, the productivity and production is going down steadily.  

In the 1980s, Mbale district together with Kapchorwa and Sironko, they could boast of export of 17,000 metric tons of coffee. Today, a bumper crop is 5,000 metric tons if the people are lucky to produce that much. 

So, when we are talking about research, Madam Speaker, these are the issues, which do not come out very clearly when we are just referring to the zones here. When you are talking about Kachwekano, you know the area you are addressing. When you are talking about Mukono, in fact Kituza is here under Mukono. In Mukono you have got low land Arabica coffee, which is known as the catimors. They are doing very well and people in the low lands I am sure are excited about that.  I am not so sure about Arabica coffee in the highlands; maybe you have got substitutes for this crop.

 Madam Speaker, Arabica coffee has made a contribution to the lives of all of us in this House. I hope that all the members do support me that we establish a research institute to address the concerns of the people in the highlands of Mt Elgon and the others as well. There is Arabica coffee in the Rwenzoris; there is Arabica coffee down in the hills of Kigezi. I am sure they will support me on this particular one. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, what will really cost you to address these zones and then phase them? What will it cost you?

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I do not think Government is going to go against what we have already agreed on with the private sector tea. We have agreed that Government is going to rehabilitate that tea “thing” and hand it over to the private sector investor –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I want to know what that “thing” is.

MRS MUKWAYA: Can I finish? The research institute that is stated. So, Madam Chairperson, for funding we have said that any private person, any farmer, any civil society person, not only public research could assess competitive grants to do research. That is already stated in the bill.  So, I can only concede if the House -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I rarely raise on point of order.  But this time I have been prompted to do so by the lack of recognition and for the record. This research institute at Rwebitaba has existed since the 1970’s. It is a government institution; if you go there now the place is rundown. There are some very faithful servants who have kept it going. Therefore, I am glad that the Minister has acknowledged that Government will rehabilitate it. 

But, Madam Chairperson is it in order for the Minister of Agriculture to refer to this very important institute in the names of Rwebitaba located in Mwenge North, Kyenjojo district as “a thing”, whereas we know that tea is one of the main cash crops of Uganda and finances all the other projects? Is it in order, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Minister is a few months old in that Ministry. So it is possible she does not know some of these places.

MR ODIT: I appreciate the concerns expressed by members who come from the tea growing areas.  To begin with, we have before us two bills. These bills have been saved for the last two to three years. They affect the tea industry: One of them is the Idi Amin’s Decree, which put in place what we call Uganda Tea Authority. When the Asians came back, they repossessed all their properties within the key industry. So that law is redundant under a new arrangement called Uganda Tea Association. 

So, this bill is to repeal the Decree. But the main one, which affects out-growers in the tea industry, is what we call Uganda Tea Growers Corporations Act. We could not allow this repealed because we wanted Government to come with a very comprehensive tea policy. We have been able to save this because we knew that the most affected people are the small farmers and this Rwebitaba is one of the centres of our concern. 

I think we have just seen in our pigeonhole what they call the Draft Tea Policy. This is a draft form we have just received this morning and we do not have the time to look at it. But as soon as we start discussing this tea policy, that concern should be addressed. I think that is precisely what we can handle at this stage. We have been moving very well, Madam Chairperson, up to this stage.  Perhaps the Minister can concede where she wants to concede and we proceed. Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I can concede to add those Bulegeni, Buginyanya, one for the Member of Parliament from Kapchorwa and one from Mt Elgon zone -(Interruption)- no, there is no Sironko. We write them here as satellite research institutes so that people can feel happy. I do not want to give Byoya bya nswa. When you put them here as zonal or PARI’s, they will bring here Article 118 because I would have given them nothing.  

So, I can only concede that we list them as satellite research institutes so that they continue to do what they are doing as we improve. If my colleague -(Interjections)- I thank you very much.  

MRS KULANY: Buginyanya and Bulegeni research institutes are dead; by the way these are not even in Kapchorwa. Surely, we are not talking about districts; we are talking about a zone. Please, these institutes we are talking about are dead. So, we want you to resurrect them.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: The Minister has just been informed that this particular institute of Rwebitaba will be rehabilitated and thereafter, privatised.  Now, how will it be rehabilitated if she includes it as a satellite zone? She says it will continue to operate as it has been operating? It does not make sense?  Madam Chairperson, I would like commitment on the rehabilitation and subsequent privatisation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe we should sleep over this matter and consult. Let us sleep over it so that we agree in the morning whether it is a satellite or a zone or what. 

MR ODIT: Sorry, Madam Chairperson, there is a correction in the naming of this Mbarara – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are sleeping over the whole thing. We are not going to take a vote on that. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.02
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the Whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Agricultural Research Bill, 2004” and passed Clauses 1 to 66 and stood over Clause 33 and with amendments and Schedule 1 and 2 and stood over Schedule 3.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done quite a bit for today. Parliament will resume tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock in the morning.  So, I am requesting all the chairpersons of the committees to come and report on the status of their work as provided for under Rule 185(1) and 185(2) so that the business can be saved.  So, in the morning we shall deal with the business of the committees.  So, House is adjourned to 10.00 O’ Clock.

(The House rose at 8.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 May 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

