

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Monday, 24 May 2021

Parliament met at 11.21 a.m. in Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Chief Justice, Justice Alfonse Owiny-Dollo, in the Chair.)

PROCLAMATION

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: “WHEREAS under Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, where a new Parliament is elected, the President is required by proclamation, to appoint the place and a date not beyond seven days after the expiry of the term of Parliament for the First Sitting for the new Parliament;
 
AND WHEREAS elections of Members of Parliament to the 11th Parliament were concluded on 14th January 2021 and in accordance with the provisions of Section 59 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 the names and the constituencies of the elected candidates were published in the Gazette;

NOTING that under clause (3) of Article 77 of the Constitution, the term of Parliament is five years from the date of its first sitting after the general elections;

FURTHER NOTING that the First Sitting of the Tenth Parliament was held on the 19th day of May 2016 and, therefore, the term of the Tenth Parliament expired on 18th day of May 2021;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the President by clause (1) of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the First Sitting of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be held at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds on the 24th day of May 2021 at 10.00 a.m.

Given under the hand of His Excellency and public seal on the 10th day of May 2021 at State House, Entebbe by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda.”

STATEMENT BY HIS LORDSHIP, THE CHIEF JUSTICE

11.30
THE CHIEF JUSTICE (Justice Alfonse Owiny-Dollo): Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, who is in attendance by reason of constitutional provision; honourable Members of Parliament, this being the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, I take this opportunity to warmly congratulate each and all the Members of Parliament, for having been elected to this august House.

I believe the journey was not easy and for this, we all have reason to thank the Almighty God for making it possible for all of you. You were declared winner in your respective constituencies, some four months ago. For some of you, you are in familiar territory, this not being the first time you are in Parliament. For the greater number of you, I am made to understand that this is the first time you are a Member of this august House. 

The reason we are here today is because the constitutional leadership of Parliament is not yet in place. The purpose, therefore, is to elect the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of this august House. 

The Constitution provides that the Chief Justice presides over the election of the Speaker. The same Constitution provides that the elected Speaker takes oath before the President of the Republic of Uganda.

On my part, I sit here today, with a lot of nostalgia because I was privileged to have been in the First Parliament, after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. I was a member of the Sixth Parliament and I served in the Government. So, for me, it is homecoming, apart from the constitutional demand that I preside over the election of the Speaker of this Parliament.

My role is simply to preside over this function in fulfilment of Article 82(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995, which provides for a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Clause (5) of the same Article provides that, “The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker and the Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.” This time, I have not designated anyone.

Honourable members, I am informed that each one of you has been availed with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I take it that you have found time to look at the relevant parts pertaining to the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

I will request the Clerk to read the Rules of Procedure, which govern the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker for avoidance of doubt, have your minds and memories refreshed. When the Clerk has read that provision, I will then conclude this remark and we go into business. 

READING OF RULE 5 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE ON THE ELECTION OF THE SPEAKER AND DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure states as follows:

    (1) The Speaker shall be elected by Members of Parliament from among their number.

    (2) A person shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker if he or she is a Vice President, Prime Minister or a Minister.

    (3) A person who publicly campaigns or causes a campaign for his or her agent in a manner which is in breach of Rule 85 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall be subject to the Code of Conduct of Members of Parliament.

    (4) No business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election of the office of Speaker at any time that the office of the Speaker is vacant.

    (5) The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker.

    (6) A person being proposed as a candidate to the office of Speaker shall give his or her consent to the nomination.

    (7) Subject to rule 11 of this rule, the election of a Speaker shall be by secret ballot.

    (8) At an election of the Speaker, a person presiding shall invite nominations from Members of Parliament present.


    (9) A Member making a nomination shall move a motion that ‘(Name)……do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker’ and shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee.

    (10) Nomination shall be seconded.

    (11) If only one person is nominated, he or she shall be declared elected and conducted to the Chair.

    (12) Where more than one person is nominated, the House shall proceed to elect a Speaker.

    (13) When all nominations have been received, the person presiding shall announce that ‘the ballot will now be taken’.

    (14) Voting shall be in the following manner:

    a) the Clerk shall ascertain the number of Members present;

    b) before voting commences, the person presiding shall cause to be produced one ballot box and cause to be demonstrated the fact that it is empty;

    c) the person presiding shall cause to be given to each Member of Parliament present a ballot paper on which the member may record his or her vote by writing the name of the person for whom he or she wishes to vote and depositing it in the ballot box;

    d) a Member who wishes to vote shall proceed to a booth or designated area for the purpose and located to and within reasonable distance from the ballot box and shall, while there, write the name of the candidate of his or her choice, fold the marked ballot paper and drop it in the ballot box;

    e) on the election of a Speaker, no vote may be cast, or abstention recorded, by proxy;

    f) after all Members who wish to vote have voted, the person presiding shall, in full view of the Members present, cause the Clerk to empty the ballot box and immediately count the ballot papers contained in it;

    g) at the completion of the counting, the person presiding shall announce the results of the voting specifying -
        i) the total number of ballot papers contained in the ballot box;
        ii) the total number of Members who have abstained from voting;
        iii) the number of both spoilt and blank ballot papers; and
        iv) the number of votes obtained by each nominee;

(i)	where two or more persons are nominated for the office of Speaker, the person who receives the majority of the votes of all Members present and voting shall be declared Speaker, and if no person receives that majority, a second election shall be held between the two persons who obtained the highest number of votes.

            (j) where at any ballot between two nominees the votes are equal, another ballot shall be held; and

            (k) where a second election has to be held under paragraph (h) and two or more persons receive equal votes in the second position, there shall be a ballot to determine the person to stand in that second election and this shall be repeated where there are ties until one person can be identified.

    (15) The person elected Speaker shall be conducted to the Chair.

    (16) As soon as possible after the election of the Speaker and before assuming the duties of the office of the Speaker, the person elected shall, in the manner prescribed by law, take and subscribe to the Oath of Speaker specified in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution as required by Article 82(10) of the Constitution.

    (17) In this rule the, ‘person presiding’ means the Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice under sub-rule (4) of this rule.

    (18) The Oath of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall be administered by the President or a person authorised by the President;

    (19) The person elected Speaker shall, upon taking the Oath of Speaker, be presented with the Mace, the Uganda Flag, the Coat of Arms, the Speaker’s Robes, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”

My Lord, I submit. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Honourable members, you listened carefully. For purposes of clarity and transparency, this election will be conducted beyond reproach. Everything will be done in the open and strictly in accordance with the rules.

Each of the nominated persons - those of you who intend to contest for the position of Speaker - have an agent. After you have been nominated and you have accepted the nomination, we will require your nominated agent to move over here and witness the process of opening the ballot box, checking to verify that the ballot box is what can be seen from outside and there is no false bottom, no mischief and that there is nothing hidden.

Secondly, we will establish the numbers of Members of Parliament who are present today for voting and the number of ballot papers will be counted in the presence of the agents and put aside. When an honourable member is called, you will be given one ballot in the presence of the agents of those who have been nominated to contest for the Speakership, and then you will go to the designated place to determine who your preferred candidate is. You will then come, insert the ballot in the ballot box when everybody is seeing, so that we deny whosoever the opportunity to cry wolf. This is the rule, which the Chief Justice is going to preside over. There will be no opportunity to give credibility to any unfounded allegations. I believe that I have been clear. 

The ballots are blank because of the circumstance of the election. Each one of you knows how to read and write; that is why you have been elected, because you can speak both the English language and your mother tongue. You will write the name of the honourable member you desire or wish to be elected Speaker of the House, and then vote in the manner I have spoken. Thank you.

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES FOR THE OFFICE OF THE SPEAKER

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I see a hand but my friends from the media are blocking me from seeing the other hands - In case you wish to nominate, just walk forward and do your thing.

11.46
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Your Lordship, I move under rule 9 of the Rules of Procedures of the Parliament of Uganda to nominate Hon. Jacob Oulanyah to take the chair as Speaker of this Parliament. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: It is good to mention your name and your constituency. If I missed them, please repeat that.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I, Rwamirama Bright Kanyontore, Member of Parliament of Isingiro North County, move under rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to nominate hon. Jacob Oulanyah to take the Chair of Parliament as Speaker.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: If you would like to second, just walk forward – (Interjections)- They have a duty to inform the people of Uganda so that they know what is happening here. 

MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU: Your Lordship, the Chief Justice, rule No.9 is on sitting arrangement in the House; maybe the colleague that wants to nominate wants to address himself on the sitting arrangement. That is the procedural issue that I would like to raise.

MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA: Further, my Lord, the rule that relates to the nomination of the Speaker is rule No.5, sub rule (9), where the motion is specifically stated. My Lord, the record should be straight, so that we do not proceed through a procedural irregularity. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. We were going to correct this. Yes, we can have another procedural issue.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: My Lord, further strengthening the point of legality, the mover was well aware of his nomination but the motion he has moved is on the issue of siting arrangement. I do not know whether he is nominating someone for which space to occupy while seated in this House. Otherwise, he either freshly nominates or the nomination collapses.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, can you nominate your candidate in accordance with rule No.5, sub rule (9).

11.50
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, your Lordship. I beg to move a motion under rule No. 5, sub-rule (9) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to nominate hon. Jacob Oulanyah to take the chair of this Parliament as Speaker.

11.51
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, my Lord. Honourable members, I, hon. Amongi Betty Ongom, Member of Parliament, Oyam County South, move under rule No.5, sub rule (10), to second the nomination of hon. Jacob L. Oulanyah, Member of Parliament, for the post of the Speakership for the Eleventh Parliament. I beg to second.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can we now have the Member nominating hon. Jacob Oulanyah to say a few words in support of his nomination. 

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Your Lordship, I wish to nominate Jacob Oulanyah, who is a graduate with BA in Agricultural Economics (1992) before perusing a degree in law in 1995. He holds a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice, which he attained in 1996 from the Law Development Centre. He is currently pursuing a Masters in Law in Legislative Drafting from the institute of advanced legislative studies, University of London.

Professionally, he is an advocate and notary public practicing under J.L. Oulanyah and Company Advocates. In 2019, Zoe Life Theological College, USA, in recognition of his distinguished services and faith, awarded him an honorary doctorate in divinity and you can now call him Dr Oulanyah.

He has six professional certificates in legislative drafting obtained from the International Law Institute, Kampala; the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training (BPST), New Delhi, India; the G.V Mavalankar Bureau for Parliamentary Studies and Gujarat Legislative Secretariat, Gandhiji, India; PAI International, London.

He attended a CPA Westminster Training on Parliamentary Practice and Procedure in London in 2002. He was trained by the best in the House of Commons.

From 1997, he taught Legislative Drafting and Constitutional Law to post-graduate law students at LDC and only left in July 2001, when he was sworn in as an elected member for Omoro County.

In Parliament, he was a member and later became chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, handling the challenging process of political transition and constitutional review. He steered his committee to process two constitutional amendment Bills and nine other Bills to implement the provision of the amended Constitution.

His committee supervised the Parliamentary Commission. He presented the only Private Members’ Bill in the Seventh Parliament. He was a founder member of the Consultative Assembly for Parliamentarians on ICC. 

From 2006, after he lost his seat in Parliament, hon. Oulanyah continued to engage himself actively in legislative activities such as training legislators in Kenya, Swaziland, South Sudan and Sudan on parliamentary practice and procedures, legislative drafting and other subjects relevant to the proper functioning and administration of Parliament. He has drafted several rules of procedure for other Parliaments in the region. 

He was a legal advisor to high-level persons including Dr Riek Machar, the chief mediator in the then Juba Peace Talks and President Joaquim A. Chissano, UN Special Envoy to the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas. He drafted the Juba Peace Agreement. He was also an advisor to the Government of South Sudan. 

He has been Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament and the Tenth Parliament and comes with this experience to handle the business of the House, upholding the independence of Parliament and ensuring befitting welfare for its Members.

Why should we vote and drag Jacob L. Oulanyah in the Chair? With his over 25 years in legal practice –

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Please, do not forget that it has got to be a brief statement. So, can you conclude in two minutes? You have taken five minutes already.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: With over 25 years legal practice and 20 years of parliamentary experience, both in and out of Parliament, hon. Oulanyah has developed a high, successful career passed in parliamentary practice and procedures. He offers extensive practical hands-on experience in legislative matters. 

He is a believer in the parliamentary system of representative democracy and is an ardent believer in procedural powers and orderly conduct of business. He is a persistent and tenacious keeper of high standards of parliamentary service delivery and capacity building for effective performance of the representative and oversight role of Parliament.

He is a professional in appearance and presentation, energetic and has an independent mind with a positive and inspiring outlook. He is reliable and dependable. He firmly believes that while the majority may have its way, the minority right to have its say must be protected, preserved and observed, as the cornerstone of parliamentary democracy.

He respects authority, believes in cooperation and building of partnerships. He is a peace builder, unifier and a bridge between the old and young parliamentarians.

Honourable members, I beg that we vote for Jacob L. Oulanyah, Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I beg to move.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. 

11.58
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you very much. Honourable members, I stand here to second the nomination of Jacob Oulanyah on two grounds; there are many other grounds but I will speak on two grounds.

The first is that hon. Oulanyah believes in Uganda. Hon. Oulanyah is a nationalist, who has traversed this country. For those who remember, he traversed this country to look for the votes to be the Vice Chairperson of the NRM. He was one of those who got the highest votes throughout this country. 

That attests to his national character that the people of this country trusted him. During the time he has been a Deputy Speaker, he has moved throughout this country, advocating for several issues, representing both Government and His Excellency the President.

Hon. Oulanyah believes in constitutionalism. This is my fifth term in Parliament. I served with hon. Jacob Oulanyah in Parliament. At the time I served with him, I was the publicity secretary of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association. I went to recruit Jacob Oulanyah as a male member of Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association.

When I reached the office of hon. Oulanyah, who, at that time, was the chairperson of –

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can you finish the secondment in one more minute?

MS AMONGI: Yes. When I went to his office, hon. Oulanyah had this to tell me. He said, “Hon. Amongi, if you want the women’s agenda for this country to stand the test of time, the only guarantee is the Constitution and what is provided in the Constitution”. No wonder, the drafters of this book I am holding – the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda – in the attestation of hon. Jacob Oulanyah, entrenched several provisions to protect the rights of women – Article 32 and 33 – and this remains our guarantee. I know hon. Jacob Oulanyah -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you very much, honourable member of Parliament. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much. I second the nomination.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Honourable members, the rules do not provide for the seconder making a statement. However, because, by default, she has done so; in the subsequent nominations – whatever number of people who are nominated for the Office of Speaker – the nominator will have eight minutes to speak about him or her and the seconder will have two minutes because the ground must be level.

Other nominations?

12.00
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Your Lordship, the Chief Justice, honourable members of Parliament. I take this opportunity to, once again, congratulate you upon your election to the 11th Parliament of Uganda. 

For the record, I am Allan Ssewanyana Aloysious, MP Makindye West constituency and a member of the National Unity Platform. I am moving this motion under rule 5(8), 5(9) and 5(10) of our Rules of Procedure that addresses the subject matter before us.

Honourable members, just to remind you of what you already know, Article 82 of the Constitution of Uganda states that there shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker elected among us, members of Parliament. Needless to say, each one of us here is qualified to be a Speaker or Deputy Speaker. Therefore –

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, can you please nominate and then speak?

MR SSEWANYANA: Therefore, accordingly, Your Lordship and Members of Parliament present, I propose that Kira Municipality Member of Parliament, Hon. Semujju Ibrahim Nganda, do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker.

Honourable members, I beg to move. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can you now speak for your nominee? You have eight minutes within which to speak about him and if it is seconded, the person seconding will speak for no more than two minutes. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Let him first second and then - 

 THE CHIEF JUSTICE: No, I am the one chairing and not you. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Your Lordship. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The Rules say you nominate and speak. Then, the person seconding – because we made a fault and allowed the person seconding to also speak. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Your Lordship. Honourable members present, the Parliament of Uganda must be an independent institution. That is why I present to you an independent person in mind in hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. 

Just to remind some of you who were here and those who were not here, that on 27 September 2017, humiliation to this Parliament happened. Members of Parliament, myself inclusive, hon. Zaake and others such as hon. Nambooze were beaten. Some of them lost their limbs and they were taken to hospitals. 

I was bundled together with other Members of Parliament like hon. Muhammad Nsereko, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and beaten by the invaders. This invasion of Parliament went against the doctrine of separation of powers commanded by the Special Forces Command (SFC), which is headed by the son of the main occupant of State House.
The Speaker of Parliament then surrendered us to the SFC. She read our names and retreated to the VIP room to take tea, as much as Parliament was being invaded. Even the Deputy Speaker ran away during these tough times, where we had to save the Constitution of Uganda, for which we swore to save and only had to command this disorganisation over telephone while clapping hands for whoever was beaten. Hon. Ssemujju was also a victim of this circumstance, as much as he was a Member of Parliament. 

I would like to assure Members that the honourable Member I am presenting to you, hon. Ssemujju, will make Parliament a safe place for every Member of Parliament to live in. Even if you disagree with him, he will never connive with any outside force to oppress or create misery for any Member of Parliament. 

We need an independent Parliament, without any external forces, which can act according to the Constitution of Uganda. Honourable members, you deserve a Speaker who will be impartial while presiding over Parliament; a Speaker who will be accessible by all Members, one who will distribute opportunities to all and a very generous one like hon. Ssemujju. 

Hon. Ssemujju will not personalise the institution of Parliament and every Member of Parliament will find comfort in working with him. He will be a Speaker for every Member of Parliament. He promises to handle disagreements with colleague Members of Parliament and subordinates in the most professional and dignified manner.  

Article 79 of the Constitution assigns you, Members of Parliament, a duty to make laws for peace, order, development and good governance. The same Article orders Parliament to promote democracy.

In the last Parliament, we witnessed a number of human rights abuses. During the recent elections, a number of our supporters in the NUP and FDC were arrested on the orders of one of the Presidential candidates, Mr Yoweri Tubuhaburwa Museveni and are still languishing in prison. Parliament, whose duty is to promote democracy, has made no significant interventions. Under hon. Ssemujju, promotion of democracy in this country will be prioritised.

The person I am presenting to you, hon. Ssemujju, is a Member of Parliament representing Kira Municipality.  

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Just a moment, honourable member. The rule of Parliament, as I remember, is that you do not clap like in a political rally but instead stamp your feet on the ground. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Your Lordship, for that guidance. Hon. Ssemujju is a Member of Parliament representing Kira Municipality and was duly sworn in on Thursday 20 May 2021, last week. 

He was a member of the 11th Parliament and therefore, qualifies, under Article 82 of the Constitution, to chair this Parliament as Speaker. 

He is also a Member of the Forum for Democratic Party; a party he also speaks for and he has other duties. 

Hon. Ssemujju has a family. He was born and has also given birth to very many people in this country. He was born in Bijaaba Village, Kyazanga Subcounty, Bukoto West Constituency in Lwengo on 23 September 1973 during President Idi Amin’s time. This means he is 47 years old. 

Lwengo District, where he was born, was part of Masaka but now is a district. He is a son of Hajji Ali Nganda Nkwanga of Ngo Clan and Hajat Sofia Nalugo of Mutima Clan – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: You have two minutes to make eight minutes.

MR SSEWANYANA: Hon. Ssemujju is married to Ms Faridah Babirye Ssemujju and a proud father of seven. He studied from Bijaaba Islamic Institute during his primary and Masaka Secondary School for his O’ and A’ level, where he emerged as the best student. Therefore, we will be lucky to have a best student in this country chairing our Parliament with dignity. 

He went to Makerere University for a Bachelor of Arts in Mass Communication Degree in 1995 and graduated in 1998. He also proceeded for further education in Oslo University of Norway pursuing a short course in media and democracy. He has been teaching Journalism in the Islamic University of Uganda (IUIU) and he worked for the Daily Monitor and the Observer as a journalist, where he was a director. 

He has always cried loud for the respect for humanity and democracy in this country. He talked about how good governance should be and how a good Parliament should be run, when he was a journalist. 

Hon. Ssemujju, the parliamentarian has chaired some committees since joining 10 years ago, as an FDC member. He chaired the Committee of Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. As the chairperson, he did a wonderful job for this country by reclaiming a lot from enterprises and even holding them accountable to those who were doing the mischief to this country – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, please, conclude. 

MR SSEWANYANA: I am concluding. In 2016, hon. Ssemujju became the Chief Opposition Whip, a position he has held until he joined the new Parliament. He has done a wonderful job for us, as Parliament, by serving Parliament. 

Honourable members, that is the distinguished son of Uganda, a person of impeccable integrity that I present to you. Thank you very much. I beg to move.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Are there any secondments? Use the opportunity, if you wish, to say anything in no more than two minutes. 

12.10 
MR MOSES ATTAN (FDC, Soroti East Division, Soroti): My Lordship, His Excellency, honourable Members of Parliament, the staff of Parliament, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, I move under Rule 5(10) to second the motion of nominating hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I support this nomination premised on the doctrine of separation of powers of the three arms of Government; the Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive.  

The Executive proposes Bills, policies and the Legislature passes them and the Executive implements them. The Legislature appropriates and the Executive implements the budget.

In the current Parliament, in the Constitution - I move under Article 79 - for the good governance of this country there is a need for separation of powers and a need to improve the oversight function of Parliament. It is on record under the Administration of Parliament Act that the accountability committees are under the mandate of the minority. It is on that basis that I move and do support the nomination of Ssemujju Ibrahim for Speaker. I strongly believe he will steer the doctrine of separation of powers and ensure the oversight role of Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, honourable member.

12.13
MR KISA STEPHEN (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Your Lordship the Chief Justice, your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, honourable Members of Parliament, the staff, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am Kisa Stephen Bakubalwayo, Member of Parliament of Luuka South County and Chairperson of the NRM of Luuka South County.

Honourable members, I have the honour and privilege to move a motion under rule 5(9) of the Rules of Procedure that the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, District Woman Member of Parliament, does take the chair of this Parliament as the Speaker. I beg to move.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can you speak in no more than eight minutes about hon. Rebecca Kadaga whom you have nominated.

MR KISA: Your Lordship the Chief Justice, I thank the Almighty God for this maiden sitting of the Eleventh Parliament of Uganda in which we are also determining the leadership of our Parliament.

Distinguished colleagues, of the three arms of Government, it is only Parliament that represents the voice of the voiceless. It is Parliament that represents the downtrodden, the less privileged, the underprivileged and the unknown segments of society. It is, therefore, important that the people of Uganda, through their elected representatives, be given an opportunity to determine the leadership of Parliament. It is our considered view that the candidate who will champion the cause of the people of Uganda is the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga.

The Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga was born on 24 May 1956 and today is 24 May; this is a very strong day for her. As you are seated there, we have a baby in the House that you are supposed to shower with gifts to congratulate her because this is her birthday. Whoever chose this sincerely chose the right day for the right person.

Your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has a Master’s Degree in Women’s Law from the University of Zimbabwe, a Postgraduate Diploma (First Class) in Women’s Law from the University of Zimbabwe. She has a certificate in French; therefore, she has the ability to chair in English and in French. She has a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice from the Law Development Centre, Kampala. She holds a Bachelor of Laws Degree from Makerere University.

The person I am nominating today, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, is the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda elected for a second term in May 2016. This is the third position in the hierarchy of national leadership in Uganda after the President and the Vice-President. 

She is an Advocate of the Courts of Judicature in Uganda, having been enrolled in 1982. She holds a Master’s Degree in Law, as I have mentioned, and she was the first woman to establish a law firm in Uganda - Kadaga & Co. Advocates - in 1984.

Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga is a highly experienced person. She has served as a legislator for an uninterrupted period of 27 years - as Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli District since 1989 and as a National Resistance Council Member. In the 27 years, she was a backbencher for seven years. 

From 1996 to 1998, she was elevated and appointed Minister of State for Regional Co-operation. From 1998 to 1999, she served as Minister of State for Transport. From 1999 to 2001, she was a Cabinet Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs. On matters of parliamentary affairs, she is knowledgeable. From 2001 to 2011, she was the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and from 2011, she has been the Speaker of Parliament. She is very exposed in parliamentary affairs.

In the international perspective, honourable members, she was the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Africa Region, from 2016 to 2017. She was the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians from 2014 to 2016, and Vice-Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians from 2009 to 2014. She was an Executive Committee member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, representing the African Region, and the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, Africa Region. In this fora, she campaigned for women emancipation in politics and governance in many regions of the Commonwealth.

She has presented many papers on women rights, youth emancipation, social and economic justice -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Two more minutes, honourable member.

MR KISA: Thank you, Your Lordship. Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga was the first woman in Uganda to hold the office of Speaker. This alone guarantees the success of this country.

She has received many awards in appreciation of her work. In 2013, she received the Golden Jubilee award by the President of Uganda, who is a brother to the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga.

In 2014, she received the Grand Officer of the Republic of Benin from the President of Benin in recognition of her work as a woman empowerment campaigner. She received an award for Africa Speaker of the Year, 2018, which was given to her by the London Political Summit. She was awarded a Doctorate of Law by Nkumba University on 26 October 1999. She is now a doctor.

Ladies and gentlemen, she has had other distinguished responsibilities. She once served as the Secretary of the East African Women Parliamentary Association, President of the International Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA) in Uganda, she was the founding chairperson of the University Council of Mbarara University of Science and Technology, founding chairperson of Busoga University Council, a campaigner for the eradication of female genital mutilation in Uganda and Africa, and she is an advocate of human rights and social justice at the –(Member timed out.) 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Conclude.

MR KISA: Your Lordship, I am concluding. She has spearheaded the establishment of the certificate of gender and equity - the first in the world as recently acknowledged by the United Nations Women at the International Women’s Day.

Honourable members, she is the first woman to establish a law firm in Uganda, and the patron of the youth “Go Green”, a campaign of the girl child for women rights in Uganda, and in Africa. She is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association President designate, and you are aware of that. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you very much. Can we have the seconder? You are now repeating yourself. You are in the ninth minute. I want to be fair to everybody and you are not speaking anymore. Your time is up.

12.23
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Your Lordship, His Excellency the beloved President of the Republic of Uganda, honourable Members of Parliament, I stand under Rule 5(10) to second hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga, Woman Member of Parliament, Kamuli District, on the NRM ticket and Vice Chairperson for the mighty party - the National Resistance Movement in the Republic of Uganda. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can you mention your name?

MR MACHO: Your Lordship, I am Geoffrey Macho, Member of Parliament, Busia Municipality, Independent and NRM leaning.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: You can speak for not more than two minutes, about the candidate you are seconding.

MR MACHO: Your Lordship, I have come to second hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga because:

    1. She is a brand of the women not only in Uganda but in the whole world. Hon. Kadaga, being the Speaker of this Parliament, has emancipated and empowered the women of this country and also strengthened all political parties to know that women are now at the frontline of the leadership in this country.

    2. My beloved colleagues, hon. Kadaga, as you heard the nominator read her profile, has built an international image that even other countries admire. That is why I second her and request you, honourable colleagues, that we should not lose this opportunity because the Commonwealth countries are looking for people with these profiles. That is why I pledge to my honourable colleagues that I second this mighty lady. 

Hon. Kadaga is a Member of Parliament, Kamuli District but in her work as Speaker, she loves visiting every part of the country to listen to the voice of the vulnerable people of Uganda. Through her leadership and style of governing Parliament, many petitions have been brought on the Floor of Parliament concerning the vulnerable people and this has helped a lot of our people in this country and our party, to make sure that it is a mighty party.

Honourable colleagues, hon. Kadaga is a committed worker and that is why she has been a consistent supporter of her political party; that since she started working, in leadership of the National Resistance Movement, she has never waived at all. She has moved with the party and I am so proud - when I heard the nominator – and I also agree and believe that when she is successful, all political parties in this country will have a Speaker who will balance Parliament and not be biased at all. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Conclude.

MR MACHO: As I conclude, I second hon. Alitwala Kadaga, as you have heard her profile, because of her knowledge in parliamentary governance. She is a lady who has been in Parliament and has mastered how to coordinate, how to link and how to administer without bringing grudges between organs of Government. Through her leadership, we have seen tremendous growth and good democracy in our country. That is why I do not doubt when our beloved President calls her sister.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Will you please conclude, honourable member? You are going into the third minute. 

MR MACHO: As I conclude, in one second, I second hon. Aliwtala Kadaga by saying that she is the best choice that Uganda wants now.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Other nominations please? As I said, it is not possible to see every Member of Parliament. If you are nominating anyone, just walk forward and whoever is seconding also follows, and then we continue.

12.28
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): My Lord, the Chief Justice, my name is Asuman Basalirwa, Member of Parliament, Bugiri Municipality.  I move a motion that the nominations be closed.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Secondment.

12.29
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): My Lord, my name is Gilbert Olanya. I second that the nominations be closed.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: That being the case, can I ask in the order of their nominations; hon. Jacob Oulanyah, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju and hon. Rebecca Kadaga each and in one sentence, whether they accept these nominations, which have been seconded.

The rules do not provide for you to campaign; just accept or decline. I said no clapping unless my ears are playing games on me; just stamp your feet.

12.30
MR JACOB OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Your Lordship the Chief Justice, Your Excellency the President and honourable members, I, Jacob Oulanyah, Member of Parliament for Omoro County, do hereby consent to my nomination to be the Speaker of the 11th Parliament. Thank you.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE:  Thank you. Can hon. Ssemujju – 

12.31
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Your Lordship the Chief Justice, colleagues, and Members of Parliament, my name is Ibrahim Ssemujju. I represent Kira Municipality and I am here to consent to my nomination.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE:  Thank you very much. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga.

12.32
MS REBECCA KADAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamuli): My Lord the Chief Justice and distinguished Members of Parliament, I, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, do hereby consent to the nomination for the post of Speaker. Thank you.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE:  Thank you very much, honourable. Can one agent of each of the nominated contestants for the Office of Speaker come forward, as we proceed into the electoral process now? 

Do we have the agent for hon. Jacob Oulanyah? You have to mention your name. Everything is going to be above board so that Members know the agent is a Member of Parliament but not someone from Owino Market. 

12.34
MS MARGARET MUGISA MUHANGA (NRM, Fort Portal North Division, Fort Portal City): Your Lordship and Your Excellency, I am the agent for Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the winner.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The agent for Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju – Can the Sergeant-at-Arms organise chairs for the agents at the front here because they will be seated for a while.

12.35
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Your Lordship, I am the agent for the next Speaker of Parliament, Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The agent for Hon. Rebecca Kadaga –

12.36
MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Your Lordship, I am the official agent of the Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Can we proceed? The next is examination of the ballots. Can the three agents move near, please? The ballot box is here, in front of everyone and it will be emptied.  Can the officials of Parliament, please – 

MR RICHARD LUMU: My Lord, Rule 5 (14) states that:

“ a) the Clerk shall ascertain the number of Members present;
b) before voting commences, the person presiding shall cause to be produced one ballot box and cause to be demonstrated the fact that it is empty”

My Lord, the Chief Justice, before the box is produced, the number of Members of Parliament present must first be ascertained. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: That has actually been done. Madam Clerk, can you, please, mention the number of Members present? 

Honourable members, the Clerk to Parliament has established a number of 320 Members of Parliament present, in the House today, as we speak. Can we have order, please, so that I do not have to speak three times? Anyhow, the names are going to be called out loudly and singly and you will come so that Members can know that the person who is coming is truly “A”. He or she will go through the voting process in the gaze of everyone, until the end.

If there is anyone whose name would not have been called, he or she can then raise his or her voice and say, “I have not heard my name. So, I have not voted.” I do not know if this answers your concern.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, My Lord. The interpretation of this rule is that our names must be called out. That is what “ascertaining” means. The Clerk cannot ascertain our names on her own. I must say that “I am present.” That will give us the number of those who are absent and those present. This is the import of this rule. My prayer is that we allow the names to be called out. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, what is the purpose of registration? 

MR SSEWUNGU: I do not know whether – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Is it a ritual? Doesn’t it serve the purpose? 

MR SSEWUNGU: I pray that we ascertain the names of Members of Parliament. Moreover, we are new here. We will be known if our names are called one by one. This is why I moved with my - 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. It costs us nothing to read out these names so that we are all contented that “A” who comes out here to vote is actually present. 

Madam Clerk, would you like to read out the names of each of the Members present? We will only know if they are present? They will call out all names. Those who are present will say, “We are present”. Are you raising another point? 

MR BASALIRWA: My Lord, I seek your guidance. My name is Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, Member of Parliament for Bugiri Municipality. As we are seated here, people are continuously arriving in the House. I am not so sure whether the approach we seek to adopt will cure the provisions in the rules. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Do you want us to wait until 6.00 p.m.?

MR BASALIRWA: No, My Lrd.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: What is your purpose?

MR BASALIRWA: The guidance I seek from you is whether after the closure of the ascertainment by the Clerk, those who come after that will be considered for purposes of voting.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: To answer the honourable member for Bugiri Municipality, if a Member comes when the voting process is still ongoing, they will vote as long as they are Members.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Chairperson, what I observe are the difficulties of blocking further entry and exit. At the moment, all the doors are open and they are porous. I would rather suggest that we put in place some mechanism to stop entry into the premises at the moment until we finish. Otherwise, we cannot ascertain the number; it will keep shifting. I do not know how the Clerk can implement that procedure because you can see people are entering from all sides.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, this is simple. This is what we are going to do: The Clerk to Parliament is going to call out your names, you will respond and your names will be ticked. That is the order by which those that will be asked to come and vote will be determined. If after that a Member of Parliament says, “Look, I came after the names were called, but I would like to vote”, we will decide. However, for the voting, those who were present at the time of calling out the names will vote. There is no voting by proxy or by remote, you must be physically here. 

Honourable member, I think somebody had come before you, but it is okay, please raise your point.

MR DENIS SEKABIRA: My Lord, I am Sekabira Denis, Katikamu North Constituency. I am in disagreement with the honourable member.  I would like to reassert that as long as the Member appears on the register -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The chairperson ruled on that one.

MR DENIS SEKABIRA: Most obliged.

MR JACOB OBOTH: My Lord the Chief Justice, I know the proclamation has been that we are now in Parliament. I also know that ascertaining names would be subject to various interpretation; it is not strict.

There is practice that has been before. I see some difficulty in the procedure that we may adopt. If we are going to do a roll call to ascertain the names, I do not know how much time we are prepared to spend here. 

The Parliament we have today is different from what we have been having before in the Chamber. In the Chamber, one would get up and the microphone would be right in front of him or her. I am seeking further guidance; maybe if they call your name out to vote, you first come here to say that you are present. Otherwise, to first ascertain the names and then begin the voting process - My Lord, I seek your guidance on how much time we have. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The 24th of May this year is the day set aside for the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament.

MS ROSE OBIGA: Thank you, My Lord. I propose that we use the system that my colleague has just mentioned, that you mention your name and it should correspond to the name in your national identification card, which we were told to come with. This will expedite this process. Thank you.

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Thank you, My Lord the Chief Justice. The rule provides that the Clerk shall ascertain the number of Members present. There are just two key points; the first is who ascertains, and that is the Clerk; the second is the number of Members present. We are not bothered about those that are not present. 

My view is simple; it is about the Clerk ascertaining and telling us the numbers present and we proceed with business. May you guide us. Thank you.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can the Clerk to Parliament please read out the names of those present. When your name is read, from wherever you are - Can we have order from the agents, before you are disqualified.

We have in the House - as ascertained by the Clerk to Parliament - 320 Members present and ready to vote. Can we have the Clerk read out those names. The Chair had already decided on this.

This is how we will proceed – Honourable members, please be attentive. The names will be read out and if at the end your name is not read out, let us know. If at the end a name other than someone whom you know is read as a Member of Parliament, you can raise it so that there is no interruption. Just read out the names of those who are present and are going to vote.

ROLL CALL

    1. Ababiku Jesca			Present

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Just continue to read out the names. They are supposed to take note; they do not have to respond. They can just stand up and then sit down.

    2. Abeja Susan Jolly			Present
    3. Aber Lillian			Present
    4. Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe		Present
    5. Abwoli Kunihira Agnes		Present
    6. Acan Joyce Okeny			Present
    7. Acen Dorcas			Present
    8. Aceng Jane Ruth Ocero		Present
    9. Achan Judith Peace		Present

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: After the names have been read, I will listen to issues of procedure –(Interjection)- I have overruled you. They are going to read out the names; if you have anything to raise, it should be after the Clerk has read out the names. Otherwise, we shall not proceed because everybody wants it their way. It is done the way the chairman decides. After they have read all the names, you can raise whatever you want to raise. 

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, My Lord.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: They have not read out the names –(Interjection)– I have not allowed you. I have said that after the names have been read out, you can raise whatever you want to raise. They are going to read out the 320 names. It was requested by you.

So, for the sake of transparency, please – we have not come here for procedure; we have come here to elect the Speaker of Parliament and a decision has got to be made by the Chair.

MR KAFUUZI: Your Lordship, they are still doing accreditation. We are going to lock out over 200 MPs.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: That is what you think. Let us read out the names first and we know who the 320 are. The Chairperson was very clear; if, after the reading of the names, your name is not read, then you can raise it but not to begin speculation. [Mr Tinkasiimire: “Procedure!”] There is no procedure.

    10 Achayo Juliet		- Present 	
    11 Achia Remigio		- Present
    12 Achieng Sarah Opendi 		- Present
    13 Acibu Agnes 		- Present
    14 Aciro Paska Menya 		- Present
    15 Acom Joan Alobo 		- Present
    16 Acora Nancy 		- Present
    17 Acrobert Kiiza Moses 		- Present
    18 Adeke Anna Ebaju 		- Present
    19 Adidwa Abdu 		- Present
    20 Adoa Hellen 		- Present	
    21 Adome Francis Lorika 		- Present
    22 Adriko Yovan 		- Present	
    23 Aeku Patrick 		- Present	
    24 Afidra Olema Ronald 		- Present
    25 Afoyochan Esther 		- Present	
    26 Agaba Aisa 		- Present 	
    27 Agasha Juliet Bashisha 
    28 Akamba Paul 		- Present	
    29 Akampurira Prossy Mbabazi 		- Present
    30 Akello Beatrice Akori 		- Present
    31 Akello Christine 		- Present	
    32 Akello Lucy 		- Present 	
    33 Akello Rose-Lilly 		- Present
    34 Akena James Michael Jimmy 		- Present
    35 Akol Anthony 		- Present 	
    36 Akora Maxwell Ebong Patrick 		- Present
    37 Akugizibwe Aled Ronald 		- Present
    38 Akumu Catherine Mavenjina 		- Present
    39 Alanyo Jennifer 		- Present 	
    40 Aleper Margaret Achilla 		- Present
    41 Aleper Moses 		- Present	
    42 Alero Tom Aza 		- Present
    43 Ali Moses		- Present
    44 Alioni Yorke Odria 		- Present
    45 Alum Santa Sandra Ogwang 		- Present
    46 Alupo Jessica Rose Epel 		- Present
    47 Alyek Judith 		- Present
    48 Ameede Agnes 		– Absent 	
    49 Amero Susan 		- Present 	
    50 Among Anita Annet 		- Present
    51 Amongi Betty Ongom 		- Present
    52 Angura Fredrick 		- Present	
    53 Anyakun Esther Davinia 		- Present
    54 Anywar Ricky Richard 		- Present
    55 Aogon Silas 		- Present	
    56 Aol Betty Ocan 		- Present
    57 Apollo Yeri Ofwono 		- Present
    58 Apolot Christine 		- Present 	
    59 Apolot Stella Isodo 		- Present
    60 Arinaitwe Rauben 		- Present	
    61 Arinaitwe Rwakajara 		- Present	
    62 Asaba Nsabimana Paul 		- Present
    63 Asamo Hellen Grace 		- Present
    64 Aseera Stephen 		- Present	
    65 Asiimwe Florence Akiiki 		- Present
    66 Asiimwe K. Enosi 		- Present	 
    67 Asiimwe Musiime Molly 		- Present
    68 Atim Agnes Apea 		- Present
    69 Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara 		- Present
    70 Atima Jackson Lee Buti 		- Present
    71 Attan Okia Moses 		- Present
    72 Atugonza Allan 		- Present	
    73 Atukwasa Rita 		- Present	
    74 Atuto Jacinta 		- Present
    75 Atwakiire Catheline Ndamira 		- Present 
    76 Atwijukire Dan 		- Present
    77 Atyang Stella 		- Present 	
    78 Auma Hellen Wandera 		- Present
    79 Auma Kenny 		- Present	
    80 Auma Linda Agnes 		- Present
    81 Avako Melsa Naima Gule 		- Present
    82 Avur Jane Pacuto 		- Present
    83 Awany Tony 		- Present	
    84 Awas Sylvia Vicky 		- Present
    85 Awich Jane 		- Present	
    86 Awor Betty Engola 		- Present
    87 Ayebale Margaret 		- Present
    88 Ayoo Jennifer Nalukwago 		- Present
    89 Ayoo Tonny 		- Present	
    90 Ayume Charles 		- Present 	
    91 Baatom Ben Koryang 		- Present
    92 Baba James Boliba 		- Present
    93 Bagala Joyce Ntwatwa 		- Present
    94 Bagiire Aggrey Henry 		- Present
    95 Bahati David 		- Present	
    96 Bahireira Tumwekwase Sylvia 		- Present
    97 Bainababo Charity		- Present
    98 Bainomugisha Jane Kabajungu 		- Present
    99 Baka Stephen Mugabi 		- Present
    100 Bakireke Nambooze Betty 		- Present
    101 Bakkabulindi Charles 		- Present	
    102 Balimwezo Ronald Nsubuga 		- Present
    103 Bangirana Anifa Kawooya 		- Absent
    104 Baryomunsi Chris 		- Present	
    105 Basalirwa Asuman 		- Present	
    106 Bataringaya Basil Rwankwene­ 		- Present
    107 Batuwa Timothy Lusala 		- Present
    108 Bayigga Michael Philip Lulume		- Present
    109 Bebona Josephine Babungi 		- Absent
    110 Begumisa Mary 		- Present	
    111 Bhoka George Didi 		- Present
    112 Bigirwa Norah Nyendwoha 		- Present
    113 Bingi Patrick Nyanzi 		- Present
    114 Biraaro Ephraim Ganshanga 		- Present
    115 Biyika Lawrence Songa 		- Present
    116 Bright Tom Amooti 		- Present
    117 Bukenya Michael Iga 		- Present
    118 Businge Harriet 		- Present 	
    119 Businge Joab 		- Present	
    120 Businge Victoria Rusoke 		- Present
    121 Busingye Peninah Kabingani 		- Present
    122 Butime Tom Ateenyi 		- Present
    123 Buturo Nsaba 		- Present
    124 Bwanika Abed 		- Present
    125 Bwiire Sanon Nadeeba 		- Present
    126 Byakatonda Abdulhu 		- Present 	
    127 Byamukama Fred 		- Present	
    128 Byamukama Nulu Joseph 		- Present
    129 Byanyima Nathan 		- Present	
    130 Byarugaba Alex Bakunda 		- Present
    131 Chelain Betty Louke 		- Present
    132 Chelangat Alinga Solomon 		- Present
    133 Chelimo Lauben Paul 		- Present
    134 Chemaswet Abdi Fadhil Kisos 		- Present
    135 Chemonges William 		- Present 	
    136 Chemutai Everlyn 		- Present	
    137 Chemutai Phyllis 		- Present	
    138 Cheptoris Sam Mangusho 		- Present
    139 Cherukut Rose Emma 		- Absent
    140 Driwaru Jennifer 		- Present 	
    141 Ebwalu Jonathan 		- Present	
    142 Ecweru Musa Francis 		- Present
    143 Edakasi Alfred Elalu-Olale 		- Present
    144 Ekanya Geofrey 		- Present 	
    145 Ekudo Tom Julius 		– Absent 
    146 Elotu Cosmas 		- Present	
    147 Elwelu Peter (Lt Gen.) 		- Present	
    148 Emigu Julius Peter 		- Present
    149 Esenu Anthony Alden 		- Present
    150 Etuka Isaac Joakino 		- Absent
    151 Ezama Siraji Brahan 		- Present
    152 Feta Geofrey		 - Present	
    153 Gafabusa Richard Muhumuza 		- Present
    154 Gidudu Mafwabi Dominic 		- Present	
    155 Gume Fredrick Ngobi 		- Present
    156 Hashim Sulaiman	 	- Present	
    157 Igeme Nathan Nabeta Samson 		- Present
    158 Ikojo Bosco John 		- Present
    159 Isabirye David Aga 		- Present
    160 Isabirye Iddi 		- Present	
    161 Isamat Abraham		- Present
    162 Isingoma-Mwesigwa Patrick 		- Present	
    163 Ismail Lomwar Muhammad		- Present
    164 Kaala Kevin Ojinga 		- Present
    165 Kaaya Christine Nakimwero 		- Present
    166 Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro 		- Present
    167 Kabanda David 		- Present	
    168 Kabasharira Naome 		- Present	
    169 Kabugho Florence		- Present	
    170 Kabuura Derrick 		- Absent	
    171 Kabuusu Moses 		- Present
    172 Kabuye Frank		- Present	
    173 Kadaga Rebecca		- Present
    174 Kafuuzi Jackson Karugaba 		- Present
    175 Kagabo Twaha Mzee 		- Present
    176 Kahunde Helen 		- Present
    177 Kajwengye Twinomugisha Wilson 		- Present
    178 Kakembo Michael 		- Present	
    179 Kamara-Nizeyimana John 		- Present	
    180 Kamara Nicholas Thadeus 		- Present
    181 Kamateneti Josyline		- Absent
    182 Kambale Ferigo		- Present
    183 Kamugo Pamela Nasiyo 		- Present
    184 Kamukama Benjamin 		- Present	
    185 Kamukama Davis		- Present
    186 Kamuntu Moses 		- Present
    187 Kamusiime Caroline 		- Present	
    188 Kangwagye Stephen Rwakanuma 	 	- Present
    189 Kankunda Amos Kibwika 		- Present
    190 Kanushu Laura		- Absent
    191 Kanyike Ronald Evans 		- Present
    192 Karubanga David 		- Present	
    193 Karubanga Jacob Ateenyi 		- Present 
    194 Kasaija Matia 		- Present 
    195 Kasaija Stephen Kagwera 		- Present
    196 Kasolo Robert 		- Present
    197 Katabaazi Francis Katongole 		- Present
    198 Katali Loy 		- Present	
    199 Katalihwa Donald Byabazaire 		- Present
    200 Katenya Isaac 		- Present
    201 Kateshumbwa Dicksons 		- Absent	
    202 Kato Mohammed 		- Present
    203 Katuntu Abdu 		- Present	
    204 Katusabe Godfrey 		- Present	
    205 Katusiime Annet Mugisha 		- Present
    206 Katwesigye Oliver Koyekyenga 		- Present
    207 Kauma Sauda 		- Present	
    208 Kavuma Sam 		- Present	
    209 Kawalya Abubaker 		- Present	
    210 Kayagi Sarah Netalisire 		- Present
    211 Kayanga Baroda Watongola 		- Present
    212 Kayemba-Ssolo Geofrey 		- Present	
    213 Kayogera Yona 		- Present
    214 Kayondo Fred 		- Present	
    215 Kazibwe Bashir Mbaziira 		- Present
    216 Kazini Francis Twinomujuni 		- Present
    217 Kemirembe Pauline Kyaka 		- Present
    218 Kesande Grace Bataringaya 		- Present
    219 Kibaaju Naome 		- Present
    220 Kibalya Henry-Maurice		 - Present	
    221 Kiiza Kenneth Nyendwoha 		- Present
    222 Kinobere Herbert Tom 		- Present
    223 Kinshaba Patience Nkunda 		- Present
    224 Kintu Alex Brandon 		- Present
    225 Kirabo Agnes 		- Present	
    226 Kirumira Hassan 		- Present	
    227 Kisa Stephen Bakubalwayo 		- Present
    228 Kisembo Basemera Noeline 		– Present
    229 Kitanywa Sowedi		- Present
    230 Kitutu Mary Goretti Kimono 		- Present
    231 Kiwanuka Abdallah		- Present
    232 Kiwanuka Keefa 		- Present
    233 Kiyaga Hillary Innocent		- Present
    234 Koluo Joseph Andrew 		- Present
    235 Komakech Christopher		- Present
    236 Komol  Emmanuel 		- Present
    237 Komol Joseph Miidi 		- Present
    238 Kubeketerya James 		- Present
    239 Kugonza Emely		- Present
    240 Kunihira Faith Philo		- Present
    241 Kwizera Eddie Wa-Gahungu 		– Absent 
    242 Kwizera Paul		- Present
    243 Kyakulaga Fred Bwino		- Present
    244 Kyebakutika Manjeri		- Present
    245 Kyobe Luke Inyensiko		- Present
    246 Kyooma Xavier Akampurira		- Present
    247 Kyoto Ibrahim Mululi		- Present
    248 Lagen David		- Present
    249 Laker Sharon Balmoyi		- Present
    250 Lamwaka Catherine		- Present
    251 Lamwaka Margaret		- Present
    252 Leku Joel		- Present
    253 Lematia John		- Present
    254 Lematia Ruth Molly Ondoru		- Present
    255 Linda Irene		- Present
    256 Lochap Peterkhen		- Present
    257 Lokeris Teko Peter		- Present
    258 Lokii John Baptist		- Present
    259 Lokii Peter Abrahams		- Present
    260 Lokoru Albert		- Present
    261 Lokwang Hillary		- Present
    262 Lokwang Philiphs Ilukol		- Present
    263 Lolem Micah Akasile		- Present
    264 Lubega Bashir Ssempa		- Present
    265 Lubega Medard Sseggona		- Present
    266 Lugoloobi Amos		- Present
    267 Lukwago John Paul Mpalanyi		- Present
    268 Lukyamuzi David Kalwanga		- Present
    269 Lumu Richard Kizito		- Present
    270 Lutaaya Geoffrey		- Present
    271 Luttamaguzi Semakula Paulson Kasana	- Present
    272 Lwanga Jimmy		- Present
    273 Macho Geofrey		- Present
    274 Magogo Moses Hassim		- Present
    275 Magolo John Faith		- Present
    276 Magoola Rachel Miriel		- Present
    277 Makhoha Margaret		- Present
    278 Malende Shamim		- Present
    279 Mamawi James		- Present
    280 Maneno Zumura		- Present
    281 Masaba Karim		- Present
    282 Masika Apollo		- Present
    283 Masiko N. Henry		- Present
    284 Matovu Charles		- Present
    285 Mawanda Micheal Maranga		- Present
    286 Mayanja Allan		- Present
    287 Mbabazi Janepher Kyomuhendo		- Present
    288 Mbabazi Pascal		- Present
    289 Mbadi Mbasu Wilson		- Present
    290 Mbayo Esther Mbulakubuza		- Present
    291 Mboizi Arthur Waako		- Present
    292 Mbwatekamwa Gaffa		- Present
    293 Migadde Robert Ndugwa		- Present
    294 Modoi Isaac		- Present
    295 Moriku Joyce Kaducu		- Present
    296 Mpindi Bumali		- Present
    297 Mpuuga Mathias		- Present
    298 Mugabe Dononzio Kahonda		- Present
    299 Mugabi Muzaale Martin Kisule		- Present
    300 Mugabi Susan		- Present
    301 Mugema Peter		- Present
    302 Mugira James		- Present
    303 Mugisa Margaret Muhanga		- Present
    304 Mugole Mauku David Stephen		- Present
    305 Mugumya Clare		- Present
    306 Muheesi Abaho Jenifer		- Present
    307 Muhindo Harold Tonny		- Present
    308 Muhoozi R. David		- Present
    309 Muhumuza David		- Present
    310 Muhwezi Jim Katugugu		- Present
    311 Mukasa Aloysius Talton Gold		- Present
    312 Mukasa Julius Opondo		– Absent 
    313 Mukhaye Miriam		- Present
    314 Mulimba John		- Present
    315 Musa Noah		- Present
    316 Musana Eric		- Present
    317 Musasizi Henry Ariganyira		- Present
    318 Museveni William		- Present
    319 Mushemeza Elijah Dickens		- Present
    320 Musherure Shartsi Nayebare Kutesa		- Present
    321 Musila John		- Present
    322 Musinguzi Yona		- Present
    323 Mutasingwa Diana Nankunda Kagyenyi	- Present
    324 Mutebi Noah Wanzala		- Present
    325 Mutembuli Yusuf		- Present
    326 Mutiwa Geofrey Eric		- Present
    327 Mutono Patrick Lodoi		- Present
    328 Mutumba Abdul		- Present
    329 Mutuuzo Peace Regis	- Present
    330 Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad	- Present
    331 Muwuma Milton Kalulu	- Present
    332 Mwesigwa Robert Rukaari	- Present
    333 Mwijukye Francis	- Present
    334 Mwine Mpaka Rwamirama	- Present
    335 Nabagabe Kalule Flavia	- Present
    336 Nabbanja Robinah	- Present
    337 Nabukeera Hanifa Hussein	- Present
    338 Nabukenya Brenda	- Present
    339 Nafuna-Muloni Irene Margaret	- Present
    340 Naigaga Mariam	- Present
    341 Najjuma Sarah	- Present
    342 Nakabuye Juliet Kakande	- Present
    343 Nakadama Rukia Isanga	- Present
    344 Nakato Mary Annet	- Present
    345 Nakayenze Connie Galiwango	- Present
    346 Nakazibwe Hope Grania	- Present
    347 Nakimuli Helen	- Present
    348 Nakut Faith Loru	- Present
    349 Nakwang Christine Tubo	- Present
    350 Nalule Asha Aisha Kabanda	- Present
    351 Naluyima Betty Ethel	- Present
    352 Namanya Naboth	- Present
    353 Nambeshe John Baptist	- Present
    354 Nambooze Teddy	- Present
    355 Namuganza Persis Princess	- Present
    356 Namugga Gorreth	- Present
    357 Namujju Cissy Dionizia	- Present
    358 Namukuta Brenda	- Present
    359 Namutaawe Joan	- Present
    360 Namuyangu Kacha Jenipher	- Present
    361 Nandagire Christine Ndiwalana	- Present
    362 Nandala Mafabi Nathan James	- Present
    363 Nandutu Agness	- Present
    364 Nangoli Gerald	- Present
    365 Nantaba Idah Erios	- Present
    366 Nantongo Fortunate Rose	- Present
    367 Nanyondo Veronica Namaganda	- Present
    368 Natukunda Midius	- Present
    369 Natumanya Flora	- Present
    370 Nayebale Sylvia	- Present
    371 Ndeezi Alex	- Present
    372 Ndyomugyenyi Roland	- Present
    373 Nebanda Andiru Florence	- Present
    374 Nekesa Victor	- Present
    375 Ngompek Linos	- Present
    376 Ngoya John Bosco	- Present
    377 Ninkusiima John Paul	- Present
    378 Ninsiima Boaz Kasirabo	- Present
    379 Niringiyimana James Ruugi Kaberuka- Present
    380 Niwagaba Wilfred	- Present
    381 Niyonsaba Alex	- Present
    382 Nkunyingi Muwada	- Present
    383 Nkwasiibwe Zinkuratire Henry	- Present
    384 Nsamba Patrick Oshabe	- Present
    385 Nsanja Patrick Kayongo	- Present
    386 Nsegumire Muhamad Kibedi	- Present
    387 Nsereko Muhammad	- Present
    388 Nsibambi Yusuf	- Present
    389 Nsubuga Paul	- Present
    390 Nyakato Asinansi	- Present
    391 Nyakato Dorothy	- Present
    392 Nyakikongoro Rosemary	- Present
    393 Nyamutoro Phiona	- Present
    394 Nyangweso Dennis	- Present
    395 Nyeko Derrick	- Present
    396 Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke	- Present
    397 Nyongore Enock	- Present
    398 Obiga Kania	- Present
    399 Obigah Rose	- Present
    400 Obong Vincent Shedrick	- Present
    401 Oboth Marksons Jacob	- Present
    402 Obua Denis Hamson	- Present
    403 Ocan Patrick	- Present
    404 Ocen Peter	- Present
    405 Ochai Maximus	- Present
    406 Ochero Jimbricky Noman	- Present
    407 Odoi Bernard Onen Mutusa	- Present
    408 Odoi Oywelowo Fox	- Present
    409 Odongo Jeje Abubakar	- Present
    410 Odur Jonathan	- Present
    411 Oguzu Lee Denis	- Present
    412 Ogwal Moses Goli	- Present
    413 Ogwang Peter	- Present
    414 Ogwari Polycarp	- Present
    415 Ojara Martin Mapenduzi	- Present
    416 Okaasai Sidronius Opolot	- Present
    417 Okabe Patrick	- Present
    418 Okae Bob	- Present
    419 Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo - Present
    420 Okello Geofrey Charles	- Present
    421 Okello Nelson	- Present
    422 Okeyoh Peter	- Present
    423 Okia Joanne Aniku	- Present
    424 Okin P.P Ojara	- Present
    425 Okiror Bosco	- Present
    426 Okori Moe Janet Grace Akech	- Present
    427 Okot Boniface Henry	- Present
    428 Okot John Amos	- Present
    429 Okot Moses Junior	- Present
    430 Okot Ogong Felix	- Present
    431 Okot Peter	- Present
    432 Okot Santa	- Present
    433 Okullo Aabuka Jallon Anthony	- Present
    434 Okumu Gabriel	- Present
    435 Okupa Elijah	- Present
    436 Okwir Samuel	- Present
    437 Olanya Gilbert	- Present
    438 Oleru Huda Abason	- Present
    439 Olobo James	- Present
    440 Omara Paul	- Present
    441 Onek Hilary Obaloker	- Present
    442 Oneka Lit Denis Amere	- Present
    443 Onen Charles	- Present
    444 Ongalo-Obote Clement Kenneth	- Present
    445 Ongiertho Emmanuel Jor	- Present
    446 Onzima Godfrey	- Present
    447 Opio Samuel Acuti	- Present
    448 Opolot Fred	- Present
    449 Opolot Patrick Isiagi	- Present
    450 Opolot Simon Peter Okwalinga	- Present
    451 Orone Derrick	- Present
    452 Oseku Richard Oriebo	- Present
    453 Osoru Mourine 	– Absent 
    454 Otafiire Kahinda	- Present
    455 Otiam Emmanuel Otaala	- Present
    456 Otimgiw Isaac Ismail	- Present
    457 Otukol Sam	- Present
    458 Oulanyah Jacob L’okori	- Present
    459 Paparu Lillian Obiale	- Present
    460 Rugumayo Edson	- Present
    461 Ruhunda Alex	- Present
    462 Rutahigwa Elisa	- Present
    463 Ruyonga Joseph	- Present
    464 Rwaburindore Tarsis Bishanga	- Present
    465 Rwabushaija Margret Namubiru	- Present
    466 Rwakoojo Robina Gureme	- Present
    467 Rwamirama Bright Kanyontore	- Present
    468 Rwemulikya Ibanda	- Present
    469 Saazi Godfrey	- Present
    470 Sebamala Richard	- Present
    471 Sekabira Denes	- Present
    472 Sekindi Aisha	- Present
    473 Sekyanzi Benard Kirya	- Present
    474 Sendawula Christine Bukenya	- Present
    475 Silwany Solomon	- Present
    476 Ssasaga Isaias Johny	- Present
    477 Ssebikaali Yoweri	- Present
    478 Ssegirinya Muhammad	- Present
    479 Ssejjoba Isaac	- Present
    480 Ssekikubo Theodore	- Present
    481 Ssekitoleeko Robert	- Present
    482 Ssemujju Ibrahim	- Present
    483 Ssemwanga Gyaviira	- Present
    484 Ssentayi Muhamad	- Present
    485 Ssenyonyi Joel Besekezi	- Present
    486 Sserubula Stephen	- Present
    487 Sserukenya David	- Present
    488 Ssewanyana Allan Aloizious	- Present
    489 Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga	- Present
    490 Ssimbwa Fred	- Present
    491 Suubi Kinyamatama Juliet K	- Present
    492 Taaka Agnes	- Present
    493 Taban Sharifah Aate	- Present
    494 Tayebwa Herbert Musasizi	- Present
    495 Tayebwa Thomas	- Present
    496 Tebandeke Charles	- Present
    497 Teira John	- Present
    498 Thembo Gideon Mujungu	- Present
    499 Tibasiimiwa Joram Ruranga	- Present
    500 Timuzigu Kamugisha Michael	- Present
    501 Tinkasiimire Barnabas	- Present
    502 Tumwebaze Frank Kagyigyi	- Present
    503 Tumwesigye Josephat	- Present
    504 Tumwine Anne Mary 	– Absent 
    505 Tusiime Julius	- Present
    506 Twalla Fadil	- Present
    507 Twesigye John Ntamuhiira	- Present
    508 Twesigye Nathan Itungo	- Present
    509 Twinobusingye Jovanice	- Present
    510 Twinomujuni Francis Kazini	- Present
    511 Waako Joy Peggy	- Present
    512 Wakabi Pius	- Present
    513 Wakayima Musoke Hannington Nsereko	- Present
    514 Wakikona Wandendeya David	- Present
    515 Wakooli Godfrey	- Present
    516 Walyomu Muwanika Moses	- Present
    517 Wamakuyu Ignatius Mudimi	- Present
    518 Wamala Edward Katumba	- Present
    519 Wamala Nambozo Florence	- Present
    520 Wambede Seth Kizangi Massa	- Present
    521 Wanda Richard	- Present
    522 Wandwasi Robert	- Present
    523 Wanyama Micheal Odwori	- Present
    524 Were Godfrey Odero	- Present
    525 Werikhe Peter Christopher	- Present
    526 Wokorach Simon Peter	- Present
    527 Zaake Francis	- Present
    528 Zawedde Victorious	- Present
    529 Zijjan David Livingstone	- Present

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Is there anyone who has not heard his or her name read out by the Clerk to Parliament? Yes, what is the name? Why don’t we follow procedure? You are on procedure but you do not want to follow procedure. The question on the Floor is: Do we have anyone whose name has not been read out? We can come to you.

MR ACON: Thank you very much, My Lord. I missed my name. I am Julius Acon Bua, No. 16, from Otuke East.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Wasn’t it called or you did not hear it?

MR ACON: I did not hear it. I came late and rushed to pick my card, so my name was not ticked-

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Yes, and the rule here is that nobody else hears for you; it is you to hear your name and respond. It is recorded now.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, My Lord. The clerk read the names of all the Members of Parliament yet you directed that only the names of the 320 Members that were registered were supposed to be read. A case in point is that I heard him reading the name of our former Leader of the Opposition who has not yet arrived. I would like to find out-

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, your concern is well justified. The problem is that everyone wants to give an opinion. Where everybody has an opinion, when the Chair rules, that is what we go by, for good or for bad. Therefore, I decided that they read out all the names of Members of Parliament. For your notice, the record of the registered Members at the gate is 509, and there are three people who did not register for good reasons, so we should be having not less than 512 Members here.

The solution is this: They will call out the names alphabetically, you will come up and the Clerk to Parliament will tick the name of the person who has come to vote. Each of the three agents has a list of Members of Parliament; therefore, when a Member votes, the clerk will tick that name, each of the agents - that one is more interested in talking and not listening to the Chair; I might have to ask your nominee to look for another agent. That is why we get confused because when the Chair is explaining, you are doing your things. Each of the agents will also be ticking the name of a Member that has been called and has actually voted. 

Therefore, there are safeguards. In the end, the number of people who have voted in the ballot should tally with the ticks. In my considered opinion, this is a sufficient safeguard. If the 512 - Some of you could choose not to vote; it is a right. So, those who will be called will come up, vote and they will be verified. Therefore, I think we should not worry about that.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, My Lord the Chief Justice. Rule 5(7) provides that this vote should be by secret ballot. Read with rule 98, it confirms that this being a constitutional office, the voting shall be by secret ballot. Rule 5(14), provides that a Member wishing to vote should come and access the ballot paper and vote. 

My Lord, you have guided that the names will be read alphabetically. The ballot papers are serialized, meaning that it is possible for someone to open the boxes after and determine that this serial number was given to so and so and they voted this way. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, honourable member -

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I want to seek your guidance-

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you, honourable member. When the Chair speaks, have the courtesy of listening. We have a solution for that. Thank you for your concern; it is a genuine one. The ballot papers will be picked at random not sequentially. You will still have one ballot. If you are No.1, they may give you a ballot paper with serial No. 28. What matters is the total number of people who have voted. Therefore, that concern was taken care of.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, My Lord the Chief Justice. If the person giving that ballot paper reads the serial number, it cannot address that mischief. A Member should be allowed, under observance, to pick the ballot paper and vote as long as the person is going to tear it and give to a Member; it is possible in the era of technology-

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: This is how we will proceed and please listen to the Chair carefully: A Member will come and the clerk will give them a ballot paper; they will not be picked serially precisely because of the reason you have just raised. Let us not extend it to the point where it is as if you do not trust the office of the Clerk to Parliament and the Chief Justice who is spending the whole day here to see to it that the democratic process is adhered to. We will proceed in the manner the Chair has just explained.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, My Lord and the Speaker of this sitting. I rise on a procedural matter under rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure that provide for the order of business and the Order Paper.

Your Lordship, I can see we are proceeding on item No. 5 on the Order Paper and we are soon embarking on the election of the Speaker presided over by the Chief Justice. However, both our rules and the Order Paper provided the business succinctly, and I see from the Order Paper that the arrival of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is supposed to be the next item on the Order Paper after item No.6. This is buttressed in our rules under rule 25(2)(f). The address by the President comes way after the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

Preceding Members have been here addressing His Excellency the President, meaning he is in the House, yet our Order Paper is clear at what stage His Excellency the President is expected to ingress in this House or to be around or to be addressed as such. Are we, therefore, procedurally right, Your Lordship -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: How does that affect the election of a Speaker?

MR SSEKIKUBO: As a matter that is supposed to come after the nomination and the election -

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Ssekikubo, you are talking about “supposed”. The reality of the fact is that His Excellency the President arrived and when prayers were conducted, when business started, he was in the House and I did address him and explained. He is here in attendance by virtue of constitutional provisions and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I am sure you were here, unless you chose to come late.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Your Lordship. Only that-

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: The ruling is that, whatever time the President comes – he could choose to come one hour before you have come here or he could choose to come at the tail end; it has no adverse effect on who you are going to elect as Speaker of the House.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Can we, therefore, formally move that – 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Would you like to sit down, please, Hon. Ssekikubo and we proceed with what has brought us here? You are just splitting hair. 

Honourable members, I think what we will do is that we will call out the first 10 names, alphabetically. When you hear your name, please, come and remain in the tent and the first person will come in that sequence.

The person giving out the ballot papers, pick them at random; do not follow the serial numbering. Meanwhile, tick out the names of those who have voted. Write the name of your chosen candidate in the right place and then you cast the ballot in the ballot box.

(Members voted by secret ballot.)
 
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Can we have all the agents seated down, please? 

(Voting by secret ballot continued)
 
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, before we conclude on the voting, if there is any Member of Parliament whose name was not called and has not voted, please come forward. 

I do not see any one coming forward. If there is any Member of Parliament who has not voted maybe because your name was not called, please come forward because when I close the voting, we will not reopen. I repeat, upon closure of the voting process, there will be no reopening, so I am asking for the last time; if you are here in the House as a Member of Parliament and you have not voted, this is the opportunity for you to come forward. 

It is evident that every Member of Parliament in the House who deserves to vote has voted. That being so, the casting of ballots is hereby closed. We will go into the next process of determining the outcome of the vote.

Hold on. The Clerk to Parliament and the Chief Registrar of the Courts of Judicature, assisted by the parliamentary officials, will go through the process of determining how many votes were cast for each of the candidates and also how many votes were wrongfully cast, meaning they are spoilt. They will then make a report and I will announce.

So, can Madam Clerk and the Chief Registrar take charge of that process, in the presence of the agents?

(Vote counting/tallying commenced.)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: For the votes that you cannot easily determine, please, put them aside. We will resolve them after you have counted the others. 

H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Lordship, people are spreading coronavirus; disperse that group. Get away! I do not want to interfere in your work but I want to report that people are spreading coronavirus. Get away, please. You are going to kill the new Speaker; he will die and what will you do? Sorry to come in but I am acting Minister of Health. 

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Order in the House! Honourable members, take your seats and we proceed. Can I ask members of the media to come back to their positions and do what you came here for. 

Honourable Members of Parliament, you can only be respected if you respect yourselves. Whatever statement you want to make, make it within the law. We are here for two very important functions - determining who the Speaker of the Eleventh Parliament will be and subsequently, who the Deputy Speaker of the Eleventh Parliament will be.

You have all the fora in the world to make your statements; please, allow us to conclude this process. Whatever you do, do it within the law because you might also invite the law unto yourself. Can we proceed?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, My Lord. We are Members of Parliament and we respect ourselves, but we cannot have strangers within the Chamber; they should be sitting outside. These are Members of Parliament; whoever is not a Member of Parliament is causing commotion and we cannot have this. It is not about the victory or loss or whatever. 

What we are saying is that the precincts of Parliament – the Chambers – cannot be accessed by non-Members. (Applause) Even the President is the other side. If –

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: If we have those who are non-Members and they are in the House, will you please vacate immediately?

MR SSEWUNGU: We need the Sergeant-At-Arms. He can manage us but we cannot allow non-Members of Parliament – the SFC – to take control of our side. We shall not accept. You rather shoot us from here and that will be harsh but it is painful.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable member, I agree with you that non-Members must leave the House. However, similarly, I ask Members of this House to act in a responsible and mature manner and understand the purpose for which we are here.

MR SSEWUNGU: My Lord, we shall follow your command and have the discipline. However, non-Members have to leave.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: No, no. I have already made a ruling on that. Can we have non-Members –(Mr Olanya rose_)- Hon. Gilbert Olanya, this is not a market place. When the Chair is speaking, you do not rise.

Let us finish one thing at a time; that there are non-Members who are reportedly in the House. Please leave the House for Members of Parliament. Let us resolve this. I will not permit any irresponsible course of action.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, please let us finish this. You can raise a thousand procedural matters but let us resolve this. It is not about hearing you; it is about solving issues. Can we have the first matter which has been raised dealt with?

Sergeant-At-Arms, can you identify those who are non-Members, who do not have the courtesy to leave by themselves, thrown out of the House?

5.48
H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Lordship, I can help. Askari wote, ambako ako nyuma mutoke uko….pande hu. Au mwendee pale inje. Munaskia? All soldiers, get out of the tent. Go either behind the other fence or this side, okay? (Applause) They are also busy bodies. Mutoke uko. Toka, toka, toka, toka, toka. (Laughter) 

Who is the other man? Hon. Ssewungu, your allergy is treated –(Laughter)– because Ssewungu is allergic to SFC. Sorry, Your Lordship. I came as a volunteer to help. (Applause)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I have allowed Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She has the Floor. What is the procedural point? Have you pressed the microphone on? Press down there. Please put the public address system back on.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, just a moment. If anyone thinks he or she is more important than others in this Parliament, the next time, I am going to order him or her to be thrown out. There is a limit to sensibility. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think we need to thank God for what has just happened so peacefully. I think we need to appreciate what the President has just said. 

I stand here to make a request, on behalf of the outgoing Speaker of Parliament, who has requested to be given one or two minutes to say a word. I do not know, Mr Chairperson, whether it will be done before or after.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we have gone through a process of electing a Speaker. People have cast ballots. The outcome is not officially known. People have been celebrating out of speculation; out of rumours. 

Until the Chief Justice announces the outcome of the voting, whatever else you know is a rumour. So, please let us go methodically and peacefully. Then, you can make your request and a decision will be made.

DECLARATION OF RESULTS

5.51
THE CHIEF JUSTICE: I am reading from the results declaration form for the election of the Speaker of the 11th Parliament of Uganda, which has been held this 24th day of May 2021.

    a. Hon. Oulanyah Jacob L’Okori, 310 votes. (Applause)
    b. Hon. Kadaga Rebecca Alitwala, 197 votes. (Applause)
    c. Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, 15 votes. (Applause)

    1. The total number of votes cast were 524.
    2. Valid ones were 522.
    3. There were two invalid votes cast. One of your Members chose both Kadaga and Oulanyah, so wrote both names. (Laughter) There is no provision for having two Speakers of Parliament; you can only have one. So, that one – The other one wrote a name of a person who is a stranger to the contest, who did not stand. So, these were two.

Therefore, Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah has obtained the majority votes of 310 votes.(Applause) I, therefore, now declare Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, who has obtained 310 votes cast, as the Speaker-elect of the 11th Parliament of Uganda. (Applause).

REMARKS BY THE CHIEF JUSTICE

5.55
THE CHIEF JUSTICE (Mr Alphonse Owiny-Dollo): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, in attendance in Parliament today, the Rt Hon. Speaker-elect, Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, it is my singular humbling honour and privilege to have presided over this very important constitutional and national function. 

For many of you who are not familiar with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, like with many others, it envisages governance by three Arms of Government who are given distinct responsibility under the doctrine of separation of powers. 

The Constitution recognises that the three Arms of Government can only succeed when they work together without losing their individual independence; when they work in harmony. This is because their purpose is one; to serve the people of the country to ensure that our country is a better place than when we took charge of our responsibilities, as leaders in governance. 

The first Speaker of the 11th Parliament, as with previous Parliaments, is actually the Chief Justice. This is because the first business of this Parliament, as with others, is the election of the Speaker of Parliament. This has been presided over by the Chief Justice doubling as the Speaker. 

Why do I say this? I say this, Rt hon. Speaker elect, so that you begin with your team. More importantly, because you have a team, the majority of who are new to Parliament, so that you understand, appreciate and embrace your responsibility from an informed position. You are national leaders who have been elected by a small constituency but you are not a leader of that constituency but a leader of Uganda, acting in consort with your other elected leaders to move this country ahead, to achieve the aspirations and the desires of our people, to leave a legacy for which you can pride yourself as having made a contribution in achieving. 

The framers of the 1995 Constitution were very clear that the function of Parliament is two-fold; enacting laws, which you do not do alone because by the nature of our Constitution, the Executive is part of Parliament. The Executive that generates laws as Bills also sits together with you and determines the outcome of the Bill. The President of the Republic of Uganda, because he has a larger constituency than each one of you, has a role in enacting the law, which you would have discussed in Parliament. 

The Judiciary of Uganda has no role to make laws. We cannot interfere with what type of law Parliament enacts, except when you enact a law that contravenes some provision of the Constitution. Then, we will exercise our oversight responsibility. 

Otherwise, Parliament can enact a law stating that the sun actually rises in the West and sets in the East and we will not interfere because it does not contravene any provision of the Constitution. Similarly, there are many things I cannot do as the Chief Justice without the participation of the Executive and Parliament. I can only have the number of judges that Parliament, by a resolution, says I must have. Without Parliament, I cannot. 

Therefore, we must work together without losing our responsibilities. If the Executive is committing excesses, it is the duty of Parliament to play its oversight role. If Parliament is committing excesses, it is the duty of the Executive to play its oversight role. If the matter comes to Court, the courts will pronounce themselves that you have acted ultra vires or outside the law.

If we understand this - and I ask the Rt hon Speaker elect that you need to organise induction retreats or sittings where our leaders can appreciate the role of Parliament and its limitations so that when our work is done, we sit back and say, “yes, when we were there, we did our part.”

Otherwise, I congratulate you, Mr Speaker, Sir. (Applause) I also congratulate the Members of the 11th Parliament for the discipline, the responsibility and maturity with which we conducted this process today. This is evidence that we can actually replicate this in any other election. 

I give you my blessings. May the Lord guide you all in what you do for us, as our leaders in Parliament and in accordance with his will. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH TO THE SPEAKER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 82(10) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE OATHS ACT (CHAPTER 19 OF THE LAWS OF UGANDA)

THE CHIEF JUSTICE: This will be presided over by the President of the Republic of Uganda, as by law provided. When the oath is taken, the next item that the Clerk will read out is handing over the instruments of power. The first instrument that will be handed over to him will be the robe. The Clerk to Parliament and Chief Registrar of the Courts of Judicature will robe him before he receives the other instruments. Thank you. 

The oath was administered to Mr Jacob L'okori Oulanyah.

HANDING OVER OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF POWER BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

(The instruments of power were handed over to Mr Jacob L'okori Oulanyah.)

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE TO THE POSITION OF SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT BY THE SPEAKER-ELECT
 
THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Your Lordship the Chief Justice, and honourable Members of Parliament. I address you with great humility. I thank God Almighty for His grace and the gift of life that has enabled me witness this day.

I congratulate you, honourable members, on your election and thank the people of Uganda for the trust they have put in you. I thank you for the confidence you have put in me. I can only promise to do my best to deserve the confidence and trust you have given me. I thank my party, the NRM, for nominating me and I thank the people of Omoro County without whom this day would not have been possible.

Honourable members, this election has been particularly challenging. As a result, expectations are high, fears and uncertainties exist but together we should build the bridges, mend the relationships and rebuild friendship, and replace despair with hope. I pledge to provide leadership and through this and walk the talk. The Acholi say Ribe Aye Teko (we are stronger together). 

This Parliament has the power under Article 79(1) of the Constitution to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. There is no question that my role as Speaker will be to execute, with utmost diligence, the mandate given to me and the Deputy Speaker, who you are about to elect, to promote good work in the august House. It is this standard that should apply to all of us, executing whatever assignments we will get as honourable members – “utmost due diligence” will be the catch phrase.

To achieve this, I strongly believe we shall need to adopt some guiding principles on how to effectively deliver on the bigger purpose of Parliament in its service to people. The declared mission for us at this moment, as the Eleventh Parliament, and in line with the Vision 2040 is to deliver Uganda to a middle-income status. Every generation has its mission; it can either fulfil it or betray it.

We are the generation of parliamentarians chosen by God and elected by the people of Uganda and given this task. This Parliament, like all parliaments throughout the world, is the highest legal forum. It is tasked with the responsibility of approving laws, policies and budgets meant for the implementation of this mission. 

I, therefore, humbly suggest some method of work, which I have found extremely useful in the execution of my previous assignments:

Facing facts

We should agree from the outset that we will lay facts on the table and use them as a reference point when expressing sometimes very divergent opinions. We must apply evidence-based processes of decision making.

Reason as a guiding principle

We should agree that we will endeavour to use reason and sound logic in tabling our positions. This will enable us to derive the correct interpretation from agreed facts. Somebody said, “We should learn to sharpen our arguments rather than our voices”.

Tolerance and mutual respect

We should agree that no view will be suppressed. All views will be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason. We must pledge to overrule intolerance.

Harmony

We should agree that the task, monumental as it may be, if we act in a harmonious way, we will always find a way. It is still important that we adopt a collegial approach and debate in such a manner that will bring our collective wisdom to bear on the problems that will be presented before us. 

The spirit of harmony should and will keep us conscious that the people did not give the task to any individual among us but rather to the august House as a whole. Therefore, we have a collective responsibility to work together harmoniously.

National interest above self and party

In one’s lifetime, one can change party affiliation but it is unusual and indeed unlikely that one would change nationality and citizenship. We, therefore, must resolve from the outset that our supreme guiding star and changing like the true magnetic north would be the enduring interest of the people of Uganda. 

As individuals, we will have interests and even as members of political parties, we are party to partisan positions. These interests, we should find occasion to declare them boldly before this august House and committees. When decision time comes, we must measure them alongside the national interest. Often, we will find that the national interest will ring true to all of us without exception.

In short, our work will enable us to learn more from each other. Prejudices will be abandoned as we discover new methods of working together and discover that all of us care about our country and our people. Convictions will be entrenched as we find new reasons to work together. None of us will claim not to have learnt something new in the course of our work. 

I can say without any fear of contradiction that, whether you agree with an opinion of any individual Member or not, you will find that you are all women and men of conviction determined to make a difference in the life of the people of this country. You will work long hours, at night and sometimes, even over the weekends. You will listen to sometimes highly offensive viewpoints and even endure threats of law suits and other veiled threats. 

I can only say that I feel greatly humbled to be called your Speaker –(Applause)- and will work very well with the Deputy Speaker, who you are soon electing. I hope and pray that the guidance and decisions we have opportunity to make in the next five years will make us truly deserve the overwhelming confidence you showed in electing me as your Speaker of this 11th Parliament. 

I invite you, honourable members, to pick a leaf from the statement I have made and consider adopting this method of work. When we accept facts, reason, tolerance and mutual respect to shape our actions, harmony, consensus and legitimacy is bound to be the inevitable result. Our people will delight in our work; they will refer to us, no longer as mere politicians, but rather as true leaders and patriots. 

Thank you, again and may God bless all of you. (Applause)  

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are ready and time is running out. We need to process the next business very quickly and see that we do not stay here for too long. Next item.

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATE(S) FOR THE OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are invited to nominate and second the candidates of your choices and we proceed with the next processes.

6.23
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Commander in Chief of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Fountain of Honour and the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, my Lord, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda, my name is Denis Obua Hamson, Member of Parliament, Ajuri County, Alebtong District, on the National Resistance Movement ticket. 

Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to move a motion that hon. Anita Among Annet, District Woman Representative, Bukedea, on the NRM ticket, do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Deputy Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Usually, we have the secondment. Seconded. Honourable, would you like to speak to your motion in five minutes? Is that okay?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, in conformity with the provisions of Article 82 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I rise with the greatest humility to present to you, my honourable colleagues, and to request you for your individual vote for our candidate and our choice for the position of the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Honourable colleagues, I present to you, hon. Anita Among Annet, District Woman Representative, Bukedea. Hon. Anita Among is a lawyer by profession, an accountant by training, an administrator by training and experience, who holds a Master’s Degree as the highest level of her education, with an impeccable record and repute.

For over 12 years working experience, hon. Among served with distinction as the District Woman Representative of Bukedea and she returned unopposed. She also served Parliament of Uganda as the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on COSASE and did tremendous work. She worked part and parcel of the Juba Peace Talks, for the peace in Northern Uganda. She served as a lecturer at Makerere University Business School and also a branch manager.

Hon. Among is God fearing, action oriented, reliable, result oriented, dependable, loyal, dedicated, a servant leader, tried, tested and trusted. She is a negotiator and a lady of integrity. 

The comprehensive plan of action for hon. Anita Annet Among, commonly known as hon. AAA, while serving as the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, rotates around the following doctrines, principles, and ideals:

    1. Good governance for the institution of Parliament;
    2. Equal opportunities for all Members of Parliament;
    3. Independence of the institution of Parliament;
    4. Working in harmony with other Arms of Government;
    5. Your, my and our welfare, as Members of Parliament among others.

In a nutshell, the election of hon. Anita Among to the position as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament will be an affirmation of our commitment as a Parliament and country towards protection, upholding and defending Article 32 of our Constitution on affirmative action and Article 33 on the rights of women. 

I call upon you, honourable colleagues of goodwill and hope, to cast your vote to hon. Anita Among as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

I respectively submit and request your individual vote. For God and My Country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is the motion seconded? 

6.28
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and the Chief Justice, I rise on Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to second the nomination of hon. Anita Annet Among, Woman Member of Parliament for Bukedea District, as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is the secondment. I think for the benefit of time, we will not allow the seconders to speak. The motion is seconded. Can we have more nominations, if any? 

Hon. Kabasharira, do you want to speak? If there is any more nomination, this is the time to do it. Hon. Kabasharira, let us see if we can move to the next nomination. We want to save time so that we can go to vote. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

6.30
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A nomination of hon. Anita Among has been made and seconded. I want to move that we close nominations for this position. 

THE SPEAKER: I see a honourable member. Is he seconding the motion for closure of nomination or he is rising for further nomination? 

6.31
MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana): Mr Speaker, I am here to move a motion for the nomination of a name for the Deputy Speaker. I am rising under Rules 5 and 6 of the Rules of the Procedure of Parliament to present hon. Muhammad Nsereko of Kampala Central Division to take the Chair, as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion in five minutes, please? 

MR LUMU: Mr Speaker, hon. Muhammad Nsereko is a lawyer by training and also a journalist. He has been in Parliament for the last 10 years and has been a Member of Parliament with distinction. He went to Kibuli Secondary School, where he emerged the best in the country, during the exams of that year. Hon. Nsereko proceeded to Makerere University and got a certificate in journalism. He is pregnant with ideas, which we require, to unify this Parliament.

Hon. Nsereko is eloquent and formidable. He is a unifier and a good debater. He is a dependable person and a person of the character we need in a Deputy Speaker. 

I pray to you, Members of Parliament, that for this position, we need a person of rare character, which hon. Nsereko possesses. I pray that we vote for him as the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. I pray. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

6.33
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Your Excellency, Mr Speaker and the Chief Justice, I rise under Rule 6 to second the nomination of hon. Muhammad Nsereko, as Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any further nominations? 

6.34
DR BAYIGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Congratulations upon your election as Speaker of this House. I am moving a motion under Rule 6 (4), read in tandem with Rule 5 (9). 

I move a motion that hon. Yusuf Nsibambi takes the Chair of this Parliament as Deputy Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion in five minutes? 

DR LULUME: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, distinguished ladies and gentlemen. In the first place, I thank the Almighty God for the great favour that He has reposed to me. Allow me to also take this opportunity to thank the Clerk to Parliament for guiding this House and the Chief Justice. 

Honourable members, I have the privilege to present before you the outstanding, genial and fine gentleman, hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, for the position of Deputy Speaker of Parliament. If you want a Deputy Speaker of Parliament that is simple, approachable, collected, compassionate, focused, hardworking, building harmony and enhancing the freedom of legislation and deliberation then we have one in hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, the honourable Member for Mawokota South.

Hon. Nsibambi is an educationist, Advocate of the High Court, businessman, leader, a family man, a banker, Member of Parliament representing Mawokota South. He has taught very many honourable men and women in Uganda including the honourable Speaker of Parliament, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Lt Gen. Muhoozi, hon. Nsereko Muhammad, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Oboth. All these have gone through his hands as he was their teacher at law school in Makerere University.

He brings to the table a wealth of expertise, spanning from over 20 years of teaching experience at Makerere University School of Law and Makerere University Business School to corporate governance. He worked as a legal secretary of Greenland Group of Companies; Greenland Bank, Uganda, Tanzania and Zanzibar; Uganda Grain Milling Company; Kampala University; Entebbe Resort Beach; and Greenland Insurance; as well as having 20 to 30 years of legal practice at Nsibambi & Nsibambi Advocates.

Honourable colleagues, we have tasks ahead of us. This Speakership election comes at a time when Uganda’s Legislature is making 100 years of existence. Our 59 years of independence are punctuated by numerous successes but also colossal failures in governance and public policy, increasing human rights abuses, corruption of the worst kind, and systematic democratic reversals that continually undermine the trust of the Uganda’s citizenry in Parliament.

We pay tribute to those who came before us, the Speakers who led this Parliament before us. Hon. Nsibambi’s leadership as Deputy Speaker of the Eleventh Parliament is premised on consolidating the gains, building a strong, sound, proactive, independent and viable Legislature.

Hon. Nsibambi has six pledges to make. He will be a Deputy Speaker who is going to work with the Speaker of Parliament in a supportive way other than an antagonistic way. One of the most important principles that he stands for is the principle of separation of powers - the doctrine of separation of powers through the observance of a system of checks and balances to strengthen-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to wind up.

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: I am winding up. Let me just mention these principles: The independence of Parliament; capacity building for Members of Parliament who need the experience to do the legislation and all the work of Parliament; parliamentary welfare, which we need at an incremental level other than being decretal; parliamentary outreaches programme in order to bridge the gap between Parliament and the people; and the principle of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which was held here in Uganda.

Hon. Nsibambi seeks to bridge the gap between our Parliament and our people so that the constituencies can enjoy how Parliament works and how it can benefit them.

Finally, the strengthening of the oversight of Parliament - this is going to be an important and cardinal role for this Parliament especially when we are on this side.

Benchmarking expeditions and onsite visits for ongoing projects are going to be important tasks, which hon. Nsibambi is going to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded?

6.41
MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Your Excellency, Mr Speaker, the Chief Justice, honourable members of Parliament. I have the privilege to second a diligent honourable Member of Parliament, hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, for the position of Deputy Speaker. 

Our motto says, “For God and my Country” and I am privileged to give you a God-fearing Deputy Speaker other than –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, we agreed that you second the motion and that is it. Thank you. Are there any further nominations?

6.42
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I stand here to move a motion that we close the nominations and we vote for hon. Anita Among early enough. Thank you very much.

6.43
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to nominate our elder and great friend who has vast experience.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to wear your mask.

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: A lawyer by profession, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion.

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, my candidate, who until recently was the First Deputy Prime Minister, is in my opinion the best person for that position. 

It shall be recalled that the person I want us to drag to the chair was a minister during Amin’s regime. This great son of Uganda has been part of the wars of liberation. It would be very sad if we have some aged leaders and we deny them another person of the same age, Gen. Moses Ali. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I am fighting discrimination of the old people. (Laughter) That is why recently, even this Parliament enacted a law to allow them have representation in all local governments and in Parliament. If this august House would join me, people like Gen. Moses Ali even need to be elected unopposed. (Laughter) 

Outside there, we run around a lot. I just imagine my Deputy Speaker will now not be burdened by making a lot of movements because he will be seated there in the Chair. (Laughter) 

He is a lawyer and this speaks a lot about him. He went back to school as an old man; you cannot underrate such a person. You see, we have never had a lawyer from West Nile. (Laughter) That will also be a good thing, as we look forward to regional balance.

Mr Speaker, I want to end on this note – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS NAMBOOZE: Now, order for what? (Laughter)

MR ALIONI: Mr Speaker, my name is Alioni Odria, Member of Parliament, Aringa South, Yumbe.

Mr Speaker, is this Parliament a House of actors? Is hon. Nambooze in order to tell this Parliament that Gen. Moses Ali is the first and only lawyer from West Nile? Is she in order?

MS AVUR: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Nambooze for nominating Gen. Moses Ali. However, it is a great insult to the people of West Nile for hon. Nambooze to insinuate that Gen. Moses Ali is the first lawyer from West Nile.

I can mention a few. The late Rt Hon. Speaker Ayume was a seasoned lawyer in this country. Irene Ovonji is a seasoned lawyer in this country. Is she in order, therefore, to insinuate and insult the people of West Nile?

I hold a Master’s degree. We do not all have to be lawyers. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we can leave it there now. Can I rule on the matter, honourable members? 

MR ALIONI: You apologise. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can I rule on the matter? Honourable members, the facts have been stated that there are senior lawyers who have existed from that part of the country, including the late Francis Ayume, who was actually Speaker of the House. 

The facts have been laid, so the statement is wrong to the extent that you referred to Gen. Ali as the first lawyer from that region.

Honourable member, given the uniqueness of your motion, I am going to use my prerogative to verify whether you have had consultations with your nominee. If he can confirm, then we can proceed with your further justification of the motion.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I want to confirm with him.

MS NAMBOOZE: History shows that Speakers are dragged to the Chair. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: No. Our rules say he must consent. So, I am going to bring up his consent forward because our rules now say he or she should consent.

MS NAMBOOZE: But, Mr Speaker, I want to apologise. What I meant to say was not that hon. Moses Ali is the first person to be a lawyer. I was talking about the first person to be a Speaker. However, I have been given information by my dear colleagues who were here.

I wonder what type of people those are. You represent an area. I come here to ask Ugandans to vote for your own but you come here putting me to order. Why? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have already guided on this matter. Gen. Ali, honourable, I bring this consent forward before we finish with the justification of the motion.

MS NAMBOOZE: As he comes, my seconder is here -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order!

MS NAMBOOZE: My seconder is here, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: He will not be your seconder. Microphones are there, General. I just want to confirm that you had consultations with your nominee. 

6.51
GEN.(RTD) MOSES ALI (NRM, Adjumani County West, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the President in attendance and Parliament. 

As a human being, I must thank hon. Nambooze for what has come out of her. If she did not say what she said, I would not have known that some people are thinking about me. (Laughter) 

Now that she has come out, I would have wished that she had the courtesy to consult me. Honestly, she is here; she can confirm. I have even heard some of you are being nominated. Madam Nambooze is aware that I am also aware these things are happening. I am also a participant. 

I would have wished myself if I wanted to be. I would then have asked her to nominate me. However, since I did not approach her up to now, when she surprised me, all the same, I will thank her.

However, I know – my colleague – that we have been working together in the House. I do not want to impute bad motive. I would not do that because she has not uttered it.

To save the time of the House, I regret –(Laughter)- this offer - (Laughter)- and I thank hon. Nambooze, once again but I decline the offer. Thank you. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any further nominations? Hon. Nambooze, your nomination cannot stand and no further speech please. Any further nominations?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the time you have given me. Thank you very much, my father, Gen. Moses Ali. We really love you and I know one day, you will make a Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Any further nominations -

6.55
MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolator): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rules 5 and 6 read interchangeably to nominate hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya for the position of Deputy Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion? Take five minutes, please. 

MR MOSES OKOT: Mr Speaker, I represent a minority political group in the House, the Forum for Democratic Change, that has great connection to the National Unity Platform, a party that hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya belongs to.

Members of this august House, hon. Ssegirinya is a young man that mimics a prevalent age group in this House. He is a disabled individual that has become so as a result of the impunity that has been perpetuated by the system. 

Honourable members, electing Muhammad Ssegirinya would be a reflection and a protest to the powers that be. It is upon such grounds that we elect a man from the hoi polloi. Should we do this in this House, we must demonstrate that we have risen beyond threats, beyond the expectations of material gains and we have restored the Parliament to the people. 

I have always told my people that the voice of the people is the voice of God. Indeed, Ssegirinya would be the master of the Vox Populi, Vox Dei. It is upon such grounds that I urge honourable members that “Mr Update” would make a very good Deputy Speaker in tangent to the manner that he reflects; the minimum qualification that was provided by the Universal Secondary Education. He reflects the societal strata that we have in the country. If we do this, Mr Speaker and the House, we would have fulfilled our noble constitutional obligation. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a seconder to the motion? 

6.58
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Gilbert Olanya, the Member of Parliament for Kilak South in Amuru District. I rise to second the nomination of hon. Ssegirinya to be the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Mr Speaker, the President of the Republic of Uganda in attendance, My Lord the Chief Justice, honourable colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, Uganda is a signatory of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which were put in place in 2017. I draw your attention SDG Number 5. As you are aware, Uganda is a member of the African Union and I draw your attention to Articles 3 and 4. In 2017, in Kigali, Rwanda, the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) passed a Bill – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, state the procedural matter and I deal with it. 

MR KATUSABE: The EALA passed an Act entitled, “Gender Equity and Gender Equality, 2017” on 8 March 2017 in Kigali, Rwanda. Our Constitution is crystal clear in Article 32 National Objective and Directive Principles of State Policy IV and VI about gender. 

Ladies and gentlemen, we have three organs of Government; the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary, which are already filled.

Mr Speaker, I am here to rise on a procedural issue. If we are still a country that believes in our Constitution, where is the place for the women? What message are we sending out there to our mothers and daughters? 

The Speaker of Parliament is a male. I have only heard one female name. Without wasting a lot of your time, wouldn’t we be procedurally moving forward if we move that hon. Anita Among becomes our Deputy Speaker for the 11th Parliament? Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: (Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi rose) On what matter do you rise, hon. Kivumbi? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the Chief Justice – Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, please. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am speaking on behalf of hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya. As you are aware, hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya has been indisposed for quite some time. Much as he is present, he is fairly unwell and unable to speak for himself. He has sent me here to decline the nomination. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.03
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Mr Speaker, after a long list of nomination of Members for the position of Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament, I rise here to close the nomination for the position of the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. I beg to move a motion for closure of nominations of the position of the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for closure of the nominations of Deputy Speaker. Should they be seconded? However, it is a motion that does not actually require secondment.

The motion that is being proposed is for closure of nomination. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Nominations closed. The procedure adopted in the earlier election – I will ask the Members who have been nominated to come and give their consent to the nomination. 

On the procedural matter raised by hon. Atkins Katusabe, I think the particular procedural matter was premature because there was a procedure; suppose all the other gentlemen declined to be deputy speakers when they were called up to confirm or consent to their nomination, then that matter would not arise. It would have been better or timelier if they had agreed to their nomination, then I would have been competent to know that their names are now properly up for discussion and vote. I would then be able to rule that given the chance that we have now, there is no possibility of that nature.

Secondly, I cannot rule out nomination of people on this matter. You cited a constitutional provision but then this is a matter of an election. Elections are the expression of people’s wishes and aspirations. I cannot rule out any nomination unless it does not conform to the law. I have not had any issue with the nominations that have been made so far, but let me ask the candidates that have been nominated to come and confirm or withdraw from their nomination. We will start with the first Member to be nominated, hon. Anita Among. Honourable, do you consent to your nomination?

7.07
MS ANITA AMONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Your Excellency the President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, My Lord the Chief Justice. My name is Anita Among Annet, Member of Parliament for Bukedea District. I do consent to my nomination.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Kampala Central.

7.08
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I, Muhammad Nsereko, Member of Parliament for Kampala Central, having heard the contents and the proposal of my nomination to take chair as Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, do hereby consent and accept. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi.

7.09
MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Rt Hon Speaker, My Lord the Chief Justice, guests in attendance, the honourable Members of Parliament. With humility, I do accept the nomination of my candidature as Deputy Speaker of Parliament. You will not be disappointed. God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have three candidates duly nominated and confirmation and consent received from each one of them. The last honourable member who was nominated had representation from his agent saying that he would not consent to that nomination. Therefore, we have three candidates and I think the time has come for us to deal with the matter by vote. 

ELECTION OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this has been done before; the procedure is clear. We are going to do this the way we did it earlier. The ballot paper is plain, so you write the name of the candidate you prefer on it and then place it in the box. Can we start the voting please.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have spent the whole day on the election of the Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural issue. In order for us to move faster, as they call out the ten names, I want to propose that we have more tables where Members can write other than ten people coming to line up, pick the ballot paper, go and write and the others must wait. 

We could handover these papers to the ten Members and they find where to write and then put the ballot into the box. That would help us to move faster and conclude this process. That is the procedural issue that I wanted to raise. Would it not be procedurally right for us to have more tables other than just one table where Members can write and then cast their ballot? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Anything that we can do to fasten the time in which we do this vote will be helpful. The suggestion that has come from the honourable member is acceptable. I ask the people managing this to see if we can accommodate facilities that would enable us to move faster.

MR NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I have an interest as a candidate. The principle of a secret ballot presupposes that we must have space. So, if you create many centres, my interest as a candidate will be directly affected. I object to that.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are just going to adopt whatever arrangement is possible and can be executed while maintaining the integrity of the process. If it is possible, we will do it. Can I ask the candidates who have been nominated to send their representatives here - agents who will be witnessing the polling process.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Okupa Elijah. I want to propose an amendment to the proposal moved by hon. Sarah Opendi. 

In trying to catch up with time, instead of having numerous tables where people write, I propose that we divide the calling of names into two; one from number 1-250 and then another side where they call from 250-529. We can have two centres but the same tally box. In that way, we would be able to cut the time by half. If that can be done, Mr Speaker, it would help.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is being done by calling of names by one person. I do not know whether we are going to have two people calling names at the same time. I think the procedure we are using now is okay; let us just start. We are not going to have one person calling a name from this side and another calling from that side; it will be very confusing. Let us start. Make the modifications necessary. 

Can I have the agents of the candidates? Hon. Namanya Naboth representing hon. Yusuf Nsibambi; hon. Richard Sebamala representing hon. Nsereko Muhammad; hon. Esther Afoyochan from Zombo will be representing hon. Anita Among.

(Members voted by secret ballot)

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible to move this light this side, so that there is more light on this side? It looks a bit dark. That is better.

Honourable members, I beg your indulgence. One of the honourable members whose name is coming much later has an emergency. Could you call the name of hon. Margaret Rwabushaija so that she votes now? 

(Voting by secret ballot continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have reached the last name on the list of voting Members of Parliament. If there is a Member who has not cast his or her vote but would like to do so, please approach the voting area and you will be identified and you will take the vote now. Is there any Member who would like to vote but has not yet voted? 

There is one Member coming. Clerk, can we know the name, please? 

(Member voted by secret ballot)

THE SPEAKER: Is there any other Member? There being no other Member, I now declare polling closed. We can start the process of preparing for declaration of results. Please, technical people take charge.

(Vote counting/tallying commenced)

THE SPEAKER: While that is going on, honourable members, I beg for your indulgence. We have some urgent business, which I think we should finish in the duration of them doing the tally. The urgent business I am talking about is our membership to the Pan-African Parliament. 

I have already received all the names from the people who are supposed to give the nominations; the National Resistance Movement has given the three names, the National Unity Platform has given one name and the one name that is supposed to be nominated by the Speaker has already, also, been provided.

We have also checked with the rules. Rule 5(4) says that no business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the Office of the Speaker – and this is important – at any time that the Office of the Speaker is vacant. This rule creates its own exception. So, if the Office of the Speaker is not vacant, you can transact any other business. 

By virtue of this rule, I am causing an alteration of the Order Paper to insert business as follows: Designation of Members of Parliament to the Pan-African Parliament. I will read the names and put the question. If you approve, we will adopt them because their names were supposed to be transmitted to the Pan-African Parliament today, 24th and they take oath on the 27th. 

Therefore, we are just in time and the rules allow. So, I will cause this alteration by immediately now asking the Clerk to call this business and we deal with it.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are the names that have been submitted to the Office of the Speaker. From the NRM, I have hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Member of Parliament, Dokolo South County, Dokolo District; hon. Anifa Kawooya, Member of Parliament, Mawogola West County and hon. Juliet Achayo, Member of Parliament, Ngora County, Ngora District. 

From the National Unity Platform, I have hon. Patrick Oshabe, Member of Parliament, Kassanda County North and the nomination that comes from the Office of the Speaker is hon. Eric Musana, Member of Parliament, Buyaga East County. Those are the names of our Members that I now give to the House for approval.

I now put the question for approval of these five names to be Members to the Pan-African Parliament. 

I now put the question that hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Juliet Achayo, hon. Patrick Oshabe and hon. Eric Musana do represent us in the Pan-African Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

DECLARATION OF RESULTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me take this time to announce the results of the votes as cast:

    • Total number of votes cast - 481
    • Invalid votes - 07
    • Votes polled by hon. Nsereko Muhammad - 24
    • Votes polled by hon. Nsibambi Yusuf - 35
    • Votes polled by hon. Among Annet Anita – 415 (Applause)

Anita Among polled the greatest number of votes, 415, which is higher than any other contestant in this contest. I, therefore, declare the hon. Among Annet Anita duly elected Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Congratulations, honourable Deputy Speaker-elect and honourable members. Thank you for the patience you have demonstrated today. I think it is a very good start. If today is anything to go by, the future can only be better. 

I want to thank you, Your Excellency, for being here up to this time. We have a few other items of business to handle and then we conclude. 


ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 82(10) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE OATHS ACT (CHAPTER 19 OF THE LAWS OF UGANDA)

The oath was administered to Ms Among Annet Anita.

HANDING OVER OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF POWER BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE RT HON. DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

(The instruments of power were handed over to Ms Among Annet Anita.)

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE TO THE POSITION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER-ELECT

9.13
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Ms Anita Among): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, my Lord, the Chief Justice of Uganda, honourable Members of Parliament, I am greatly humbled and honoured to be elected across the political divine as the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.

In a very special way, I wish to thank the people of Bukedea District, who have made this journey and made me reach the far I have reached tonight. I also wish to thank my party, the NRM, under the stewardship of none other than His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for allowing me to serve the nation Uganda, my country, in the position of Deputy Speaker, a trust that I do not take for granted. I will forever be grateful to my party.

To my honourable colleagues of the 11th Parliament of Uganda, I remain highly indebted to you. For your waiving support that you have shown me by giving me all those votes for the position of Deputy Speaker, I am grateful. As a duly elected Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, I commit to promote teamwork, coherence, equal opportunities and enhance the welfare of the Members of Parliament. (Applause)

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate my senior colleague, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Speaker of Parliament, upon your election and elevation to the position of Speaker. I pledge to work with you to ensure that we perform in the 11th Parliament, for the good of our country and Parliament. We will ensure that we work together with all the other arms of Government without compromising independence. For God and my country. (Applause)

REMARKS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome, Your Excellency. (Applause)

9.17
H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA(Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Sit down, please. Thank you. The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Jacob Oulanyah, His Lordship the Chief Justice, Alfonse Owiny Dollo, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Anita Among, honourable Members of Parliament, the former Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga and everybody here. I would like to congratulate the Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah and the Deputy Speaker, Anita Among, on their elections. Congratulations! (Applause)

I would like to thank His Lordship the Chief Justice for two things: first of all, I thank him for presiding over today’s function and doing it very well, according to the constitutional provisions. I also want to thank him that a few months ago, he was like the acting President because I was busy campaigning – I think from the month of October. 

The Vice-President was busy campaigning and the Speaker at that time, Rebecca Kadaga, was also campaigning. Therefore, he was the most senior state leader who was here. He helped here and there, in managing situations. He knows - (Applause) - I would like to thank him for doing that very well, also.

I would like to advise the honourable members about the style of work. I have now known why some people get problems health-wise. By sitting like this for very long, you will get health problems. It is not good to sit down for a very long time. You saw me standing up and walking – it is very dangerous to sit for long. These procedural motions you bring – procedural motion for standing up – you are just prolonging the sitting down instead of going to the business so that people go home and do other things. I do not think it is healthy to sit for long.

This term of Government is the kisanja for socio-economic transformation. We have already laid the foundation. The infrastructure is much better; we have got better roads; we have got enough electricity; the schools and the health centres. What is needed is to use these to transform our people so that all of them get out of underdevelopment.

In this kisanja, I want us to be very serious. First of all, budget correctly. Make sure you budget correctly. During the campaign, I committed, on your behalf, by saying that in this kisanja, we shall- the Acholis say “poko marom”, as opposed to poko guna. In our other dialects here, we say “okugabula bulungi”. We will budget for the priority sectors of infrastructure, security but also wealth creation so that our people who want to work have no excuse.

I have been interacting with the ghetto children here in Kampala. Some people were trying to misuse them to riot and so on. I, however, got in touch with them and I met them many times. As I suspected, their main problem is capital. Many of them want to work but they have no capital. Of course, they also need some skills but the biggest problem they have is capital. So, please, budget not only for the ghetto youth here but for all our people in the country. Let us make sure that we budget properly and they get capital so that anybody who wants to work can work. 

During the campaigns, I checked the Operation Wealth Creation. I was wondering what happened since we have been doing a lot of wealth creation. When I checked, I found that for the eight years; from 2013, Operation Wealth Creation had served about 900,000 people. You can see it was not enough. If you assume that each recipient was from one homestead - the homesteads in Uganda are nine million - therefore, if we only served 900,000 people in the eight years, then that is not a good spirit. 

In this kisanja, with the wealth funds, I want us to reach about   two and a half million families per year so that in the five years, we cover all the nine million homesteads. Then nobody will have an excuse. 

Apart from budgeting correctly, we are going to fight corruption. Corruption is becoming a big problem. I saw this recently in the Uganda Airlines. In that airline, because of good planning, we had some money and we bought four brand new CJRs 900 and two brand new Airbus A330. The airline, however, was infiltrated immediately by some corrupt elements who were employing their own relatives, over budgeting and inflating procurement costs. These are terrible things. When I got information, I moved in and dispersed the whole group. The management – I had even put some people on the board and I thought they were serious – I suspended the whole gang. The soldiers to fight corruption are there. 

Therefore, I would like you, Members of Parliament, - I will give a long address, one of these days, on the anatomy of corruption in Uganda and how it had come up. It is now clear. The good thing, however, is that many Ugandans are fed up and they are willing to assist us. With correct budgeting and zero tolerance to corruption, we are going to succeed. 

One of the problems we must fight is intolerance; people who do not work together with other people or who are vindictive. This is not good. I have never had any problem with any Ugandan who wants to work with me. Even when we fight with a group because of political differences, once the fight is over, we work with them. This is the line of the NRM.

This line of vindictiveness of not forgiving is a very bad spirit, which is not NRM spirit. I work with Gen. Moses Ali. Yet, Gen. Moses Ali was with Idi Amin in the other years but when we got together, we started working together. People who were with UNLA - the other army - which we were fighting are with us. When we came from the bush, we formed a broad base Government, where all the parties were represented. I am working with hon. Jimmy Akena and hon. Betty Amongi. They are from our old party, the UPC. The ones of the DP – So, please, have a spirit of welcoming people. Reject the politics of exclusion and egocentrism. 

I want to congratulate the NRM people for the way they have scored this victory here. (Applause) I want you to learn very carefully about how we work. Our people had got divided because of this speakership race; mistakes were made. People were campaigning, when they should not be campaigning. I heard about this and called a meeting some time ago. I thought it would stop but it did not. There was a lot of bitterness. I heard that people were abusing one another on social media, which was very bad.

As I always tell you, we veterans never involve ourselves in politics with lack of principles. In this race, neither in public nor in private, as the leader of NRM, did I say, “Support Kadaga” or “Support Oulanyah.” Yesterday, when we were alone, I challenged our caucus if anybody heard me saying “support Kadaga” or “support Oulanyah”. I asked the person to stand up and tell everyone in the caucus. There was no one. I cannot do that. 

I do not know why people cannot keep away from that mistake - a senior person taking sides among juniors. If you are a senior person, you belong to everybody; do not take sides – “This is mine; this one is against me”. That is very bad. You will fail and that will fail us too.

I never take sides among my juniors or my equals because they are all my people. I wait - as I told you to wait for the NRM Central Executive Committee to decide then you would be able to know whom to support. That is what I told hon. Nandutu when I rang her some time back. That is what I told hon. Anyakun and hon. Nyakikongoro when I rang them sometime back. Please, do not take sides; wait for the official forum to make a decision, then you back what the forum has decided. 

I would like to congratulate the NRM group, because it was only yesterday at around 3.00 p.m. when we finally took a position on what to do. We took a position on how to support the Rt Hon. Oulanyah as a sole candidate for the Speakership - we had our reasons as to why that was done - and how to forward the three names - hon. Anita Among, hon. Tayebwa and hon. Rwakoojo – to the caucus. I think it was about 2.00 p.m. 

My people were terribly divided - the pro-Kadaga group and the pro-Oulanyah group – but I would like to congratulate you. Since yesterday, from about 3.00p.m. or 4.00 p.m., I gave you guidance first of all in the general meeting and then subsequently, I rang a number of our people, even in the night. 

You have seen how guerrillas work. Guerrillas are very dangerous; once they start working, they have no time limit. I was ringing some people at 11.30 p.m., 12.00 in the night. I would tell them, “You have been with hon. Kadaga but the official candidate now is hon. Oulanyah. (Applause) In the morning, I also rang some and met others. Now, you have seen how you have come up as a united group. I congratulate you.

We only had maybe 16 hours of trying to work on the division. I would like to thank the people who were supporting hon. Kadaga but they listened to my advice and shifted to support the official candidate, especially hon. Tayebwa and his group (Applause). These fellows had formed factions, and faction formation is a subversive act according to the doctrine of NRM. It is against the code of conduct. There was a very strong Oulanyah faction and a very strong Kadaga faction, but after the decision was taken and when I talked to them on phone and also met a few today in the morning, many of them agreed. I do not think that it was everybody but many agreed in a very short time to support the official candidate.

They were actually plotting to have - the factions had been Kadaga with hon. Tayebwa. Stand up and they see you – (Mr Tayebwa rose_) (Applause) The idea in their group was that hon. Kadaga becomes the Speaker and hon. Tayebwa becomes Deputy Speaker. The other faction was hon. Oulanyah and hon. Anita Among. 

This morning, I had to bring my tissue out to help some people who were weeping - fortunately, I had my tissue, so I lent my tissue to some of them. They were weeping and saying that only the Oulanyah and Anita Among faction are the ones who are in charge. I said “No, this is now the NRM”. They said, “They are going to mistreat us”. I said, “No, they will not mistreat you”. 

They said that they will be persecuted and they will not be allowed to go to committees. I told them, “I am the President of Uganda, Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, and historical leader of the resistance; nobody will do that in Uganda; nobody will persecute you.” So, I rang hon. Oulanyah when those people were here. I told him, “Your enemies are here. I am with your enemies. Would you like to say hello to them on the phone?”

So, I thank the hon. Tayebwa group for agreeing to support the official candidate. They were conspiring with the Opposition to have an NRM Deputy Speaker who would fight with hon. Anita Among. I said, “Please, forget about this.” I thank all of you for developing the NRM spirit even when it was late in the afternoon, but it is better than never. I congratulate the NRM people for being mature. You have handled the issue very well. 

Today, the 24th of May, - yes, I heard that it is Mama Kadaga’s birthday and I congratulate her on her birthday, but it is also the anniversary of the sad events of Uganda. It was when the Uganda Army under the control of President Milton Obote and Idi Amin attacked Mutesa’s palace at Mengo. So, it is a bit more serious than Mama Kadaga’s birthday. Therefore, it is very pleasing for me and some of the elders like Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali - those who are old enough; if Dr Rugunda was here, he would also know this - to be here on the day when blood was being shed in Lubiri. But for us we are here in a mosquito-free Kololo. There are no mosquitoes because wherever I have functions, I kill all the mosquitoes. You will not hear any mosquito disturbing you here, peacefully changing leadership of Parliament and with a united Uganda, as you can see. 

So, I am very happy that I have lived to see such days in Uganda because by 1966, the situation in Uganda looked bleak. Divisions were very serious – tribal and sectarian. In 1966, the conflict at that time was between what they were calling Bantu and Nilotics. Now, you see how united our people are. That is what the NRM rejected.

So, this anniversary is not just the birthday of Mama Kadaga - on which I congratulate her - but it has got more serious history; the suffering of Uganda. I am glad that we are out of it.

I am also ready to engage the Opposition. I actually engaged some of the Opposition. The UPC, we talk very well. The DP, we talk very well. Even recently, we have been talking to some members of FDC. The ones who have been avoiding us have been the ones of NUP but there are also many who would like to engage in talks, so that we can have a peaceful way of working, even when we belong to our different parties.

So, I want to end by thanking everybody today, but only ask the in-charges of these ceremonies who cannot pronounce our people’s names. Do not put somebody on the microphone who cannot pronounce Ugandans’ names. 

For instance, there is somebody who was calling “Lillian Aba”. These people do not know that she is called “Lillian Aber”, because they are speaking like the English. Please, these announcers should know how to pronounce our people’s names. 

I do not want to hear somebody going to the microphone and mispronouncing my name, “Museveeni”. I am not Museveeni; I am Museveni; flat. (Laughter) Somebody there could not pronounce, “Bahireira”. She is one of the MPs. Somebody could not pronounce “Aleper”. I think they were calling him, “Alepa”. 

How can you fail to just be an announcer? (Laughter) If you cannot be an announcer, then how will you manage to cultivate a garden which requires more energy? (Laughter) Please, be serious with any work they give you. 

If they give you this work, ask, “How do they pronounce this name?” Do not just go. That shows you that he is not caring. Ask, “How do they pronounce this name” because the people who know the language are there.

If it is an Acholi name, you ask the Acholi, “How do they pronounce this one?” They could not pronounce “Nakwang”. My girl Nakwang came back to Parliament. Is she here? Nakwang, where are you? Oh, Nakwang, alakara nooi.

I thank you very much and I wish you a good night. We are now just beginning. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency. Your Excellency, there is some communication that I need to make now, before we close.

One; very soon, names will be coming to Parliament to require approval. We are just starting today. The people in charge of all the parties that are represented in Parliament are, therefore, requested to have mechanisms of preparing some names, which will be submitted to the Speaker’s Office, so that when some names are sent by the President, we have the means of handling them within time.

You also know that around the first week of June, it will be the official opening of Parliament and that would require a State of the Nation Address. We need some of these things to be done before that.

Your Excellency, earlier, when we were just proceeding and you were already here, the honourable member for Dokolo District, hon. Cecilia Ogwal had made a request that the former Speaker wanted to speak to the Members of Parliament when the Chief Justice was still presiding. 

When she said that, I decided to suspend some part of my speech to allow her make her comment, in which case now I would have come and made the overall picture. However, we discovered then that she had moved out but the information we got later was that she was coming back. I do not think she has come back, so I need to make this statement, Your Excellency.

I just wanted to thank Madam Rebecca Kadaga for her leadership - (Applause) - the leadership she provided in Parliament, the people she met countrywide and provided leadership on some urgent matters and also the leadership she provided internationally, when she represented Uganda in the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and other organisations which the Government of Uganda subscribes to. 

She has excelled in those areas and has even been elected to positions that bring honour to the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda. So, I want to thank her very, very much for what she has been able to do. (Applause)

We pledge to pick up from where she left and continue because there is no way we can say nothing happened. A lot of things happened which were beneficial to this country and we would like to pick from where she left and continue with it.

You have now elected a brand-new Deputy Speaker. I can only pledge to work very respectfully with her. These offices are not private offices; these offices are public offices. We sit in them to facilitate things that matter to the people of this country, not do our own things. I am sure we will agree on some methods of work, which will enable us achieve this.

Honourable members, the process of selecting the Speaker and Deputy Speaker is over. It is all done. Like the President said, there were some issues that had gone beyond what should have been in a normal contest. I pledge not to hold a grudge with anybody – any Member of Parliament. (Applause)

First of all, it is not my nature. I do not bear grudges. I will not victimise anybody for whatever has happened in the course of these discussions and processes of coming up with a Speaker. I am not a vindictive person; it is not my nature. That will never happen. 

However, if you feel that you went beyond the lines and you need us to have a discussion and apologise to each other, you are welcome. You can come to the office, we sit and have a discussion, we laugh and then that is it. We start a new life and move on.

To those who I could have offended in one way or the other, I apologise publicly –(Applause)– and I ask for your forgiveness. I could have done it myself without knowing or some of the people who were working with me could have done it in my name or on my behalf. I apologise for all those and ask for your forgiveness. 

I, therefore, ask you to approach the Office of the Speaker and that of the Deputy Speaker. If there are issues you think we should talk more about, come and we talk. 

This country belongs to all of us. The people sent us here collectively to focus on two things; defending the national interest and perfecting service delivery systems to them. 

Like the President said, the main point for these five years is socio-economic transformation. We are part and parcel of this and we should do our best to deserve the respect the people gave us to become Members of Parliament. 

I would like to thank you very much and congratulate hon. Anita Among for ascension to the Office of the Deputy Speaker. I would like to also thank the Chief Justice for the day. 

Mr President, you have sat with us here. All the three arms of Government are here and that is symbolic. If you talk about independence of a particular institution, remember the fundamental is that they should work together to help the people of this country. There may be functional independence and functional differences to make sure that other arms crosscheck what the other arm is doing and hold them to account but that should not make us lose sight of the nature of what we must do. 

The Book of Isaiah Chapter 33:22 says, “For the Lord is our judge; for the Lord is our lawgiver; for the Lord is our King. He will save us.” The judge is the Judiciary; the lawgiver is Parliament and the king is the Executive. 

These matters have been there. They united people’s voices, actions and the people we represent because after all they say - and somebody said it here, “The voice of the people is the voice of God.” By sending you here, with those voices, that has become the voice of God. We should stand together and deliver for our people. That should be the nature of things that bind us together so that we achieve the best for our people and support what has been proposed by the party, which has come to Government. 

There are other manifestos that they will like to implement and they will bring proposals to us. For the ones that cannot work, we will say “no.” We have no reason to say “no” to the ones that should work because it is all about the people who sent us here. 

Thank you very much. May God bless you. (Applause)  

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House stands adjourned sine die. Notification will be given to you when we shall resume to conduct business, as the 11th Parliament. 

(The House rose at 9.59 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

