Monday, 28 May 2012

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President, the Deputy Prime Minister and honourable Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have two short announcements. The first is that the House will be prorogued on Wednesday afternoon. Secondly, I am also giving notice that the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament will begin on 7 June 2012 at the Kampala International Conference Centre. So, please put it in your diaries and be available for the commencement of the Second Session. I thank you.

2.56
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this matter had been raised earlier. This is in regard to shortages in the funding for the national housing and population census, which all of us know is going to take place in August this year. 

A census is an important event which occurs every 10 years, and the minister had made an undertaking to come and brief Parliament on the preparation to carry out the census. However, we have been reading in the media that the exercise is going to be postponed for one year. We are going on recess yet we have to be given information on what to tell our constituents - whether they should prepare to be counted in August or not. 

We would want to know whether it is true that Government lacks the capacity to carry out the national census this year. Given the importance of the census, which all of us appreciate, my position would be that Government should find the money so that we carry out the census as scheduled in August, without disrupting the planning process and functions of the Government. I just want to get information from the Government whether what we read in the papers is true, that Government will be unable to carry out this important event, the national housing and population census. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us take all the queries and then the minister will come in.

2.58
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance.

I do not know whether God wanted me to know or to witness the situation at Yumbe Hospital. I was in my hospital this weekend where I went to mobilise people for immunization because there is a massive immunisation campaign against measles and polio that is ending today. I went to my hospital but when I reached there, it started raining and that is when I really got to know the situation in which my hospital is in. When it started raining, the roof was leaking and the ceilings were falling off. The staff and attendants to the patients were shifting the patients from one bed to another and then to the corridors until they could not do it anymore. The patients and attendants were washed. I was also washed by the rain - (Laughter) – and we were all wet in that situation. 

Madam Speaker, I took keen interest and when it stopped raining, I went to the toilet and I could not believe my eyes because the toilets were flooded. They were full and there was no where to sit if you really wanted to help yourself. The sewage was off! At that very point, if you would get a doctor in the theatre I do not think he would come out with somebody who would be alive.

I have ever raised this issue of my hospital in this House. You remember that even in the Eighth Parliament, I wrote specifically to you explaining the situation in which the hospital was. I even raised it one day with the President during a NEC meeting when we were in Entebbe. The President directed Dr Nduhura, the minister – luckily he is still in this Cabinet - to see how the hospital should be renovated. Up to now, nothing has been done.

I have been perusing through the budget framework paper and my hospital is not there. In the loan request we passed, of the 17 hospitals that will be renovated Yumbe is not among. Can the minister now tell me how far he has gone in implementing the directive of the President to see that Yumbe Hospital is renovated? That hospital does not only cater for the people of Yumbe but also Moyo, Maracha, Koboko, Congo and Southern Sudan. It almost acts like an international hospital. 

I just want the minister to tell me what he has done now. Even in February, the minister, Dr Ondoa, went to the hospital herself to see the situation of that hospital. Several committees of this Parliament have gone there and condemned the hospital. One day they said that the hospital must not operate because of the state in which it is. Can I be informed of what the minister has done or is planning to do? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssimbwa, just raise your issues and do not debate.

3.04
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you very much. I am rising on a point of national importance. I am aware that there is an inquiry into USE but the issue I want to raise cannot await the results of that inquiry. 

In Kampala, we have got 22 schools which are undertaking the programme of USE. Out of these, it is only eight schools which are government aided and the rest are private schools. As we talk now, even the private schools want to pull out of this programme because of lack of money to run this programme. We have been following up releases from Ministry of Finance but what is interesting is that every time money is released, it is released to clear arrears. 

I can just give an example of one school, St Dennis in Ggaba; as we talk, the school is in arrears of Shs 54 million. That is money which was supposed to cover last term and third term of 2011. I do not know what is happening. How is government running this programme when head teachers are living on borrowed money from money lenders? Private schools are now under the threat of those who have loaned them money. They are attaching their buildings, arresting their head teachers who are no longer in schools, and the teachers are also no longer in schools because there is nobody to supervise them. This is a very big problem. 

In the last quarter, Government released Shs 5.9 billion to cater for the capitation grant but a school which has got 792 students was only given Shs 3.3 million. I do not know how the Minister of Education is handling USE, or you just left it to the dogs. That is the question for which I seek an answer from you.

The other issue is about finance. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is here to cripple government programmes. When you look at how student headcounts were made in 2009, you find a school with 1,200 receives money for only 500 students at the time of release. What is the use of the student headcount held in schools? Is it intended for budgeting or there is another use for it? I request that the Minister of Internal Affairs, through Police, carries out an investigation into the disbursement of these funds because it seems there is a problem there. 

I request the Minister of Education to liaise with the Minister of Finance to ensure that they release that money as per the number of students in the school. I also request that those officers in the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education who are found to be part of that great fraud be investigated thoroughly and prosecuted under the law. This is because they are killing the good NRM programme of Universal Secondary Education. I thank you.

DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen on a matter of national importance and it involves the youth fund. I represent Mbarara Municipality, which has got about four universities and many youth. My problems are the phone calls and the outcry from young ladies and boys wanting the money that was meant for their enterprises, and which government promised to give them. Recently, when the Minister of Finance was talking here, he told us they were waiting for the President to give a statement in the next financial year. My problem is: why should we wait for the President’s statement when this money was released? 

I got a phone call this morning from a person called Ruganju Mose, who owns Mbarara Cushioners Association. These are young boys who have a cushioning association and they are eight in number. They went to Stanbic Bank with every condition that is required of the youth to get the money, and they were told that they should go and wait for one month. A month has elapsed. When they went back, they were told that the person who puts the last signature on the document for the money to be given is in Kampala.  

I am one of the agitators of Mbarara City, so that we are given at least one ministry. All ministries are in Kampala here and people must not get this fund because everybody is in Kampala! I want the Minister of Finance to tell me who this person is in the Ministry of Finance who has to put a signature for every youth association from Kapchorwa, Nakapiripirit, Mbarara Municipality, Kabale, Kisoro. Nobody has received the money as we speak in Mbarara Municipality. My point is, by the time Mbarara Municipality, which is a town, fails to get money, what about your constituency, Madam Speaker, which is in the village - (Laughter) - I am very serious.

I am very sure this money which the youth have not yet got is going back to the Treasury and yet the youth have not got the money. I can tell you this is a problem of every Member of Parliament here, including the Vice-President. When he goes to Kyanamukaka, they will ask him that, “Vice-President, you are in things; where is the money for the youth?” Even the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Kajura, here will be asked. I am trying to talk on your behalf now but I want you to give me support. (Laughter)

I want the Minister of Finance to tell us, honestly, where are you putting this money and why are you taking it back? Secondly, why do you want the President –(Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you my friend, hon. Bitekyerezo, for giving way. Concerning the monies of the youth, actually for Kabale Municipality those who attempted to get the money were told to come with land titles. How do you expect the youth who have never worked to have a land title? We need to know who is holding this money. Perhaps some people are making money out of it. There is a very big problem. In Kabale, there is not a single youth who has got the money. When you get to the banks, they ask for your land title. Yes, you may have every credential and a very good project, but you need a land title. If you do not have it, you will not take the money.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much for that information. Madam Speaker, I am reliably informed that the youth have been told to take guarantors who have got accounts in these banks. Also, these guarantors have been told to surrender their land titles for these youth. My problem is that if we prepare and keep giving speeches about the youth fund, - and we have now spent a year doing so - I do not know whether this thing is going to go on as far as 2016. 

Minister of Finance, what do you want the President to tell the people because if the money was given out, why don’t you give this money to the youth? I think that the relevant ministry is causing chaos in this country. I think they are economically poor because they know that the money is meant to be given to the youth but they are not giving it to them. Do you want the President or the Vice-President to come and start giving out money himself? 

I am tasking the Ministry of Finance to tell us exactly who this person is in Kampala who must put a signature before the youth get money. Secondly, why you are putting conditions that are very complicated, and why do people even in towns have no accessibility to this money? Where are you putting this money? Where do you want to keep this money and for what reasons? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Balyejusa before I also say something about that fund.

3.14
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJUSA KIRUNDA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national concern, and it is about the degradation of our environment. A few days ago, I travelled to Pallisa to participate in a fundraising function organised by some of our colleagues from here. After the function, I got engaged in an informal interaction with some researcher from Makerere University with whom we discussed a wide range of issues. What came out prominently was the fact that our ecosystems have been massively encroached upon. For the benefit of some of the members, an ecosystem is simply a community of both living and non-living organisms which interact with each other in an environment. 

Having listened to that knowledgeable person in the field of environment, I thought this is a matter that should not escape the attention of Parliament. Many of our river banks throughout the country and lakeshores, together with the catchment areas including forests, have continued to be encroached upon. The other day, while watching television I saw footage of the Minister of State for Environment battling with illegal pit sawyers, I think in Mabira Forest. The wetlands have also been encroached upon.

If you go to Western Uganda, for instance, you will realise that many of the wetlands there have been converted into areas for large scale dairy farming. In Northern Uganda, the wetlands have been encroached upon for papyrus harvesting. In Eastern Uganda, you will find rice growing. In Central Uganda, the business at hand is brick-making. The total of all these unfortunate, negative and irresponsible actions and activities is the manifestation of what we have recently witnessed - the recent disasters of the landsides in Bugisu, floods in Teso and the unending droughts in Busoga together with the occasional famine that usually hits West Nile and other regions of the country.

In view of that, I plead with you to ask the Minister of Water and Environment, particularly the junior minister for environment, to tell us to what extent they intend to involve Members of Parliament by way of addressing this challenge in regard to environmental degradation. Also, to what extent they intend to involve Members of Parliament by way of monitoring and implementing all programmes that are geared towards the conservation of our environment. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, you know we have been expecting a statement from you in regard to the youth fund. I am becoming internally displaced in Kamuli because I have no answers about that fund. (Laughter) The last time I went there, the young people followed me and said they had come to me to guarantee the loans. When I said that was wrong, they told me the bank had told them that their MP was supposed to guarantee those loans. So, what is happening? You are causing us problems, honourable minister.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING): (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, let me start with the issue of the youth fund. First of all, it is not true that there is need for a signature of a particular officer at the Ministry of Finance. That cannot be true because the Ministry of Finance is not keeping this money. The money is being kept by the banks. In that regard, may I have the particulars of the officer in the bank that has said that a person at the Ministry of Finance is supposed to sign something before money is given out? That will help us investigate that bank.

Two, land titles are not part of the conditions in our memorandum of understanding – (Interjections) – Please, can I have more evidence on this allegation so that we can be able to take it up with the relevant bank that is asking for land titles?

Finally, I have been waiting for the last one and half weeks – (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance is aware that many Members of Parliament have evidence that their constituents have not had access to the youth fund. So, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to continue telling us what is not exactly happening on the ground when the people we represent here are crying a lot about that money which we passed here? I want to think that the minister is not aware of what is happening on the ground. We talk as representatives of the people. Our constituents have not had access to this money, including youth from Kampala who are said to have been allocated Shs 26 billion. So, is he procedurally right to continue telling us what is not actually on ground?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when are you coming with the statement that we have been expecting for the last three months on these funds?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, before I was interrupted by the procedural point, I was about to say that my ministry has been waiting for an opportunity to present this statement. So, can we do it tomorrow, Madam Speaker, - and I promise?

THE SPEAKER: If you were ready, you should have brought the statement to me to include it on the Order Paper. Not so? You know that I have been waiting for it.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, Madam Speaker, the statement was sent to your office. When I get back, I will check with the responsible people.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, allow me say something about this matter. This is not the first time this issue of the youth fund is coming here. We are getting disturbed and we are about to lose patience. I want to say that the senior minister at finance tends to avoid these issues when they come up. In the circumstances, I want to request that this time round we should have the senior minister here to give us this statement. (Applause) This is because we have heard many contradicting statements from the junior ministers in regard to this matter. 

Before the next budget is read, I demand that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, addresses Parliament and the nation at large on the issue of the youth fund. This business of sending the junior minister, hon. Matia Kasaija, will not help us. There are many issues that have been raised, for example the criteria being used, and the junior minister is saying that is not true. Let the senior minister come to tell us what the criteria is.

THE SPEAKER: So, when is your minister coming?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, the senior minister is currently attending a crucial meeting in Arusha. The statement is ready but if Parliament insists that it should be her to read it, I can promise that she will come before we prorogue. She will be here on Thursday. However, I also seek your guidance on this matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not true that I actually want her to read this statement. The last time we put you on the Order Paper, the minister who was in charge said they were waiting for the senior minister. That is what is on the Hansard. But if you are ready and you are in charge, can you read it today? I can give you time to do it today, since you are in charge.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am requesting that we read it tomorrow because I do not have it with me right here. I was not aware. Can I read it tomorrow, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You will read it on Wednesday. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you. The other issue was census. Again, one and a half weeks ago, I promised to come back on the Floor. Unfortunately, this item has not been put on the agenda. I have a comprehensive statement about census. Can I ask that I present those two statements on Wednesday, the one on census and the youth fund? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. May I also request that when the minister is coming, since he is the Minister of Finance, he brings a status report of the total development support from all multilateral and bilateral institutions and organisations showing performance to-date?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I do not want to disrupt the youth venture fund. Let us give the youth venture fund the proper time and focus. So, you will deal with the youth fund on Wednesday. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. On Wednesday, we will be here with a statement on the youth fund and also a statement on the census. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to education. There were some issues on USE and the capitation grant. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member of Parliament who is very concerned about the delay of capitation grants being remitted to USE schools. I feel that the Minister of Finance has the answer to this question or concern. 

I would like to take this opportunity to also request the Minister of Finance to clear the backlog of the amount of money that we, as Government, owe the USE schools and also those private schools that are participating in the USE programme. I know it is a concern of this Parliament, just like it is a concern of Government, that we have a programme that is fully facilitated as designed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Yumbe Hospital; where is the Minister of Health? Can the Prime Minister take up this burning issue of Yumbe Hospital?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Huda has raised a very critical matter regarding the state of Yumbe Hospital. I will accordingly bring this to the attention of the Minister of Health so that urgent action is taken. Thank you.

3.27
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence because the statements made by the Minister of Education, hon. Alupo, are very serious. A minister gets up on the Floor of the House and by implication she is saying, “There is nothing I can do as a minister; the problem is with the Ministry of Finance”, and she is honest and representing the views of her ministry. I thought it would be prudent that the Ministry of Finance comes and explains to Parliament why they have not been sending money to these USE schools for two terms. They should also bring us the entire backlog and a schedule of their payment plans because these are very important issues for all our constituencies. 

I thought, Madam Speaker, you would direct the Ministry of Finance to come and make a comprehensive statement to Parliament. We are not just going to sit over it as if it was not the minister who raised the red flag. I seek your indulgence. 

THE SPEAKER: You want him to speak beyond Makindye to give an update of the whole country? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. We want a comprehensive report for the whole country, beyond Makindye. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give colleagues information. When we went to bury Mzee Obwangor, when I came back I stayed in Soroti town. The head teachers of secondary schools where students are studying under USE gave me a petition. It is just that I was trying to seek an opportunity to present that petition here. Since first term, honourable minister, they have not received the money which was supposed to be given to them. How do you expect them to operate? So, it is not only limited to Makindye. At first I thought it was a problem with Soroti or Teso, but it is also here in Kampala. 

I want to agree with my colleague that the Minister of Finance helps us and helps these schools. With the economic crisis we are in now, where do you expect, especially those in boarding schools, to get money to provide food to these children? The minister is helped by the Ministry of Finance and it is good the Prime Minister is here; can you take charge and help these schools?

THE SPEAKER: I think the matter is really grave. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, as the Minister of Finance comes, I just wanted to give information that a few days ago, I met a head teacher from the Prime Minister’s constituency who had travelled to borrow chalk from a private school in my constituency. So, it is as serious as that. Schools are not running because the money is delaying. A head teacher in a Government school is borrowing chalk from a private school, and he was walking about 20kms to borrow that chalk!

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. I was actually disturbed while listening to the Minister of Education when she was making her statement. I was not shocked but I saw the Prime Minister looking at her in shock. From the statement made by hon. Baryomunsi, I think the Prime Minister owes this House an explanation as to whether the government actually has money to support these programmes before we ditch the future of this country into an abyss, and secondly, as to whether money was released and diverted. For schools not to receive grants for a whole year and we continue passing budgets, and monies are appropriated and we get statements here to the effect that the Minister of Education cannot defend her territory, I get very disturbed. 

In my constituency, schools have been crying for the whole year. Monies either come late or are not released. This is second term but they are waiting for monies of first term. Was money released and diverted or actually the Prime Minister should declare a national education disaster? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, where do you stand on this issue?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information that we have not seen in Uganda any barracks going to another barracks to borrow bullets. For sure, how can someone move miles to borrow chalk when the army cannot borrow bullets? Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, please tell us what you are going to do. The situation is grave.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, release of money, or what we call disbursement of money, to ministries, departments and agencies of Government is normally done based on two things. One, it is based on the work plan. Two, it is also dependant on the cash flow. As you know, we operate a cash budget. 

Madam Speaker, I do not have the details, so may I once again very humbly request you to allow my ministry to come with all the details of the cash releases we have done for each school and the dates, so that this House can get a full picture. As I speak now, I do not have all the details. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. That will be in the second session I think, which is not far from now.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE VERIFICATION COMMITTEE OF THE CANDIDATES NOMINATED TO BE ELECTED TO THE EAST AFRICAN ASSEMBLY ON AN INDEPENDENT TICKET

THE CHAIRPERSON, VERIFICATION COMMITTEE (Ms Mariam Nalubega): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This report is presented under rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure, Appendix B. The committee nominated me to chair the meetings and this is the outcome as far as conducting our work was concerned.

Introduction

Rule 8, Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly provides for the election verification committee of the Members of EALA.

On 22 May 2012, Parliament approved members of the committee as indicated in the attached appendix (i). That appendix has the names of the members of that committee. The mandate of the committee is contained under rule 10 of Appendix B, which provides that the verification committee shall consider the nominees and all applicants independent of a political party or organisation, and shall ensure that the requirements of Article 50 are fulfilled. Article 50 (2) of the Treaty provides for the qualification of a person to be elected as a member of the Assembly. The qualification provides that the candidate should be a citizen of the Partner State; that the candidate is qualified to be elected as a member of that Partner State under the Constitution; that he or she does not hold an office as a minister in that Partner State; is not a Member of Parliament; is not an officer in the service of the Community; and that he or she has proven experience or interest in consolidating and furthering the aims and objectives of the Community.

Methodology
Under rule 4(3)(b)and rule 5 of Appendix B, the following documents were submitted and considered by the committee:

a) 	Nomination Form A for candidates on a party ticket. This was specifically for verifying the number of times that Members of Parliament endorsed the nomination of the candidate and for verifying signatures.

b) 	Nomination Form B for candidates independent of political parties or organisations.

c) 	A statement under oath in the prescribed format stating that a candidate is a citizen of Uganda qualified to be elected as a Member of Parliament, is not a Member of this Parliament, does not hold office as a minister, is not an officer in the service of the East African Community, and has proven experience and interest in furthering the aims of the Treaty.

The committee, in executing its mandate, examined the documents presented by each of the nominees. The committee also interacted with all the candidates who had shown interest to stand as independents. This was further realised as the committee decided to clarify some of the issues raised by the candidates. 

The committee checked the number of candidates each Member of Parliament had nominated to ensure that they had not exceeded nine, that each member was eligible to sign for. The member who signed for the highest number signed for eight candidates. 

Observations

The following candidates submitted nomination forms as candidates independent of a political party or organization:
1.	Ben Wacha
2.	Robert Araali Tusiime
3.	Susan Nakawuki
4.	Moses Nuwagaba
5.	Martin Wandera
6.	Jack Nsubuga
7.	Andrew Niwabiine
8.	Nicholas Babigumira
9.	Jeremiah Birungi Kamurali
10.	Twinomugisha Mugisha
11.	Dennis Namara

On 25th May, Mr Namara wrote to the Clerk to Parliament withdrawing his candidature, and it is indicated in appendix (ii). The committee considered the rest of the applicants independent of a political party or organisation and found the following to have satisfied the requirements of rule 4 and 5 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament - I would like to lay on the Table the resignation letter from Mr Dennis Namara.

THE SPEAKER: You can do the laying of papers later. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Honourable members, the committee considered the rest of the applicants independent of a political party or organisation and found the following candidates to have satisfied the requirements of rules 4 and 5 of Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure:

1.	Ben Wacha
2.	Susan Nakawuki
3.	Moses Nuwagaba
4.	Martin Wandera
5.	Jack Nsubuga
6.	Andrew Niwabiine
7.	Nicholas Babigumira
8.	Mugisha Twinomugisha

The committee observed the following issues candidate by candidate: 

Mr Robert Araali Tusiime
 
The committee noted inconsistencies in the documents presented by the candidate in regard to age and years of study. He stated that he was born on 31 July 1985, and that is the date that is indicated in his birth certificate and passport, and yet the voters’ card indicated 24 December 198. He had deliberately deleted the last figure since it did not tally with his year of birth. His curriculum vitae indicated that his year of birth was 1982. 

The committee observed that whereas he indicated having studied for his A’ level for two years, his documents, the O’ level and A’ level documents, show that he did his O’ level when he was 18 years and his A’ level when he was 19 years. So he grew by one year in two years.

A further contradiction appears where the age column in his application form on Form B is not filled. Mr Tusiime reported that he had forgotten to fill it.

The committee was suspicious that the inconsistency regarding the age and alteration on his voters’ card may be a result of forgery of documents. The committee handed Mr Tusiime to the Sergeant-at-Arms in order for the Police to carry out investigations on the documents he had presented. 

Honourable members, Mr Tusiime later presented to the committee an affidavit, which the committee observed could not cure the omissions and alterations on his documents. The committee was unable to recommend Mr Tusiime for nomination.

Mr Jeremiah Birungi Kamurali 

Mr Kamurali submitted partial information to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament claiming that he was not given a complete set of forms to fill. However, on 25 May 2012 he submitted the missing information indicating that he had been given the forms by the Office of the Clerk but through omission, he had failed to submit them at the required time.

His submission was not permissible given that he brought the forms after the date of nomination had closed. On examining the part of the form that had been submitted in time, the committee noted that it was not endorsed by the commissioner of oaths as required by the Rules of Procedure.

Among the documents attached to his nomination was his party card indicating that he is a member of the National Resistance Movement. He later denied having attached the card himself. (Laughter)

Given the above grave omissions and inconsistencies, the committee did not consider Mr Kamurali as a duly nominated candidate.

On 22 May 2012, the House appointed a verification committee, which was assigned the duty of verifying candidates independent of a political party. However, the committee observed that rules 4, 5, 9 and 10 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure may have required the verification committee to consider nomination of political party candidates. The committee did not do so because of the lack of clarity of the rules as mentioned in 4, 5, 9 and 10 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure.

General Observation

The committee was unable to verify signatures of the independent candidates’ nominators due to lack of forensic experts to do so.

Recommendations to this Parliament

The committee recommends that in future, nomination forms be amended to require MPs nominating candidates to indicate their identity card, passport number or any other form of identification. 

Members should also be required to sign the forms in the Office of the Clerk to Parliament to cure suspicion of forgery.

Candidates should also be required to attach passport size photos to their application forms. This was done by the candidates but it was not a requirement under our rules.

The committee recommends that the House adopts this report and passes it.

Finally, I wish to thank my committed committee members and the staff from the Office of the Clerk who showed commitment and exhibited a lot of expertise while handling this matter including working on Sunday especially Sunday afternoon. I would like to thank them very much. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the verification committee on the candidates independent of-

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the letter from Mr Namara Dennis withdrawing his candidature. It was written on 25 May 2012. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on the Table a Police letter in reference to the queries against Mr Araali. It is dated 24 May 2012. If I may read, the address is, Uganda Police ref. PAC CID/SD, 07 24 May 2012: 

“The Clerk to Parliament 
Thorough investigation into the documents of Tusiime Robert 
This is to inform you that inquiries have been instituted into documents, which were presented by Tusiime Robert for the purpose of EALA nomination. We are yet to verify the academic certificates, O’ level and A’ Level with Uganda National Examinations Board. The voters’ card is also yet to be verified from the Electoral Commission. 

The date of birth on the voters’ card is different from the birth certificate. The birth certificate presented talks of Tusiime Robert Byaruhanga and the documents talk of Tusiime Robert. This is yet to be verified. You will be informed of the progress in due course.” It is signed by P.C Kato, D/ACP OC CID, PAC. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

I would also like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee starting with the minutes of the meeting held on the 24 May 2012, which were adopted by the committee. I beg to lay.

I would also like to lay the minutes of the meeting held on 25 May 2012, which were also adopted and approved by the committee.

I would also like to lay the minutes of the committee meeting held on 27 May 2012, adopted and approved by the committee.

I beg to lay on the Table a verification form for a number of nominators of Independent candidates. I beg to lay.

Our meetings were electronically recorded, and I would like to lay electronic recordings of our meetings. One is the electronic recording of the meeting held on 24 May 2012. The second is the electronic transcription of the minutes of 24 May 2012

I wish to state to this Parliament that during the meeting, we did not have any controversy and we did not have anyone not assenting to the committee’s decisions. We unanimously agreed to adopt the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the report of the committee on the candidates independent of political parties. Now I would like to ask Commissioner Baryomunsi – (hon. Ekanya rose_)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I was a member of this committee and I have a minority report which has been photocopied. I told the chairperson and even the Hansard indicates that I disagreed on just few issues. Therefore, in compliance to rule 171, I beg that I am granted the opportunity to present the minority report because I did not sign the main report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have looked at the report; your minority report was supposed to be attached to this report so that when she finishes you present, but I looked at the report and your annexure is not here. You are operating outside the rules, hon. Ekanya. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I sent the minority report down there for photocopying. The issue of stapling it together is the work of technical people. The copy is there and there are more copies here.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ekanya. Let us not amend the Rules of Procedure on the Floor of this House.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am not amending. After writing the minority report, I was supported by the technical people as the rule provides. I sent it down for photocopying and it has been photocopied. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ekanya, you are a senior member in this House and you know the rules relating to minority reports. A minority report is supposed to be discussed by the committee and attached to the main report when it comes here. (Applause) I will not allow amendment of the Rules of Procedure on the Floor of this House. 

I was telling you that the Clerk has written a report relating to the political parties and since she cannot come here herself, I have asked Commissioner Baryomunsi to read the report on the political parties. In the meantime, I want you to join me in welcoming the students of Kinawa High School, Kyengera campus, represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Rosemary Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.55
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here as requested to present the report prepared by the Clerk to Parliament on the persons nominated by political parties for election to the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Rule 43 of Appendix B to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012 requires the Clerk to receive nominations of candidates sponsored by political parties represented in Parliament. Between May 22 and 23 2012, the following nominations by candidates were received by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament:
1.	Dr Edward Kayondo, CP
2.	Mr Louis Dramadri, FDC
3.	Ms Dora Byamukama, NRM
4.	Mr Daniel Kidega, NRM
5.	Ms Margaret Zziwa, NRM
6.	Mr Bernard Mulengani, NRM
7.	Mr Kennedy Sebalu, NRM
8.	Ms Nusura Tiperu, NRM
9.	Mr Mukasa Mbidde, DP
10. Mr Kenneth Kakande, DP
11. Mr Chris Opoka, UPC

Observations
Dr Edward Kayondo was nominated by Mr Walyemera D.M as the Secretary-General of the Conservative Party, and his nomination was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. He has fulfilled all the requirements under rule 4 of Appendix B. However, I received a correspondence signed by the President-General of the Conservative Party, hon. John Lukyamuzi, claiming that Mr Walyemera was suspended and cannot act on behalf of the Conservative Party. 

I wrote to the chairperson, Electoral Commission, requesting him to avail Parliament with an updated list of the leadership of all the registered political parties in Uganda. You may wish to note that in a telephone conversation between the chairperson Electoral Commission and myself, held this morning, Monday May 28 2012, he assured me that Mr Walyemera is the Secretary-General of the Conservative Party. (Applause)

On Mr Louis Dramadri, he was nominated by hon. Alice Alaso, the Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change – (Applause) – and was seconded by 20 Members of Parliament. However, on May 24 2012, I received a letter from hon. Alice Alaso stating that Mr Dramadri was an impostor and a fraudster. (Laughter) She requested Parliament to disregard Mr Dramadri’s purported nomination. 

On the same day, Mr Dramadri wrote to the Clerk to Parliament withdrawing his candidature, citing his party’s decision to withdraw from the EALA elections. I wrote to Mr Dramadri, drawing his attention to requirements under rule 7(2) of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure for the elections of Members of EALA but no response has been received yet.

Mr Mukasa Mbidde was nominated by Mr Mathias Nsubuga, the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party. His nomination was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. However, on May 28 2012, I received a letter signed by Mr Peter Ochieng, who signed as the Deputy Secretary-General of the Democratic Party, withdrawing the purported nomination of Mr Mbidde as the DP nominee for EALA elections. He alleges that Mr Nsubuga is not the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party and can therefore not nominate a candidate on behalf of the Democratic Party. 

I have written to the chairperson of the Electoral Commission seeking a clarification on who is the registered Secretary-General of the DP. In a telephone conversation between the chairperson Electoral Commission and myself held this morning, May 28 2012, he informed me that Mr Nsubuga is the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party.

Mr Kenneth Paul Kakande was nominated by Mr Vincent Mayanja, Deputy Secretary-General of the Democratic Party (DP) and was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. However, I was verbally informed today by Mr Mathias Nsubuga that in his capacity as Secretary-General of DP, he had not authorised Mr Vincent Mayanja or anyone else to nominate any candidate on behalf of the DP.

Mr Chris Opoka Okumu was nominated by hon. Jacinto Ogwal, the Secretary-General of UPC, and was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. However, on 24 May 2012 I received a letter signed by Mr Olara Otunnu, the President of UPC, withdrawing the nomination of Mr Chris Opoka Okumu. 

On 25 May 2012, I wrote to Mr Olara Otunnu drawing his attention to the provisions of rule 12(2) of Appendix B to the Rules of Procedure regarding the procedure of withdrawing a candidate. No response has been received yet.
 
The following persons also certified the requirements under rule 4 of Appendix B to the Rules of Procedure to be candidates for the elections of East African Legislative Assembly (EALA):
1.	Dora Byamukama, NRM
2.	Daniel F. Kidega, NRM
3.	Margaret Zziwa,  NRM
4.	Bernard Mulengani, NRM
5.	Sebalu Kennedy, NRM
6.	Nusura Tiperu, NRM

Please note that all the mentioned correspondences have been attached as appendices to this report. This is what I have ascertained from the documents submitted and I beg to submit. It is signed by Jane L. Kibirige, the Clerk to Parliament, dated 28 May 2012.

So, this is the report, Madam Speaker, prepared by the Clerk to Parliament with regard to nomination of the various candidates. There is an addendum which says, Mr A.A.I Kingo Molodokai Bushnell was not nominated by any party neither was he an independent however he was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. (Laughter) I think it would be interesting to know the Members of Parliament who seconded him. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is very interesting that such a member is supported by 20 Members of Parliament. It raises doubt about the credibility of those signatures. If no party has nominated someone and he is neither independent, then there is a problem of credibility of those signatures. You may find that your name is there on that list yet you did not sign. You may be cited here yet somebody is masquerading that you nominated or supported him. Since it is neither here nor there, then we can leave it but I wanted to put that on record.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Unfortunately, I do not have the list of the Members of Parliament attached but if necessary, those names can be got. I am sure the Office of the Clerk should be having the list.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the report which I have just submitted. Attached to it are the various correspondences withdrawing candidates and any other which I quoted in the main report. I beg to lay.

I think to answer hon. Okupa’s clarification, the form has been sent to give the names of members who seconded Mr Vicks Kingo.

THE SPEAKER: No, otherwise you will be required to read all the names of those who nominated other candidates. Since he is neither independent nor from any party, it is just information. 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I rise on a point of clarification from the presenter of this report about the last paragraph he read. It says: “The following persons satisfied the requirements under rule 4 to be candidates to EALA...” He then read six names. It is as if the report is saying these are the only ones that meet the requirements, but from the report I have seen other people who qualify.

THE SPEAKER: No, Prime Minister, why that letter was written in that manner is because those other six members had no issues about their candidature, but all the others were nominated by one party and withdrawn by another. The Clerk has written to the Electoral Commission to confirm who the right people are to nominate members. So, they are candidates. Today or tomorrow we shall receive letters from the Electoral Commission.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But, Madam Speaker, that is determined by our rules. Rule 7(2) of Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure is very clear and the Clerk correctly cites it. The marginal note is, “Withdrawal or death of a candidate”. Sub rule (1) says, “Subject to sub-rules (2) and (3) of this rule, a duly nominated candidate for election may withdraw his or her nomination at anytime before the declaration of elected members.”

“(2) Withdrawal of a nominee under sub-rule (1) shall be effected by a written notification to the Clerk and shall be signed by the nominee personally and the secretary-general of the party which nominated him or her where a candidate was nominated by a political party.”

If I may use Chris Opoka as an example; according to this report, the Secretary-General of the party of UPC wrote to nominate him. The one who wrote withdrawing is Mr Olara Otunnu, the President of UPC. According to our rules, Olara Otunnu has no capacity to do that. (Applause) Therefore, that candidature, in as far as it conformed to the Rules of Procedure of our Parliament, stands valid.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, I do not think that we need to debate this matter here. The Clerk is going to issue the ballot paper according to the Rules of Procedure having satisfied herself who the secretary-general is in writing. The Clerk does not know between Olara Otunnu - there are so many factions in parties. So, leave that to us, please. Let us not have a debate over this matter.

Honourable members, that is the report. I do not want to manage political parties from here.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, as a whip of UPC, I want to confirm to the House that the secretary-general of the party and the chairperson of the electoral commission of the party personally nominated the candidate. I had a conversation with the secretary-general of the party and the candidate has the letter of the party president and there is no withdrawal of the candidature of UPC. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think leave that to the Clerk to ascertain who the secretary-general is and the rest we shall handle on Wednesday, please. Otherwise, I will have to administer parties from here and I cannot do that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, because of the time pressure-

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. I just asked for the Political Parties and Organisations Act to be brought to the Parliament. Unfortunately, we are moving a little faster. 

I remember when we were passing that law, we made the Chairman Electoral Commission to be in - I do not know which word – in charge of correspondences that relate to political parties. So, it was right for the Clerk to write to the Electoral Commission to ascertain the nature of leadership at the various political parties. The clarification I want to seek is whether the telephone conversation between the Clerk to Parliament and the Chairman of the Electoral Commission can form part of official correspondence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, I have already said that we are waiting. Those conversations were held, you have been informed, but we are waiting for the letters. Please, allow me to do my work. 

Honourable members, those are the two reports. On Wednesday we shall start at 9.00 O’clock. By then, we shall come with all the letters. I issued the notice about the 30th two weeks ago. We shall start at 9.00 O’clock because members must address the House. We agreed on that two weeks ago. 

The Clerk will publish the names for display during the course of tomorrow and then the voting will take place on Wednesday. We shall convene at 9.00 O’clock to allow the members to speak to us and then we shall vote. Thank you. Honourable members, House adjourned to 9.00 O’clock on Wednesday.

(The House rose at 4.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 May 2012 at 9.00 a.m.)
