Tuesday 24th May, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, it is with deep sorrow hat I have to announce the untimely death of hon. Daniel Kigozi, former Minister of Works in the National Resistance Movement Government and a Member of the NRC.  The late Kigozi died of heart attack at his home at Rubaga on Saturday 21st May 1994 at noon.  We shall remember the late Kigozi for his great contribution to this House, the Government and in any other fields where he did served the people of Uganda.  Let us stand up and observe one-minute silence in his honour.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

MOTION

(Debate Continues)

MR. MUKISA (Bukooli County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion.  The basis of my contribution will be a quotation from the Report that, ‘no education system is better than the quality of its teachers nor can a country be better than the quality of its education, hence, it is the quality of the teacher which ultimately determine the lot of the nation.’  It is further stated that I quote, ‘we note in our case that large numbers of untrained or poorly trained teachers at all levels of education, particularly at primary and secondary levels has had adverse effect on the quality and quantity of education of this country.’  It further stated, ‘Government has also been equally concerned about the long standing poor conditions of service for teachers that have made the teaching profession increasingly unrespectable and unattractive to potentially good and adequate would be teachers.’  It is important that we note here that we admit that the teaching profession has been unrespectable and unattractive to potentially would-be good teacher.  

Now, the determination of Government is stated be; ‘so as to provide adequate numbers of well trained teachers to improve the terms and conditions of service in the teaching profession and generally turning it into one of the most respectable and most attractive professions in the country.  That is our aim to turn education into the most respectable and most attractive professions,’ that is the teachers.  Now, what does the Paper propose to do?  The proposals are; incentives in the form of the salary structure, that is 40 per cent increase and profession allowance, housing allowances and such things.  To the effect that we say that a grade 3 teacher would get an extra Shs. 20,000/- per month, a grade 5, Shs. 30,000/- per month and so on up to a senior lecturer who would get Shs. 60,000/- and professor Shs. 80,000/- plus housing allowance of Shs. 10,000/- for those in town and Shs. 5,000/- for those in the rural schools; and then allowance for extra teaching lot.  

This is a good list, my opinion here already is, good as this list is, it is not very helpful because it has already been swallowed up by inflation.  Because I will give one example, an average secondary school teacher will now earn Shs. 5,978/- after the 40 per cent increase, he will earn his Shs. 40,000/- professional allowance, Shs. 10,000/- for housing allowance and perhaps about Shs. 598/- for extra teaching lot which is for 10 per cent of his salary.  Giving him Shs. 56,600/-.  This is equivalent to only 57 dollars, and Mr. chairman, who in this country can live on 57 dollars a month in any of the towns of Uganda, when a kilo of meat is over 1 dollar and a bunch of matooke is over 2 dollar?  I am using dollars here because no country can now afford to live in economic isolation, that explains why forex bureaus are everywhere and if as a nation we have decided that our currency becomes freely convertible, then let out living be freely convertible.  

My proposal is that we should start expressing salaries in terms of convertible currency if our workers are to remain internationally competitive in quality and output.  A secondary school teacher, fresh from university, I will use a year when perhaps I started teaching because I am a professional teacher.  In 1973, a fresh graduate was earning Shs. 1,330/- basic salary.  

In terms of dollars this was 190 dollars because then a dollar was about Shs. 7 whatever.  So, you can see that our average secondary school teacher today is earning 133 dollars less than what his counter part used to earn 21 years ago.  A teacher would be very happy today if his basic salary was reverted to the 1973 level and expressed in terms of dollars then.  This would give him Shs. 190,000, which is comparable to what the private sector is paying.  I know it is below what he is worse now, but it is better than what you intend to give him.  And, I dare say that if we do not take a bold step in this direction, we may find that the teaching profession will end up loosing more teachers to other professions and to the private sector and to outside countries especially now that South Africa has become independent.  

There are more deserters in education than they are in the army, I know because I am a teacher and I am one of those deserters that is why perhaps I am here.  So, if we are going to protect this noble profession, let us make up our mind now and let us pay the teacher well. (Applause)  I know the hon. Minister would say that the Wage Bill would be unmanageable.  

But I think as a nation, we have to set out priorities right.  If we say that the quality of our teachers will determine our lot, then let us equate our aspiration, quality wise to what we pay the teachers.  Let us reduce on what can wait, and pay for what must be paid for now.  Let us - perhaps, I know one of our biggest problems is the debt burden and the servicing of the debt burden.  Can we not explain our situation to some of these people so that the servicing of the debt burden is reduced such that we create capacity in way of education so that we can have a higher capacity to pay in future?  The nets incentive to teachers, I know if we did what I am suggesting or expressing, of the good money into dollars so that the Ugandan teacher is not exposed to internal inflation - because I know the dollar, since 1973, has also depreciated; but even then, if you brought it today the same amount of dollars then and you expressed it to today the salary would still be better.  So, the Uganda teacher would not have been exposed to international depreciation of the dollar, but at least, he would have been protected from the international depreciation of the shilling.  This is the gist of my argument.

Another incentive is housing.  I am not one of those people much as I am a teacher, I am not one of those people who subscribed to the idea of housing teachers at school, giving them houses at the compound, it makes them lazy that is the reason.  Let us pay them well, and out of their savings, because it is well know that the higher somebody’s income goes higher his level of savings.  But there is a level where he cannot save because his income will be so little that there will be nothing to save.  But should you expand it they will reach a level where his consumption will allow a margin for savings, so the idea here is if somebody is earning - if the cost of living - the average cost of living is let us say, 100 dollars, if you pay somebody 250 he may increase his consumption to 150 but he will still have a margin of 100 from which he can make a saving, this is a common sense I thought because the propensity to save increases within income.  

I would like to say that the saving these teachers would make out of their good salaries, given the savings would create with the money available saved there would be incentive for a private scheme - a private housing loan scheme which will develop and this will help to build houses for teachers, which as a government can in turn higher from the teachers themselves and assist them to pay the loans and also prepare them for retirement.  This is not something I am just talking about from the blue; I have seen it work, the Mwalimu Co-operatives is working very well in this direction in Kenya.  

So, if possible, I have seen it and it can work, and prepare for retirement, yes, the reason why people in the Civil Service are scared of retirement is because they have nowhere to retire to and nothing to retire to.  People have been known to swear affidavit to change their age, just because they want to remain on the jobs and remain in the houses; actually, some people remain on the jobs because of houses.  

I will now turn to the point of wastage.  The level of wastage in our country is alarming.  Wastage means, man power that is never given a chance or if it is given a chance through schooling drop outs at a very early age and then the dropping out at various levels, all this contributes to wastage.  

Forty per cent of school-going age children do not enter school at all.  About 60 per cent of those who enter primary one of drop out of school without completing the primary cycle, and 90 per cent of those who complete the primary cycle do not proceed to secondary schools.  I will give an example, if for instance in January 1980, 100 children were born, in January 1986, 60 of these children would enter P.1.  Already that is a guaranteed 40 per cent literate race for that age group.  

In December 1992/94 of those completed P.7, 36 of them having flopped out along the way, most of them below P.4 especially the girls.  In such a bunch of 24 about 18 boys and 6 girls, that is a ratio of 1 to 3 that means the girls drop out more and perhaps by - we are training these children by February 1993 only 2.4 of these children would enter Senior one, the remaining 21.6 children will remain at P.7 standard.  This is actually alarming; this shows that this country is actually still very illiterate and something must be done.  If the Ugandan population is very highly hypothetical, but I am putting it, if the Ugandan population of 17,000,000 people was one age group, then 6,800,000 would have been the people who have never gone to school, 6,100,000 are those who dropped out before completing primary; 3,200,000 are the ones who drop out at P.7 and about point 5, would be the number which went beyond primary, if we were to follow the other figures, and if we narrowed down the Ugandan population to one age group.  

I said, we must do something, I think what we must do now, we should make the available resources spread out in such a manner that it is not the few who managed to reach the top that benefit, but the majority who either never get the chance to start or drop out mid-way.  What I am saying is in a nutshell.  Cost sharing in higher institutions is necessary, inevitable and it must come, and I think we must unite as a House to defend it and explain it properly to the population because -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform him that if government was serious in combating corruption, that money could pay very well our primary, secondary education and possibly to university education.  Therefore, the question of cost sharing when most of the money is swindled should be looked into by the Government. Thank you.

MR. MUKISA:  Thank you very much for that contribution.  Hon. Wanendeya, that is very good contribution.  You have been in the public life for very long, I do not know how much you have done to stop the swindling.  But now, I hope you will start, if we can start to see how much we have save, then we can know the ratio of cost sharing because we are not saying that the parents must pay completely, we are talking of cost sharing and cost sharing means ratios. So, I would like to continue that it is coming and I think we should accept it. (Interjection)- Well, it is coming, may mean the future and the future is indefinite.  Now, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor of the House that, I think in all seriousness this House assumes a collective responsibility for the common wealth of the country.  Now, all my argument is that we all must help the theory and philosophy of cost sharing when the country cannot at the moment feed even itself.  This is to me not understanding the economy of the whole country.  Now, why can we not feed those people for example first, when we are talking about cost sharing?  First of all, people are dying.  Therefore – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  That is an argument.  Continue.

MR. MUKISA:  Thank you for protection, Mr. Chairman.  As I was saying, I was talking from a point of a bit of research.  In out time about 20, 15 years ago, the majority of the children who ended up in higher institutions of learning university, vice versa, were children from the very poor families because the system then allowed them to progress up to the end.  Right now as we talk, the children who are in these tertiary institutions are not the children of the very poor.  Some of these children of the very poor you know very well, the children who are mostly in these tertiary institutions, are mostly children of either members -(Interruption) The fees structure right now has actually in a way phased out the child of the very poor from entering university.  So, if there are few who make it to the university an arrangement should be put in place to have them identified and educated and those who can afford, let them pay.

MR. MAGEZI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Could I ask the hon. Member on the Floor to clarify on this position?  He is saying that now the children of the poor are not anywhere near the tertiary education.  At the same time, he is saying cost sharing should be introduced.  How does he marry the two, because I cannot contribute now when it is not even compulsory because I am poor.  How am I going to be able to cost share when it is compulsory?

MR. MUKISA:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, this is a sign of the persistent disease in this House, lack of patience.  Most hon. Members never have time to listen to people to the end.  I have started with higher institutions of learning and I am saying whose child, given a higher percentage, whose child is there?  I say what should be done there?  

At the lower institutions, that let us start with free education and that is what I mean when we say that the money which is helping the few at the university must be brought down at the primary level to make sure that the rate of wastage which I was talking about is stopped so that more children can go to primary schools with this money we have saved from not educating the children of the able; so that the children of the unable at lower levels can start.  

And, in the same breadth, I support the system of starting with P.4 up to P.8 and then coming back to P.3, to P.2 and P.1 and it will work.  I would have supported starting with P.1. but as we talk now, we do not have the facilities in place.  But with P.4, those children who have reached that level at least, they should be allowed to continue up to P.8 without dropping out.  That is my argument.  

Universalisation of education is very important and if we all agreed as a nation and if we as leaders took the lead to explain exactly how the payment burden would be relieved at various levels, I am sure this country would benefit out of our contribution and mind you, if this is the trend everywhere, people must bear the burden of their economy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende):  I stand to support the White Paper.  Mr. Chairman, the history of our education has always been shaped by Commissions.  The last revision of our education system was in 1963; the Castle Report.  The aims and organisation of that Commission was aimed at meeting the national needs of the 1960s; mainly to produce highly trained manpower, to quickly replace the Europeans and Indians that were going.  So the fact that we have not revised our education system since 1963 means that we are terribly out of date, that we are no longer meeting our national needs, that we badly need an orientation to meet the needs of 1990s and not those of 1960s.  The revision that was to be there in 1978, the report never saw the light of the day because of the political changes and the turmoil that politicians brought to this country during that time.  

The changes that have taken place since then - it does not mean we have not had any changes since 1963, but that changes we have had have been piece-meal depended on the zeal of whoever was guiding education at that time and nobody has ever taken an overall view of the whole education system to see that we produce what we badly need.  All the evils of society have been heaped on education system.  Whenever there has been anything bad, people have turned round to flog the educationist and the education system.  

So, I hope and it is my earnest hope that Members here will give a real consideration to this White Paper and we view it not only as cost sharing but to look at it in its totality so that we can get a good paper out of NRC.  I would like to congratulate the NRM Government for first of all, having appointed the Commission and secondly, coming out with a White Paper though probably we should have done it earlier.  

The White Paper calls for a revolution; a real revolution in education, it needs to be met with evolutionary thinking on the part of the educators, on the part of the public and on the part of NRC people who are debating it today.  What is this revolution?  This revolution also calls for political commitment above everything else.  We need to commit ourselves, we need to pass this paper in the form that this country is determined to support it because if we do not, most of these very good ideas will remain on the drawing board and will not be properly implemented.  

I would like to welcome the White Paper first of all, in its attempt to democratise education.  The UN Declaration on Human Rights Article 26(i) said, ‘education is a right to everyone, education and primary education or elementary education should be compulsory and free, technical education and professional education should be generally available to everybody, higher education equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.’  That was 1947.  So, since we have not achieved that, it shows that we are very far behind everybody else.  

In 1961, African Ministers met in Addis-Ababa and declared that by 1980, there will be universal primary education in all African countries.  1980 has come and gone, we have not seen it.  In 1990, I had the honour of going to a World Education Conference in Thailand and at the end of it, all States of the world and all donors to education held our hands and promised this country or this world that by the year 2000, we shall have education for all and I did it on Uganda’s behalf.  I turned and looked at Prof. Asavia Wandira who was behind me and I asked him, do you think I am promising the right thing?  Shall we be able to achieve it?  Well, this is an attempt towards that.  We are part of the world; and we have promised that there will be universal primary education for all.  This White Paper is a first step in democratisation.  I am sure all of you in the CA election have noticed how illiterate our electorate is and I am sure most of you have come to believe that there will be no proper democracy until everybody can read and write for himself or for herself because people being blindly put to vote where they did not wish to.  So, when you are debating this Paper and debating who should be educated, I hope you shall have that firmly in your mind.  

I subscribed to the thinking that universal primary education will help in spreading and quickening up the industrialisation of this country because we shall have a literate and trainable work force.  It will improve the nutritional status of the population of Uganda and therefore, improve our health and improve our life span, which should be longer if everybody is educated.  It is expensive what this Paper is demanding is very expensive and when we do pass it, we should be prepared to pay the price that universal primary education is demanding.  

Above all, it asks for a re-allocation of resources and this, we cannot avoid.  We are asking to re-allocate resources from higher education to give it to more people to share in the primary school.  Why?  The question you need to answer is who has the right to be educated?  When I look at those who are being educated today, remember when we pass the budget every year, 50 per cent of the cost of fees alone - not the total cost of school -in primary education is allocated by this House.  65 per cent of the fees in secondary school is allocated by this House.  

When we come to higher education, almost everything is paid for; they even pay you for going home which they have never done before reached that stage.  So, what you do, you ask yourself, who has the right to be educated?  Is it the rich who have had money to pay for the nursery school, learnt words of English and got selected into primary one, in what we call good schools?  Or is it the fittest that have survived the very stiff examination?  Very often because they have rich parents who have paid for coaching and extra looking after those children or the rich and influential parents who have had influence of the headmasters to place their children in secondary schools or who should be educated?  The elite who are very few about 10 per cent of the age set who go to tertiary institutions.  Are those the people we should pay for?  Or are we prepared to take a political decision to educate everybody; that is to give a chance to everyone that is born in Uganda to share at least in the national cake and be given primary education.  

The Paper calls for assistance to the poor who today are not in school.  The children of the very poor and ignorant are not in school.  The children of the poor stop at primary four and drop out.  The children of the poor do not get an access to secondary education because they cannot afford fees.  The children of the poor do not survive he secondary school because they cannot get that extra coaching to compete for the few places there.  When we continue to say that, we should maintain higher education and not universal primary education, we are continuing to say that the privileged should remain privileged and the poor should be condemned ever after.  

This Paper would give a chance to girls, who for cultural education and economic reasons, dropout at P.4 to P.7, and who are marginalised because of the practical things all of you know quite well.  The country’s rural children who so far have no equal access or no equal chances will compete with the urban who have access to nursery schools and who are able to go to secondary schools these days.  

It considers the disabled who are often hidden in our homes and never see the school room, it considers for the first time the gifted who most people do not think about because we always try to educate just the average child.  

It also considers the nomad who because of reasons of being unsettled does not see the classroom.  I would like to welcome in this Paper changes and I would like to commend Members to begin to think about them.  In the debates so far, we have concentrated on universal primary education, on cost sharing and on teachers but this paper calls for quite a lot of changes that should not go unnoticed.  We have changes like having the National Council for Higher Education which will rationalise the establishment of secondary education, which will for the first time probably give us standards and measure the standards of our education.  We have a National Council for non-formal education.  

This is a new change, in this country, and we are spending a lot of money on adult education, on literary campaigns, the Ministry of Health will spend the Ministry of Local Government will spend, the Ministry of Agriculture will spend.  But there is nobody planning for an over all non-formal education and there is a group of people aged 5 to 15 who are completely left out, who would benefit from this non-formal education.  They are left out because they are not in the education system; they are left out because community development and others take people from the age of 15.  

So, if you are 5 to 15 and you are not in school, they wait for you for adult campaigns when you have turned 16, 18.  So, for the first time, we shall have a real planning for non-formal education.  There is for the first time, a directorate for pre-primary education.  It is true we do not have money for nursery school but if someone is going to give it, for the first time the country is saying we should train teachers to meet the needs of pre-primary schools and we should look at the curriculum so that people do not just cheat us, put up a ‘Kiwempe’ and say this is a nursery school, come and join and nobody is looking.  There is a directorate for technical and vocational education and we hope this will also meet the needs of vocationalising.  

This Paper calls for vocationalisation of the education, which is very, very expensive.  Vocationalisation, unless we are prepared to pay for it, will remain on paper and then 10 years later, we shall turn round and say we said we should vocationalise but we have not given them enough money.  So, we have not achieved it, and I would like to welcome continuous assessment because for the first time, we are lifting the burden of the child, we are allowing them growth that is even, we do not tell them to come and eat once on Christmas and starve during the other times.  

So, continuous education will reduce external pressure and will probably see that the teachers teach properly but all this demands a lot of money.  This is what I said, we should be prepared to make a political commitment.  We should be prepared to meet this paper with a revolutionary mind so that we divert and re-allocate our resources to educate our population.  Many people have been asking, why do we begin with P.4?  

I must declare, I also had part in the preparation of this.  You had to weigh.  If today I say everybody who should go to primary one come, the school is compulsory and probably free which is probably not, what scenario would you have?  Would you have the 10 old people who have never been to school turning up for primary one, you will have the 9, 8, 7, 6, all of them will come, do you have the teachers, do you have resources, do you have the ability to meet the influx of all those people?  Then, if the answer is no, then we said, okay, let us see where can we begin, where we can logically think that we can begin with a degree of success and the degree of success will look at the primary section, you will look at the statistics and see that primary four, all those who have had a wish to take their children to school, that is where they begin to fall out, either because they are economic assets in the production because they help or already money has run or parents have died.  

So, if you take everybody in P.4 and take them, you are giving also the country the time to prepare to come back and provide for everybody.  But at least, you saying those children who have been P.4 will have a chance of finishing eight schools, eight-year primary school.  This Paper calls for a re-organisation - primary one to primary eight.  I have not heard people giving serious thought to what it means to adding one year to primary.  It means extra classrooms, it means extra teachers, it means keeping those children at school for eight years at public expense, and when I usually drive around the country, I look at the young children we have and say, we have such a big problem because most parents just produce without caring and we have so many, so many of them are out of school, as you drive you see them. So, if you begin with P.1, you should be aware that we shall have an influx and that you have too many that you will not be able.  That was the rationale behind saying, let us start with P.4.  

Thank you for giving me this chance.  I will go on and on, but I would like to end with a concentration on girls’ education.  Although I said that I do have - although I said that I did not take part in the preparation of this, but now as a Member of Parliament, I would like also to launch my descending voice because when you say you are discouraging boarding schools, in today’s problems, and at the sametime, you say this country is prepared to make positive discrimination for girls, I think you cannot continually give positive discrimination to the girls looking at the real cause. It has been proved that the girls’ schools, entirely girls’ secondary schools do better than girls in cored schools. (Applause) 

You look at the results the way Namagunga tops - when you look at the results of O’ level, A’ level, you look the way Namagunga tops all the schools boys inclusive and Gayaza and so on, and Mary Hill, its because they have at time to be educated properly to make their growing problems with people who understand them and be able to solve them at that time, and by the time they meet other destructions, they have already formed a character, they already know how to send for themselves, and they can stand.  

I can also tell you Sir, that I am a product of such education.  I would like to give it to full support.  I know we do not have money, so we cannot encourage opening up new girls’ schools, but I would like to recommend to this House that if we added a stream on the already established - already schools that are doing better add one stream of 30-40 right through, we shall have more girls, the 1.5 will come as a positive discrimination at university.  But we do not want to depend on it year in, year out.  We would like to compete fairly because we can, give us the chance lower down, look at the causes that make us drop out, give us more girls schools that will bring more girls that the competition for entry to university, then you will not need any more 1.5, we shall have been equal.  

Secondly, I would like to recommend the Ministry of Education to have a very close look at the text books right through primary one, and see whether they make the girls look at themselves positively.  I was flipping through one of the mathematics books just by sheer accident, and you may turn pages before you even see a name of a girl there.  Or if you do, you see the boy named first, and the girl second, does that make look at myself positively as a girl or does it naturally make me feel I should be at the bottom?  

I would also like to encourage the Ministry of Education where we have good cored schools like Buddo, like Nabumali, like Nyakasura and so on, let us add more dormitory for girls so that they become truly co-educational so that their needs are thought about as main stream needs and marginalised these are called boy’s cored but they are actually boys’ schools with a few girls that may be the problem.  We would like to more from the error of positive discrimination to the era where boys and girls will compete naturally and then you will find that girls - there will be more girls both in public life and higher education because when God gave us the brains, he gave everybody library, he did not say, these are brains for the men, this is for the girls.  

Lastly, I have promised the Minister or Education that I shall talk about phasing out of the double session schools.  I would like him to have a serious look at it because when I was at Gayaza High School as Deputy Head in 1963, I was put on the committee that planned the five-year development plan for education for this country.  Why we introduced double session, we looked at the concentration of population around Kampala, at the possibility of everybody up country having somebody who can house for a day school and we argued if we give them good facilities and you will see that most of them - most the schools around here benefited from the USAID whatever it was extension so that you have more children many sitting from a secondary school using the facilities economically and the difference between someone who goes to a double stream and someone who goes full time, is just one hour.  Those who have double stream, have five hours, those who have morning and afternoon, get only six hours.  

So, they have only one more hour.  You will look at the extra curricular activities particularly those for boys, the schools around Kampala do quite well, and they are competing fairly well.  When you say they should go to other set light schools in Kajansi, Wampewo and so on, you are sending them not to the Third World Schools but to the Fourth World Schools, you are leaving the laboratories and other facilities that were meant for so many to just a few, and definitely around this area Kampala, I do not represent Kampala but I represent Mubende, and a few of Mubende children are there I hope.  But there will be a competition for the few places there; there will be quite a number of people who would have benefited.  I was talking to somebody from Kololo SSS and he told me Kololo SSS has produced quite a number of children that have gone to engineering at Makerere. Why?  Because they have a good laboratory.  It will be a pity if that laboratory is going to be shared by just a few for the sake of the one extra hour that they will get.  At least, we are trying to make the national cake go across.  Let us also make the secondary education more available to the Kampala children.  Thank you very much.

MR. AKURE (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the White Paper.  From the Minister’s statement when he was tabling the Bill, he talked about school fees which a student pays when he goes to Makerere that is about 600,000 per term, at the end of the year, a child ends up by paying 1.8 million if I got him right.  I know government policy is a government policy, and it has of course, to go as the House liberates a Motion is either passed or rejected.  But I find it Sir, a child of a poor man down the grass root, may not be able to afford to pay this 1.8 million shillings a year -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I clarify on this point, I think it is very largely misunderstood even when it is written in black and white.  The White is not proposing the payment of tuition fees at tertiary level; that should not be in question.  The Paper is saying tuition fees - the maintenance of facilities, the provision of books and libraries and laboratories and the payment of teachers be made by the government.  What it is proposing which is mixed up is that, accommodation and feeding be progressively met by the parent, and where the parent is unable to afford, then a bursary scheme is put in place for the students to borrow and repay back that money slowly on getting employment.  

So, we should agree on the facts but, not on creating situations.  Because I have heard many people talk of school fees, school fees and 10 million that is not in the Paper.  That must be somewhere else.  So, I wanted to make this clear to this House and the public that we should disagree where the issues are real issues but not on some imaginations.  

So, honourable, the proposal is, the government continues to pay the tuition fees maintenance of education facilities.  Provision of books, laboratories and the payment of teachers. Then the parent takes over the feeding and accommodation of the child, and where the parent is unable, a loan scheme is put in place that is what is being proposed and that is what should be discussed.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. AKURE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I thank the Minister for Information.  All the same, it seems it cannot mare really a difference, it is still expensive for these children of the poor, I know for us here as we talk now, we may afford, but thinking of a man, a woman in a rural area, we may find, we are going to cut out most of the experience who will be joining Makerere. This problem of accommodation I do not know how the Minister of Education is going to handle the issue of accommodation. 

One time, I was battling with the Minister of Education, my four were kicked from the university they said, you go and find where you can stay, I had the struggle telling him now, where do I put these people?  Are you able to provide a helicopter to pick them from Kotido every morning and take them back in the evening?  

So, you find there are some people here whose parents are near, but they are accommodated, a man from Kisoro, from Moyo, from Kitgum, does not get accommodated - okay, if it means let us say when we are having these exercise going on, I think what the Minister of Education should really consider is the people who come from far so that they are given a priority, in accommodating them in Makerere.  Accommodation not admission, admission is different from accommodation.  

For some people who have not got me right, because most of these people have no relatives here in Kampala, but a person where relatives are here, should actually stay at home; and also Sir, - you men you are getting me?  

I was saying for your information so that you put in record that accommodation; when these students are admitted, the priority should be given to people who come from far and then others can come in, because you cannot expect a child from Kisoro to operate either from Mbarara every morning and goes back in the evening to look for accommodation, I think the best thing the Minister of Education should come with a policy that, at least, people who come from far are considered.  This exercise of teachers has been going on, I do not know the census, I do not know how far that exercise has been conducted, in my district Sir, the office of the Minister there in the first place, it has not enough staff.  

For your information if you are not aware, I have only one district officer, there is no inspector of schools, there is no nothing only one DO, one, and that is a very large district, we used to have three inspector of schools where you transferred them, I do not know and you have never replaced them. How do you transfer somebody and you do not replace?  This is a very serious issue, and I think -

THE CHAIRMAN:  Go ahead, go ahead.

MR. AKURE:  So, I thank the Education Minister must ensure that every district must be well staffed, the DEO alone cannot do a, b, c, d, he cannot become inspector of schools, he cannot become DEO at the sametime, for your information also we do not have even assistant DEO, it is only one man.  How does this man operate?  How, how really?  How can one man run all these offices?  It is very unfair if the Ministry is not aware that there is a district called Kotido existing on earth, and in most cases we have been helping this man to get some data.  Whenever I want - he has used most of us the NRC Members when we go out for these public rallies, he uses us to get some information, which he requires.  The Holy not transport no what.  

The other time also, the Minister of Education gave some motor cycles, they were two motor cycles and instead of giving the motor cycle the district, one was retained in a Ministry and I have been following all along this motor cycle where it went.  I do not know maybe Members here in the Ministry have taken upon themselves -(Interruption)- of course, knowing that they may send somebody I know the Minister will send somebody eventually, and admission of these students into Makerere Sir, has been a bit very disturbing. I see on certain occasions that we may have a student from upcountry who gets about three principle passes, he is not taken to Makerere and then you find there are some who get two principle passes and they are taken.  I do not know really –(Interjection)- yes, unless - okay, let me address the chair.  These are facts even if you want me to give the details, Sir, -(Interruption) 

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I happen to know a little bit about Makerere University, and admissions there all and I knew, that we had strict rules by which students were admitted to Makerere University and these rules we are strictly on academic merit only.  Is it in order, therefore, that an hon. Member of this House should make such serious allegations without any substantiation?  Mr. Chairman, is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He can substantiate it.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, I am sorry hon. Kagonyera left Makerere long five years ago, so he does not know exactly what is happening now. (Laughter)  So, I want to tell him, let us just enjoy our politics about Makerere University, you leave because you are no longer admitting them.  Sir, I really find that is a difficult situation and if things are done -(Interruption)

MR. OPIO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like o inform the speaker on the Floor, that even if you are a candidate from Moroto, Kotido, maybe having three principles, the three principles may be weak and the principles are awaited according to their strength; there is principle A, B, C, E and if your candidate has three E’s, definitely he is going to compete with the student with two principles with AA, that is what I wanted to inform the speaker.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for giving information but I think one time, I remember if I quote the press sometime, 1992/91 where; if somebody was sneaked from Makerere having sneaked, he or she studies in Makerere and later on, when the Registrar checks, he found someone who he did not admit, I think he was either a child of a big source, I do not know.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my - the hon. Friend from Kotido that Makerere - and I was discussing this matter yesterday with the Academic Registrar, they admit people purely on merit, rank to merit, and the students he is talking about, forged the papers and then, when the forgery was discovered, the student was discontinued, but on the forged surface of it, he had the grade, but they were forged and on discovery of the forgery, the student was discontinued.  I wanted to help him on that.

Secondly, on his admission of students from Kotido, that is precisely what this paper is trying to do.  If you are living in Kampala, to go and borrow money for your child to go and sleep in Makerere, you will think twice, but obviously if you are from Kotido now, this programme will be of great assistance students from up-country rather than at the moment where the children of the well to do who score the highest points are the ones who are admitted first and foremost in the Halls of residence and you could help us on this because that is a programme intended to help those who are disadvantaged.  And he quotes it as if it is supposed to assist those.  And finally, it is sensible on our part to give on inspector two motorcycles.  Thank you Sir. (Laughter)

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, I was not only talking about students in Kotido but, broadly, I was talking broad sense, not necessarily the Karimojong and of course normally he has been seeing us battling, how these boys could be admitted.  If we do not push through your office, through the Commissioner’s Office, obviously some of these students are never taken and this one you will agree.  

I might also thank the Ministry of Education for one thing they have done, at least, once in a while, for actually taking these grade 111, I mean these licensed teachers for further training.  It happened that about a month ago, I saw a good number of untrained teachers being taken to Kotido Teacher’s College for further training which training I am told will take four years and I think if the Minister of Education has been doing that before, at least, we would have had trained teachers in this country and I think and I hope the Minister of Education is not going to stop here, because once we do not establish a system at the grass root all these other things may not work.  You send a child to a secondary school, you may send a child who is not mature enough and I think, he should continue and also conduct refresher courses for some of these teachers.  

These days teachers  - some of them have decided just to remain where they are. If you are a Grade III, you do not want to think of further training; you just want to remain there until you retire. But I think let the exercise be carried out in terms of qualified such that teachers might always go for refresher courses.  Because by doing so, you are now making them - you are reminding them what is going on.  

I do not feel a bit embarrassed, especially last week but one, when the students were demonstrating here, and the way the students were being handled, I felt it was so bad, and I think they need to also show the ability they have if they were demonstrating for a good cause or for a bad cause. They should have been told that I think what you are doing is bad.  But now, when the Police begin beating them, you see some of them hurt themselves and I think it is not a good system really, it is not a good system.  

If there is a problem like this problem of the East African Community, they matched very quietly, sad and then they were addressed, and I think even the students, if they came along those lines as long as they were not destructive, they would have only been - I mean the same thing should have been applied to them.  Now beating them really, is a very bad thing.  Supposing Amanya’s child were beaten on the head, what would have his father said?  He would really feel very embarrassed.  

I think let us take everybody as a human being and we understand the situation of the students, you know the students are always like that, they cannot accept the Government until they are explained, that is when they have got to understand.  But if you go on beating, them chasing them like that, you think beating them, can teach them a good lesson, instead you are making them more child and tomorrow you will have a lot of problems.  And I think also the Chairman - on salaries of these teachers, lecturers, I think the Government as we are now talking about the White Paper, the Government should look into the problem of paying these teachers so much that we reduce these burdens.  We pay a lot of PTA, and this is the reason why we are paying a lot of money for PTA; it is just because, to pass some of this money to add on teachers’ salary and I think if government comes up with a clear policy whereby teachers are paid well, this business of PTA, paying shs. 200 per term will not arise, I believe schools like Buddo pay a lot of money but in some other areas like in our place here, PTA is about Shs. 25,000 you find that parents are crying too much that this money is much -

MR. MARK TIVU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor that, when we talk of PTA, it does not mean that it is used strictly for the payment of teachers.  PTA is used for the construction of school, maintenance of various structures in the school, therefore, you find that in most of the schools today, because of the meagre assistance the Government is giving for instance, today a student gets Shs. 45 from the Government.  How do we maintain the structures?  Therefore, when we talk of PTA, we are trying to talk of the total contribution of the parents towards the development of the schools.  Thank you.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, I am aware about that, for him, if he is not aware, part of his money goes for the welfare I know, PTA is supposed to be meant for construction and doing other developmental issues, but at the moment, if my colleague is not aware, some of this money goes to the welfare of teachers.  

So, if we do not address this issue of paying the teachers’ well, we shall always have a problem of strikes, and you have had and you have been practically in most cases the lecturers in Makerere, ITEK, they have always been striking just because they get little money and our children miss so many lessons and I believe the Minister of Education has always been tough with these institutions whenever they have a sit down strike; he has always been on move to ensure that something is done, and I think Government should actually come out with a clear policy, some of these teachers are paid well and our children should not miss studies - you imagine, students staying for one complete month, they are not being attended to, they are studying on their own, just because the teachers have striked.  

Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Education to attend the problem of teachers right from primary to University so that we avoid this business of striking each time.  The budget, by the way - we have always been supporting the Minister of Education, and we have never refused to give Minister of Education money here. It is only the Ministry of Finance which does the cutting of the resources of education, so therefore, the NRC normally has given you the money and I think you are second to Defence, yes, this financial year, they got about Shs. 20 billion.  If I am not mistaken, they are second to Defence.  

Therefore, it is not us who normally to give you the money, we always wash our hands, we tell you, Education Ministry that is you share, but if Ministry of Finance cuts the budget, what do we do?  We have always to quarrel, you are aware, not only your Ministry which is being disturbed, all these ministries we approve it here, but then tomorrow, you find it reduced by a half at times a quarter like for the case of these KDA where - we gave Shs.48 million, they reduced to 12, imagine it is not the NRC who are refusing to give you the money.  So I think - do not take me to KDA.  Sir, I think if the Ministry of Education can really attend to these problems of these institutions better, we shall always have a good understanding between the Ministry and higher learning institutions.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also stand to support the Motion on the Floor but there are a lot of questions Sir.  You see the idea of changing the requirements as per that paper are concerned, I do agree if we were altogether okay - I am taking you seriously on the basis of economical undertaking now throughout Uganda especially for us in the East and North where we are vandalised properly to zero almost when we were okay.  

For the first time when I lived to see up to the 60’s Iteso were second to Baganda in financing their children, no doubt because we have everything; we had cows, goats, and we had every equipment to get money.  Now, in these circumstances why should we bring this kind of policy requirement when we cannot do anything otherwise?  For us people now say, maybe this policy is intended to ground us completely so that we cannot compete with the brains of this country.  If not, why?  It is terrible, and it is really straining us. Everybody should have a chance to get educated in this country for example, since the war ignorance, was declared in this country immediately after independence.  I am asking, which Government will win this war?  Which?  If we can now say, we are staring from primary four and even primary one, primary 2, primary 3, how can we really educate our people?  

There was no need for this civic education during the CA elections if everybody went to school. We could listen or read from papers. But I am telling you, up to now, nearly 70 per cent are illiterate in this country, when we have declared war against ignorance.  Why do we fight unpeaceful wars which come politically, and militarily and leave this one, the war which affects everybody whether you are not in a party or you are pro-party, but the war is a war which has given Ugandans a lot of ‘Haja’ everywhere; you cannot progress when illiterate people are many in the market, many on the road, many in agriculture, and many everywhere.  It is this one that cannot really ride economy properly.  

I am appealing to government that if the time come right to start compulsory education, then I start from primary one, obviously there is a lot of - you might say, there is no money, but then I look out at budget.  Why do we give some priorities to some area only?  I think this is not a war.  

Last time I asked somebody here to give me some information about the allocation of serious budgets, which are too heavy, we have some money that we borrow but we mis-allocate these funds properly.  I think this country should be called upon, moreso Government to re-visit how we allocate our estimates, because if we cannot fight this war, then we shall also end up with interim period without winning the war of ignorance.  I can assure you.  This country needs education so that we can all follow what is happening.  It is really very disappointing if on the day of elections some people could not even read, if they are told to put a thumb on the box they put on a candidate.  

When we are here that we are changing education - you see these are the things we should really be very serious with on the ground.  I admit the idea was good, it is only very good when everybody is with some wealthy, but in our case, we shall say, it is deliberately put to disown us; to stop us on progress because I know we have capable brains, for example, and we have children in areas like Kalaki, you find a mother killed, a father killed, uncles killed by rebels, by government troops by Karimojong, and by disease; now what shall we do with brains?  These are diseases and these children are very intelligent; they have got capable brains.  

I am asking the government that let us be very serious to make sure that these good brains are not just dropped because they have failed just to pay school fees some where and we should allow competition to be in education - okay, we are trying to say that some well to do children in Buganda and so on, but sometimes people also work hard, they also work hard to put these children why should we say that, because these people who have got opportunity because they are well placed they should not be given a chance no, if somebody has got brains and he has competed in the class, why not? This is what the British people did when they were educating us. Competition was necessary in school from primary school, and secondary school, and that is why there was grade 1, grade II, and even these aggregates 

So, I am arguing that for the time being, instead of starting paying from a universal state, maybe a percentage will be agreed upon, like one third, to try with, if you want to make sure that the small money on top there is reduced. Otherwise, if I may ask, how much are we going to save by not saying the university, so that the primary schools in Uganda gain? Can somebody give me those figures so that I am convinced? There is no way, because Ministry of Education is still given little money.

MR. NTIMBA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that what it costs to educate a student at the University here in Uganda is equivalent to what it goes to education 100 children to a primary school.  

MR. ELYAU:  Okay, even then, I still maintain to the Chairman that, the Minister of Education receives very little allocation of her resources.  I think so that the wars achieved, this Ministry should be given special consideration, because it is dealing with a war that affects everybody; the war of ignorance.  I am telling you we cannot put up these wars, we shall reach the year 2000 when still we have more than 50 per cent illiterate. Children do not bother even to have any teacher because teachers runaway from Teso seven years, back to Buganda to look for greener pastures. And I can assure, although we have secondary schools here, in a given secondary school you find out of 12 teachers, only two or three are qualified teachers, and here we say, we have got schools upcountry.  

The allocation of teachers is done badly even if you wanted a place, like us in Soroti District, the so-called BES, I mean the Education Officers, could still allocate good teachers to their areas, leaving areas which are not influenced properly without proper, good and assessed teachers, and that is what we have.  That is why we are suffering inconveniences of getting below margin in every exam.  This disease will not be cured until the Minister takes trouble to make sure that there must be some regulation which posts the teacher who is well-trained also to go to upcountry schools to get the same education if we have got to match together.  Otherwise, we shall remain behind, if you are number 20, you remain number 20 and then you go back to number 23.  It is terrible and that is why you see people getting excited, moreso, people who come from upcountry when they are in Buganda, and see these things, when they are in Ankole, see these things and they get excited and say we are cheating them. We must have a programme, which can allow us to continue all of us like Ugandans, with me to have one cent.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the speaker holding the Floor as to how much he has done on children in Ntungamo, Bushenyi or Mbarara, this Ankole he is talking about, who actually make it through primary school as opposed to his own rather than the inflammatory Teso, Teso, Teso.

MR. ELYAU:  Mr. Chairman, if I may clarify, recently even our Head of State said that, the West get jobs because they are more educated.  Why did we make that statement?  That one proves the truth.  Let us not hide the fact -(Interjection)- obviously, it is education that is what I mean.  How can you come to the university if there is no primary school?  So he was very honest.  That statement gave us a lot of headache to find out what can we do so that we also catch up with people in Ntungamo.  We do not hate you, but we want to have the means, we are all Ugandans, we must ride together.  If we are going to lead this country peacefully, let us balance the scale.  There is nothing that is as painful as education itself.  Let us miss the job, but education we must get it.  If I go to my firm, I must be educated, I must be able to operate my computer, I must be able to operate my tractor, and I must know the speed-readings.  That is what I mean; do not give me to a job of manager somewhere that I will be educated.  In Europe, I have seen people go to schools to get manuals for their yard, and for their mechanism.  

So, in Uganda I am only happy that this Paper talks about technology.  It is true; if we had first science and technology, sixty years is a long time, but now we would be able to do manufacturing business ourselves, we would not be hiring expatriates but because we were deceived to be teachers, to be District Commissioners, to be Doctors, full stop, we never did commerce, we never went to run ginneries, that is why we are failing even co-operatives.  

So, I think the paper is talking well but I am saying, are we all reading?  I am not disagreeing, are we all ready now?  If we are not ready, are you gong to give provision so that those places that do not have facilities should be catered for differently.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I fully sympathise with my Colleague, hon. Elyau but I would like to give him some information, on what the government has put in place in the short-run to redress the situation.  He is aware of the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP); the money has been now disbursed and we are about to start on the programme of constructing. I am talking about education now; primary schools in the area and Teacher Training Colleges and Technical Colleges. We have also been having a PAPSCA Programme and Kumi and Soroti were part of the ten districts that benefited from this Programme; and you will remember that we spent a good part in his area.  

Thirdly, you may recall that in the 1990/91 Budget, there was a heated debate here when we allocated all the money for development to Teso College so that it could be brought back to normal.  I defended it here very violently when many people vigorously rather when a number of people were saying that we should distribute this money across the country and Teso College has now been fully rehabilitated and it is operational.  There is a special programme going on now for training of teachers in the North and North East so that we can have a requisite number of trained teachers to man our education institutions and, finally, hon. Elyau may recall that when I visited his constituency an NGO had built a very wonderful primary school and he wanted to turn into a secondary school but we persuaded him not to do so because in order to go to secondary school, you must finish primary.  

So, I appreciate his concern but definitely, it is not true that the government is not doing anything.  There is even the re-stocking programme for the cattle so it may not be enough but it is not true that the government is not doing anything.  There is even the re-stocking programme for the cattle, though it may not be enough, but it is not true to say that the concerned about the situation, it is not true that I was born in Ankole by accident, I never asked my father and my mother to marry and produce me there, but I am a Ugandan by outlook.  Thank you very much. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Minister gave information about the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme which programme has been over played in my view.  The total programme as of now is being funded at a level of about 87 million dollars for three years covering 11 districts and most of it, in fact, it taken up by this section of the road which is not even on the North but 30 million dollars, that leaves 57 million dollars for three years for 11 districts.  

Now, if you divide this between the programmes obviously, they are so small that the impact is going to be extremely minimal so that in my view this so-called NURP is being over played and you will notice that even in the national budget, we are missed out in the North because of this Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme.  Every time you ask for money, it is NURP and yet if you recall go down to details, you find that it is very minimal, it is no going to do what it is really supposed to do.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Information.  In the current budget, Sir, of the Ministry of Education, there is over 50 million shillings for the rehabilitation of Sir Samuel Baker and, Sir that is not part of NURP.  The three schools in for rehabilitation in the current budget is Sir Samuel Baker, Kabalega Secondary School and Tororo Girls, whose roofs collapsed.  That is the information that could be noted.  And the rehabilitation of Sir Samuel Baker is going on now as we speak.

MR. ELYAU:  Mr. Chairman, you can see how things go.  Mr. Chairman, let me advise you that the NURP as of saying per say, it is there by words comforting this country that there is something happening.  I am challenging the Minister that if there is any school which is now ready constructed under NURP, let us go and open it soon.  

I want to inform this House that the Minister has told you that there was a primary school built by NGO, that is true, the NURP started to come but the NGO came seven months later on and they have finished the building in 12 months, but when will NURP finish any school ever in my area?  Some are not even on the wall plate at all.  I do not know what is trying it up, I was thinking that maybe it is being delayed in Gulu and Kitgum but I am shocked to see that a man also equally from Kitgum or Gulu is complaining.  Even water there are schools without water and children walk in 10 miles away for water and we are told that the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP) will give us boreholes, will give us roads.  You go to my road now, I cannot even pass.  It has rained to the better of a farmer but it is dangerous.  That philosophy will delay Uganda thinking that we are being given an answer, it is just a song, NURP, NURP, but there is nothing on the ground. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  

MR. ELYAU:  Mr. Chairman, again I want this House not to be derailed that the re-stocking in Teso is pleasing anybody except for the programme, which the President has just started that we should get some two oxen and so on for each family that has not even stepped up.  What I have only seen on the ground is that the government has done well, it has helped the rebels who surrendered and they have sustained their assistance.  Those are the ones we have seen now in Teso but the re-stocking went to the wrong hands although the government had good intentions, those who operated it be they Iteso, or what spoilt the whole thing.  

Recently in Soroti a DA was clashing with an Assistant DA, that one stole 100 cows and kept them somewhere.  So the programme is messed up until there is a special committee by Iteso to operate, this re-stocking will have no meaning.  More importantly, Mr. Chairman, we have to vote in the national budget showing that there is restocking in Teso.  It is just a word but, somebody’s mercy.  There is no single cent voted by this country to re-stock Teso, that is lies, it is just a story.

Again, if we are going to run the senior secondary schools, I agree with the government that there must be day schools but at the same time there should be boarding schools.  I thank the hon. Member Joyce Mpanga, who said that actually girls need special protection.  The morality in Uganda will go out of hand if we do not allow this situation to be.  Because I remember my childhood we never saw a girl until there is some special concert during the mission schools.  When we were mixed together, you can see the type of life we are leading.  Things cannot be controlled. (Laughter) 

 Girls used to be given special consideration because they were not as men.  I remember when I was in Layibi College, girls were well protected, they were smart in mind, in dress, but today if you mix them together, it is okay, because we are inter-changing but you cannot assess them accurately, that is why women are coming round to say that they should be given special consideration.  Why?  You cannot compete with a bull -(Laughter)- It is impossible.  

That is why these small children fall prey to these young men, boys are very tricky, they trick these girls and put them off the rails so they should be protected so that by the time they grow and understand that is when they can pick up as women of integrity but if they are still young, they should be protected.  So, I want boarding schools to be there.

Now, we can bring any better-revised and well-schemed programmes for education, but unless we pay teachers, we are just talking for the sake of talking.  Recently, look in my area, from February up to now, we wanted to fight the ghost teachers then we turned everything to computer, the computer has had names from Teso lying in the Ministry of Education, nobody is bothering to compute them and teachers are without salaries.  

In the case of Teso people are suffering of famine, how would you expect a teacher who has not eaten to go and teach?  I want to know in this House, a teacher who has no food in his house, how will he teach?  But he has his salary here, because the computer has refused or somebody has refused to compute, when a name starts with ‘A’ somebody else starts with ‘W’; when I see it, you know what I mean.  In this office, you can go in the computer room, there are a lot of files there and nobody is bothering to follow them.  I think the Minister should take steps to make sure that these names are put in the computer and these people get their salary.  If there is no money tell them that there is no money but if there is money why the computer confuses these Africans who are suffering? (Laughter)  

Actually, it is terrible.  We laugh, but this is a terrible position.  You go behind in the areas like we come, they think we are the government, they say you people, you have failed to pay us. So we agree but we want a very good explanation from the Minister today’ what is wrong with the computer room?  Is it true that the computer itself has failed to work because in the village they say the computer has refused to work, that they are bringing spares from America.  Is it true that the computer itself is wrong or some people are there a problem?  Unless that disease is removed from Education Office or the Education Ministry, we will not achieve this thing here.  A dog must eat to hunt, if you take the dog to hunt and it does not eat, you will say shay, shay, and it will not touch anything. (Laughter) 

It is true teachers are there, they have brains but they think they are cheated.  I think by this note, let us do something, the little we can and pay them the arrears so that these people - we have no food, teachers are used to smart life, they want to iron their clothes, they want to buy new clothes, new shoes, it is a shame to tee a teacher with a torn trouser.  

Let me suggest that we should help this country by taking all our ideas to start from P.1 so that we fight the total ignorance that has been rampantly abundant here.  I want the NRM when we are still here, to be the status of fighting this war.  We must begin from P.1.  If we take from P.4, then we are again discriminating other Ugandans who are unthankful.  Let us start from primary one if we cannot have secondary schools and universities but primary one up to primary seven, at least, because I see some of our neighbours are doing it, at least, because there is no much big fee in primary schools.  I am happy to see that one student can take the fee, which would accommodate 100 or 200 students.  Why not, therefore, should every son and every daughter in Uganda start primary school?  Why do we say that we fear those who come at the age of 10, what is wrong?  We are still fighting the disease of ignorance.  The more people come to be enlightened and given literature to read and write, the better even though we have no jobs to give them.

This country - I want to inform through you, the Members that the country received the recent elections as a very good system in politics because I heard from women who are old saying that this is the time we have enjoyed politics of elections.  It is true I do not know why.  Okay, some people say money, but money, what for?  I am saying this because people were given a chance to go and elect.  They were given a chance to make sure that they know the number and the picture of the person.  That was calling everybody’s intelligence to find out whom he wants and where they are.  

Formerly, we used to elect symbols so you must go for a symbol in a way you want it whether you are convinced or not, you go for a symbol but this time people were looking for honourable Kigongo, hon. Elyau, which was very good and I tell you in our area, people have said that, this is the most enjoyable kind of election although some people again would prefer to stand behind the RC, but for me, I say unless we educate our people, the next elections in 1995 or when we shall have it, we should have at least have started not only the young children, there must be a mass education on everybody who has not been able to go to school.  

If we do not do that, it is yet another mistake and we will have left undone.  We are talking of the young ones, what about those ones who are old and they are able to guess but they cannot read?  They are able to count fiscal money; they do not know how to write the number?  So, we must have another plan for these people who still live in Uganda but they cannot have a chance to write for they know how to count for.  This is a very important issue also as we are talking to education, because this is an area where most of the governments were talking but they never fulfilled.  I am arguing that there must be a step for the elderly people to know at least, something so that this question of doing civic education for election should not arise in Uganda; it is a matter of information only.

I must congratulate the Minister that he did very well, he went to my village for the first time, we saw a Minister in the area like Kalaki.  I only wish that he quickens the means of opening my senior secondary school because his policy here says at least, every sub-county must have a senior secondary school.  That is the only source for starting in Kalaki because somebody came from somewhere and assisted us.  I hope the Minister will put it for defer he crosses over because you never know these days, tomorrow you are here, next time you are somewhere else.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute to this very important debate.  I rise to support the Government White Paper on Education.  The reason I support it, is because I am convinced it is a serious attempt, if it is adequately supported in all respects especially financially, it is a fundamental attempt to address the crisis in education in this country.  We should not be tempted to speak from our own personal experiences, we have been products of boarding schools, good boarding schools that may be true but, I think we should speak from the point of view of the people we represent in this House. The Constituencies that sent us here.  

Speaking for my County, I represent a very rural area, one that is considered most backward in Bushenyi District, where something must be done in education.  I am talking of a constituency and I am sure many members may share that experience where in last year’s primary seven results out of 12 primary schools with P.7, only 10 children managed to get grade 1 passes.  I am told that that is better, that means that there are some constituencies where even that was not good.  If there are some Members representing constituencies where even 10 children were not produced, then that shows you the crisis in the rural areas with respect to education.  I am representing a constituency where with two secondary schools -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Information.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Minister is touching on a very important area when he talks about education in rural schools.  There is a county in Lira, which is called Otuke with over 30 primary schools; only one managed grade one, that means hon. Omara will remain in Parliament for a very long time. (Laughter)  

MR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information but that really emphasizes the point I am trying to make.  The point I am trying to make using my own experiences now I am getting the experience of others is that, there is a real crisis in education in the areas where we come from and any policy that is being introduced by the government must address that situation because that is where the majority of the people of Uganda live.  We tend to talk that education is a right and often times those who talk about education being a right when they are already in tertiary institutions, they talk of it being a right in so far as they are attached when they are in tertiary schools. They forget that there are thousands of their brothers out there in the rural areas -(Applause)- who cannot even reach primary four later alone pass.  

Today, the county of Bunyaruguru has only fifteen under graduates at the university - fifteen from the whole county.  Therefore the policy which ensure that the people who elected me, that the people who sent me here, the thousands out there that they are going to put their children in schools and be kept in schools at least, to get basic education, that policy must be supported.  

Secondly, having started school, I understand the reasons given why free education will start at P.4 because as hon. Mpanga pointed out from their study, many kids even those that start, P.4, P.5, is when many parents start getting serious difficulties.  If the resources were available, I would say why not start at P.1 right from the beginning but I understand the reasons being given but the kids having got there must be kept to complete that primary school.  Even if they do not eventually end up in secondary school, there is always a benefit accruing from a child knowledge how to read and write, knowing how to speak English, they can listen to programmes on radio, they can read simple instructions on how to grow tomatoes and that can always help them.  

Now that brings me to the bigger problem of financing new post-primary education.  A little has been said about secondary boarding schools.  I do share the concerns about secondary boarding schools.  I am a product of a boarding secondary school, some of the good ones, and I do have children going to good secondary schools. But as I said, the people we represent cannot afford even to think that their children will go to Buddo, Namagunga or Kasubi.  What we must now emphasize to put in place is good quality education at affordable cost to the people that we represent.  A good secondary school in a rural area that has the same educational facilities as any other school.  

We should not keep sending the best facilities to schools like Namagunga, Kasubi, Buddo and so on, the same facilities that come to the Ministry of Education for schools should find their way to all these rural secondary schools so that the children there are put at competitive levels, people have been talking of leveling the ground, the ground must be levelled even at that level but those of us who have children in boarding schools know how expensive it is not in terms of just tuition and the books and so on, but what you pay in terms of boarding charges.  

Now, we are saying, for those parents who may not be able to afford boarding charges, they should find adequate quality tuition at affordable costs.  I think that is the essence of the main thrust of this, it is not true that people who go to boarding schools necessarily stop being tribalistic because I think in the history of this country, some of the people who ruined this country on tribalistic grounds went to schools such as Samuel Baker and Buddo and others.  

So, it is not necessarily true; what we need to do first as parents, the character formation of the child must start in the homes.  We must start bringing out children as balanced children, the children must get good quality primary school, secondary schools and if a child has been given balanced education, he will be a good Ugandan in respective of whether it is a boarding school or not.  

Now, financing tertiary education, which is the thing that is giving us large headache.  What are we talking about here?  When I went to university in 1971, they said that was the highest intake Makerere has taken 1200 students, 22 years later, you are taking 2,000 students and what is the population, how many children now qualify?  At the time we went to University and you needed one principle and three subsidiaries.  

Today, you find people with three principles, good principles, they have qualified to go to university and we say there is no place for them.  Now, a parent who have two sons and they have both qualified, they have finished their A ’levels, they have qualified for entrance into university and because of these bottlenecks only one gets admitted the other one they say, sorry, we cannot take you. Suppose this parent was told that both kids can be admitted if we cut down on the boarding of the other, would this parent say sorry keep that one there and this one goes away?  I am sure this parent will say, please, if you are to cut down the boarding and both of them go, I am all for it and this is what we are talking about for 10,000 Ugandan students qualify for university and you take only 2,000 and the other 8,000 are left out, it is a serious matter, we must address without emotions.  (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. friend through you, Mr. Chairman, that the places in Makerere or Mbarara or Mbale University are so constricted because there is no planning, dynamic planning by the Ministry of Education, if they had by now education on the developmental manner by now, they would have had a university college in Kabale, a university college in Kasese, a university college in Gulu, a university college in Kamuli, a university college say, in Busitema the place is there in Busitema, it is idle, they would have a university in Serere but, because they are idle nobody is pushing.  (Laughter)

MR. KATUREEBE:  I hope the hon. Minister for Education has taken note of my colleague’s information, but they say, if wishes were horses, every beggar would ride.  So, what is the thrust now of this Paper in how to address this?  My understanding of this Paper is not to say that you will get to the university and you are abandoned as it were, that you start paying for yourself everything that is not the thrust, my own understanding as the hon. colleague Minister has said, is that when you get to your tertiary institution, the state and here I mean all of us because that is the tax payer will contribute towards your tuition, will contribute towards your teachers and your books and the other related things, but if you can afford it, you will contribute towards the recording costs, if you cannot afford it, so as to make sure hat no child admitted to the university is denied entrance because he cannot afford boarding, fees and eating charge fees there is going to be putting in place a tertiary or loan scheme that is the way I understand it, if that is the way, it is them why have we been making all sorts of our allegations and counter accusation instead of saying should we adopt this or if so, when should it start?  The proposal is that it should start in 1997 or 2,000, is it not? (Interruption)

MR. OPIO:  Point of information.  Through you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister, he puts a question that if a rural person has 3 children and they have all passed and at that time he is asked whether the 3 children should go under the cost sharing or one should go under what we have which one will he decide on?  I would like to say, that practically, that farmer whether he chose one or two or three, will not manage because if the figure of 1 million or so per year is asked, he will never raise it, so the issue why we are - some of us not supporting it, is that, it cannot be implemented in villages because I do not see in our area where a person whom can be asked to say, you pay 1 million even - they say that is what I would like to say.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. KATUREEBE:  I am surprised that my hon. colleague who is a university professor has either not read the White Paper or has chosen to misunderstand my argument.  The argument is simply this, will there be a bursary or loan scheme put in place that would help the rural person because we are talking of financing, financing scheme or from a bursary scheme. I went to school on bursary of the Ankole Government, that type of scheme that one can look at, so my learned friend and other colleagues really should take these things very serious.  

The only thing I would ask the hon. Minister is that, before this old thing is implemented sources of funding must first be identified and must be in place if you want to establish a loan scheme or a bursary scheme the funds should first be identified must be in place, if you want to start a book bank, then the books must be there so that the smooth implementation of this scheme is not disrupted by people getting there and then they are told there are no funds and there is no money which will cause frustrations and demonstrations and other things.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MISS BINTU (Youth Representative, Western Region):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to congratulate the NRM Government for ensuring that the youth are represented at all level.  I would like to thank the Minister for Education in conjunction with Government in a scheme they did in the enrolment of the teachers’ salary at primary level because when I have been going around in one of the district, I found out that in these teacher’s colleges this scheme has done at least a great role because they were telling me that the enrolment now of the students who want to join the Teachers College is increasing prior to what the public has been thinking that those people who join teaching profession are the outcast or the failures.  

Because of this, I would suggest that the government instead of only taking the primary teachers, they should consider also the teachers at the higher levels because if we are saying that we want to get the best quality of teachers, we must consider both at primary level, teacher training colleges, secondary schools and higher institutions of learning.  I support the Report, but making some of the observations all along most of us are versed with the system of education which has been going around, Mr. Chairman, you are aware that the most productive area in our community -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MISS BINTU:  The most productive sector in our community are the youth and when we look at the population in regard to the education system, you find that most of the rural areas are the ones which actually have this highest population.  When we go back to school, you find that the most productive areas in sending these youth to schools or these children to schools, they are not actually represented as I would have expected.  Why?  In these schools, I do not know, I stand to be corrected whether it was the Ministry which introduced the PTA or rather it was the parents who actually decided to introduce this organisation.  

But, this organisation the PTA has turned instead to be the organisation of confusion in such a way that, instead of all the parents convening to decide on what to raise in order to up lift the standard of a school, it has been the few members who turn up and these few members now instead decide to oppress the majority which do not turn up and the majority who are actually the unable parents.  

I would, therefore, suggest that the Ministry I again stand to be corrected, the Ministry should actually prepare guidelines for these PTA, which it will be operating at in order to see that all the parents are considered to ensure that our children are really represented and they should actually attend the education for our better Uganda.  

I would like to thank the curriculum designers for the effort they have endeavoured to prepare the syllabus and the rest.  But as I have been trying to find out, I am a teacher trainer by profession, I have found out that we are saying that in our report that vocationalisation should be established. 

I want to supplement, although we are saying that, some of these disciplines have been really designed by the curriculum designers such as art-craft, music, health education and the rest.  But teachers have been intending to leave those disciplines out by not implementing on them this one. I have true evidence since I said I am a teacher by profession, when I used to go out to inspect the students, I would ask that why are you not teaching art-craft and yet it is on your timetable?  But the response I used to get was that these subjects are not examinable at any level especially at primary leaving examination, so they were saying, why should they waste their time in teaching these subjects whereas they are not going to be examinable.  

So, you find that though at times we design certain things but we do not follow up because I think if actually these subjects were to be examinable, then a bit of vocationalisation would have been done as the Government had put it in those programmes.  

So, I am suggesting that the inspectorate should ensure that some of these disciplines are examinable by having continuous assessment in so that thought we are saying we are just going to begin it but it has been there and not implemented.  

As one of the hon. Members said, that university education should start from primary one, but we have been in this process, when you look around especially in most of these schools in up-country rural areas, you find that up to now, some schools are not yet equipped as regards the infrastructure and the teachers who are there though they are coming up now, most of them are unqualified.  

So, I really do not know if we say, let university education begin right from primary one, I would not think we shall continue the system of teaching our pupils under the trees because when it starts raining, I really do not see the teaching continuing.  

So, I suggest, let us first or let the government ensure that the infrastructures are there and the qualified teachers are there, then we can begin the university education from primary one but otherwise, I am supporting the recommendation that the university education should for the time being start from primary one and then be going backwards as the government tries to restore the infrastructure.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 25th May 1994 at 2.30 p.m)




















