
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Friday, 20 May 2022

Parliament met at 10.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s morning sitting. As you are aware, we are pressed by the constitutional obligation of ensuring we have a budget in place; that is why we are here this morning.

I sincerely want to thank the leadership of the Committee on Budget and its members. I also want to thank the entire House for the year we have done. Today, we should be able to show the country why we are here. We should be able to ensure that we distribute the national cake to the country. That is why we are here, as representatives of the people. We are the voice of the voiceless and so, whatever we will do here today, just know the whole country is watching. So, we need to ensure that service delivery is a priority to this country. I want to thank you so much.

I will limit debate only to part one of the report because that is basically a report from the committee that is based on the policy statements. So, we will not debate the policy statements; we will look at the supplies. We will go to supply after the chairperson has made his presentation. 

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2021/2022 AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, we are at the tail end of the appropriation process for the Financial Year 2022/2023. As you also recall, we began with consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper 2022/2023 to 2026/2027.

In late December 2021, pursuant to rules 144(1) and 145 of the Rules of Procedure, this was followed by consideration of the ministerial policy statements in March 2022. That was pursuant to rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure and the tax Bills that were presented to the House two days back. That was pursuant to rule 150 of our Rules of Procedure; that was concluded. I want to congratulate you for that. 

Today, we embark on the supply, pursuant to rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure. We shall crown the day with passing the Appropriation Bill, 2022, which is pursuant to rule 152 of our Rules of Procedure. 

I commend all of you for the devotion throughout the whole process. As you are aware, the power to do appropriation lies with the Parliament. I want you to ensure that you do as per the law because that is our cardinal activity, as per Articles 155 and 156 of the Constitution of Uganda. Nobody should claim he has the powers to do appropriation. 

Appropriation is a preserve of the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) This is still under sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rules 148, 151 and 152 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. It is through this appropriation that we exercise our power as the legislature, which is something that you must protect jealously, as the Parliament of Uganda.

I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to move the motion. Honourable minister, you can speak to the motion, which you had moved during the time we handled ministerial policy statements.

10.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. In December 2021, I laid before this House the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2022/2023 to 2026/2027, in accordance with section 9(5) of the Public Finance Management Act.

This House considered the National Budget Framework Paper and made recommendations to Government, in accordance with rules 144 and 145 of the Rules of Procedure. The recommendations were discussed with various stakeholders and a response was made to this House.

Madam Speaker, most of the recommendations of this House were adopted but some were not, due to the limited resource envelope. Some will be considered in other future financial years.

The theme of the Budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 is: “Full Monetisation of the Ugandan Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services and Digital Transformation and Market Access”.

The Budget will aim at achieving three objectives:

Ensure peace and stability through enhanced security and macroeconomic stability as key foundations for growth and development.

Mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic through widespread vaccination, support to businesses and reopening the economy to enable all sectors to function optimally; and

Enhance social-economic transformation by redirecting budgetary resources towards wealth and job creation, industrialisation, export promotion and other areas with high returns on investment and focus on lifting the 39 per cent of households who live in a subsistence economy, into a money economy through the implementation of the Parish Development Model. 

Madam Speaker, the House received reports from various sectoral committees on ministerial policy statements with recommendations that were adopted by the House. As a result, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled a corrigendum in this House to accommodate some of the recommendations amounting to Shs 879,000,733.944. 

The proposed budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 is Shs 48,130,684,729,000 for both recurrent and development, which Government is seeking approval from this House.

Madam Speaker, I once again would like to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the revised estimates for the Financial Year 2022/2023 and budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal Year 2022/2023. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. I now invite the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to present a report on the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

10.17
The chairperson, committee ON budget (Mr Patrick Opolot Isiagi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We take note that in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 12 and 13(4) of the Public Finance Act, 2015 (as amended), and rule 148(2) and 148(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Budget committee is mandated, among other things, to examine, discuss and review policies, programmes and the annual budget estimates; and where necessary, make appropriate recommendations to Parliament. 

Also, to consider sectoral committee reports on the budget estimates referred to the committee by Parliament for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation. 

I make that preamble for us to be reminded of the mandate for which we are reporting today. 

Remember that on 31 March 2022, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023. These were referred to the Budget committee for examination. 

Parliament also referred it to the sectoral committees of the House to scrutinise and report to the Budget Committee for harmonisation, reconciliation and consolidation. 

Furthermore, a few days ago – on 18 May 2022, the Minister of Finance, again, laid before Parliament a corrigendum to the annual draft estimates indicating a budget increment of Shs 879,733,000,944, which revised our budget upwards. 

The Budget committee examined all of these and made a review. As such, we would like to report our findings. The report is in two parts, A and B. Part A will give us the macro aspects of the budget and part B will give the detailed proposed adjustments to the budget arising out of the scrutiny by the sector committees and as such, reconciliation and harmonisation by the committee – (Interruption)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 4 where the chairman says, “…the budget was revised,” is that figure in billions of shillings or trillions? 

The budget was revised from Shs 47.250 to Shs 48,130.68 billion. Is it a billion or trillion? 

The Speaker: It is in trillion. 

Mr OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, it is billion - the technical team is going to consult. I think let us proceed, first. Colleagues, here is the methodology. This budget has been widely consultative, whereby the committee consulted the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the National Planning Authority, the Equal Opportunities Commission, and; all our sectoral committees.

The committee also made reference to a number of key documents, which are relevant to the budget such as:

The Third National Development Plan of the country; 

The Programme Implementation Action Plans;

The National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2022/2023-2026/2027 that was approved by the House; 

The approved Annual Budget Estimates for the financial year currently running. 

The committee also had certificates of compliance of the Annual Budget of the Financial Year 2021 to NDP III and other documents, as you may follow on page 5. 

Performance of the duty 

(a) The macroeconomic aspects 

The committee carried out compliance tests on a matter of the legally specified parameters. The committee carried out a test as legally required. There is information that the minister is supposed to have submitted. 
According to section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, the minister is required, on behalf of the President, to present the proposed Annual Budget to Parliament by 1st of April. 

In addition, he is also required to provide an annual estimate contained in them as stipulated in section 13(7), l3(9)(a)-(c), 13(10)(a)-(f) and 13(1l)(a)-(f) of the Public Finance Management Act. The table on page 6 will show compliance to each of the required information. 

Colleagues have this on their iPads. Table 1 is an assessment on submission of the information. These tests found that the minister fully complied in some and in the few, partially complied. The committee found that the test had been passed. 

However, the committee was not happy as far as the violation of the Public Finance Management Act requiring the finances and the budgets of the corporations and state enterprises of Government was concerned. It was observed that out of 65 state corporations, only 14 had submitted their accounts and their budgets. This one violates the requirement of the Public Finance Management Act because many corporations under Government spend money the way they think they should spend, without any appropriation from Parliament. 

The test on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility 
Aware that Government signed a contract with the people of Uganda, through a charter of fiscal responsibility, the committee carried out tests to check how far the compliance has been done. 

Objective 1 of the Public Debt puts the maximum ratio of debt to GDP

The committee found that the charter provided for in the Financial Year 2022/2023 states that the debt to GDP ratio must not be above 53.1 per cent, as per the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. 

Fiscal balance 

The Financial Year 2022/2023 target should be -5.4 per cent. 

The Petroleum Fund transfers to the budget as required by the law was assessed. 

It was, therefore, found that the budget, as it is presented, does not meet the test of debt to GDP ratio. Going by the figures, as Members will see ahead, you find that our total nominal public debt is going to be at 55.1 per cent against the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility annual target of 53.1 per cent. 

Total domestic debt interest payments to total revenue on a high of 18.7 per cent against the charter of fiscal responsibility target of 14.6 per cent. 

Therefore, colleagues, in accordance with the law, the committee recommends that section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the charter of fiscal responsibility provides that the minister must seek parliamentary approval for the deviation from the Objectives of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Madam Speaker, at an opportune time, we shall require the minister to give a statement on that. 

The committee also carried out tests of the estimates against the approved National Budget Framework Paper and found that there were a number of deviations. The minister will explain that part – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you are taking note. 

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: The committee also carried out a test against the NDP III requirements and found that there is also a lot of departure, whereby a number of projects supposed to have reached a certain state – some have not started at all; only one of the projects is on course. The rest are not moving in an expected manner. The minister will give a statement on that too. 

There were also measures of economic and budget performance highlights of the current running financial year.

The committee observed that there were earlier recommendations by Parliament to Government to focus on sustaining a resilient agriculture along a value chain. Agro-processing and support to light manufactures. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that to come out of the unfavourable economic ratios, there must be serious input and investment in focusing resources to production key sectors and to have commodities with the high impact of transforming Ugandans from subsistence to commercial agriculture. 

All this arose because it is found that a very big number - around 39 per cent of the population - is engaged in non-commercial agriculture. 

The committee also recommends that there is need to expand the storage and processing capacity for agricultural commodities within 18 zones of the country and fund UDC fully to be a lender Fund UDC fully to be a lender for agro- processing. 

There is need to increase the capitalisation to Uganda Development Bank to enable lending to enterprises that will create financial inclusion. 

Inflation

The committee observed that while inflation remained relatively low and stable in the first half of the current financial year, there has been an upward pressure on prices of some essential goods and services due to the global recovery in consumption and a lot of pressures from the rise in global energy and Russia and Ukraine war which has affected the inflow of raw materials in the country.

With the affected inflow, increased activity in the economy from opening up, the production costs have gone high and the demand for goods has gone high. Therefore, we realise inflation is starting to rise. The minister will make a statement on how the Government intends to curb that.

Another measure was public debt. As at the end of December 2021, the total debt stock was Shs 73.5 trillion, indicating an increase from Shs 65.6 trillion by December the previous year. This means our debt stock increased by about 15.4 per cent. As at December 2021, out of the total debt stock of 62.2 per cent amounting to Shs 45.7 trillion was attributed to external debt, while Shs 27.8 trillion was on account of domestic debt.

The committee notes that the share of concessional loans has dropped.  We would like the minister to explain this because the Government is now borrowing mainly on concessional and a few semi-concessional. This is why the estimates, which were submitted by Government, were indicating a very high rise in commitment fees. The estimates indicated commitment fees growing from Shs 20.6 billion to Shs 137 billion, this coming year. That means there was a plan to enter into loan agreements but not to implement the disbursements. 

It should be noted, Madam Speaker, that the rate of increase in debt is higher than the rate of growth in GDP levels, which is very dangerous. That indicates that the debt we go into, the investment does not impact GDP growth. 

The committee recommends that we go for debts, borrowings and loans, which must grow the GDP so that we end up having a favourable ratio. There is a need for the Government to focus on giving public debt a sustainable path. 

There was a check on semi-annual budget performance for the current financial year. The current financial year’s theme was “Industrialisation for inclusive growth, employment and wealth creation”, which emphasised policy interventions to sustain recovery from socio-economic setbacks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the development of the National Development Plan III.

The planned overall fiscal deficit for the Financial Year 2021/2022 was Shs 5,216.94 billion. However, the overall deficit turned out to be Shs 3,956.21 billion, as total expenditure was 84.5 per cent. 

Revenue performance highlights

The performance of domestic revenue during the first half registered a shortfall of Shs 880.17 billion of which, tax revenue was Shs 695.45 billion while NTR was Shs 184.72 billion. 

During the first half of the Financial Year 2020/202l, all major tax heads registered shortfalls against respective targets for the half year, as collections were affected by low economic activity on account of lockdown measures. So, we suffered a setback in revenue collection. 

Expenditure performance highlights

Total Government spending in the first half of the current year amounted to Shs 14,539.31 trillion, which was equivalent to 84.5 per cent of the programmed Shs 17,201.87 billion. That was a fall of Shs 3,529.34 trillion. 

There was low performance of externally financed projects. Madam Speaker, Financial Year 2020/2021 was characterised with poor performance of externally financed projects. This signifies a key weakness in the Public Investment Management Framework. Project selection criteria were unclear and poorly planned. This created delays in achieving the expected dividends to the economy as well as wastage arising from payment of commitment fees.

Public projects whose implementation is off-track should be reviewed and refocused to achieve their intended objectives. Colleagues, you realise that for about three years, some monies have not been disbursed out and we have continued to make payments on commitment fees. 

The committee observed the performance of the Petroleum Fund. It was observed that in the Financial Year 2021/2022, the value of the Petroleum Fund was equivalent to Shs 228.70 billion. However, Shs 200 billion was drawn during the year, leaving a balance of Shs 28 billion. This fund has so far grown by the end of 31st December 2021 to Shs 81 billion. 

The committee made an assessment of COVID-19 financing, and found that since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, a total of US$ 2,001 million has been committed to various development partners through loans and grants as support towards COVID-19 innovations. Out of this, COVID-19 accounted for US$ 1,064.5 million and off-budget COVID-l9 support accounted for US$ 936.86 million. The off-budget COVID-l9 support was through cash donations both in kind and services.

On table eight, colleagues, you will observe the status, how the funding was done, where the disbursements were done and where the contract has not yet performed but the grant was entered into. 

Madam Speaker, allow me, now, enter into the annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023. We start by observing the resource envelope. 

Our resource envelope is composed of tax, that is, domestic revenue and non-tax revenue. This financial year, we expect domestic revenue to be Shs 25,789,270,000,000. That is an increase of 2.951 trillion, from the previous financial year. So, we estimate to collect more taxes. This is, however, not going to arise from increase in tax rates but efficiency measures in tax administration. 

There is a domestic tax management strategy, which is going to be put in place and that is why the committee was convinced that URA should be fully funded to the extent that they perform their role without any excuse. 

Therefore, the committee, on top of the allocation in the estimate presented by the minister – when you look at Part B of the report on the recommendations from the sector committee – has reinforced URA with additional funds to enable them do the tax administration efficiently. (Applause)

This envelope also includes domestic borrowing and external borrowing. 

The envelope for this financial year has a total of Shs 48,130,600,000 trillion, with an increase of Shs 3,317,690,000,000 from the previous financial year. That means the activities are going to be higher by that amount.

Madam Speaker, earlier on, I mentioned an inconsistency in the budgets of public corporations and state enterprises. Section 13(11)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lay before Parliament the proposed budget for public corporations and state enterprises for the financial year. 

However, for this financial year, it is observed that out of 65 public corporations and state enterprises, only 14 submitted their budgets. The minister laid budgets for only 14 enterprises, which reduced from last year when we received 26. This is a very serious decline. This implies that more public corporations and state enterprises do not comply with the PFMA, despite previous parliamentary recommendations requiring them to comply. 

The Parish Development Model

As we shall be looking at the expenditure side of this funding, we have a highlight on the Parish Development Model (PDM). The committee observed that a very huge amount in this budget is going to finance activities in relation to the Parish Development Model. 

The Parish Development Model is a strategy for organising and delivering public and private sector interventions for employment generation and wealth creation at the parish level. That is the lowest planning and budgeting unit that the Government has adopted to carry this year. 

Government aims to graduate the 39 per cent households – that is around 16 million Ugandans – that are in the subsistence economy into agents of wealth creation through the use of this model. With the PDM, Government targets a minimum household income of Shs 20 million per household per annum. The PDM is a universal programme covering all the 10,594 parishes across the country, without any imbalances. It is starting as a universal process and will, later on, translate into further interventions. 

The model’s operational focus is on prioritising development of 18 commodities which include coffee, cotton, cocoa, cassava and tea.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to report on the current status of the activities of the Parish Development Model. 

In 2021/2022, Shs 2OO billion was appropriated towards preparatory activities for the phased implementation of the PDM. These funds were able to support key activities like the establishment of the Parish Development Model Secretariat – we now have a secretariat to coordinate the PDM activities. These funds were also utilised for recruitment of 6,000 parish chiefs in the posts, which had not been filled.

Furthermore, Parliament, under Supplementary Schedule No. 1, approved additional funding of: Shs 3 billion for mind-set change and community development activities under the Ministry of Local Government; Shs 29.3 billion to operationalise the recently created subcounties and town councils, and; Shs 20 billion for the revolving fund. 

It should, therefore, be noted that Shs 142.5 billion has so far been released towards implementation and preparatory activities under the PDM. 

Therefore, colleagues, the Parish Development Model involves money going to the parish. It involves coordination. It involves mind-set change. It involves security – because as money goes, the wrong elements will also follow the money. 

It also involves sensitisation of the public and that requires all of us, Members of Parliament, to go to the parishes. If we do not go to the parish – you never know – the parish may come to us. (Laughter) Whoever you are, it is your duty to ensure that parishes in your constituencies are working to come out of poverty. 

The Parish Development Model activities that have so far taken place

It was launched in Kibuku, Bukedi Subregion on the 26th of February. Recruitment and training for the SACCOs and parish development committee teams is taking place. However, we still note some gaps, which Government has to take note of in order to effectively run the Parish Development Model.

There are capacity gaps of the parish chiefs. A parish chief is the accounting officer of these funds and, therefore, still requires training.

So, the committee recommends to extensively and continuously have these parish chiefs trained together with the parish development committees so that these funds are put in good use.

Most of the activities targeted relate to agriculture but there is a gap in extension workers. We, therefore, recommend that recruitment of extension workers, where there are staffing gaps, must take place immediately and also facilitation must be put in place. Also, develop a parish grant formula because there is no formula and the parishes are all homogenous, as we speak.

The homogeneity of the parishes will not allow all these parishes grow as we expect. So, Government has to again do a thorough study and ensure thorough feedback in order to have improvement in the operationalisation.

In part B, the committee looked at the recommendations for further interventions that our sector committees saw and deemed fit for Parliament and Government to undertake within the existing resource envelope, without violating the provisions in the law; keeping within the envelope.

Therefore, sector committees submitted a lot of recommendations for further interventions and the committee, therefore, did an assessment, analysis, harmonised, reconciled and came up with the recommendations for the interventions to be done, starting from page 42.

On the start, the committee also observed wastages in the estimates. I would like to name a few of them. Money estimated to be spent was Shs 319.5 billion for promissory notes under vote 130. These funds were meant to build a hospital in Lubowa but on the advice from the sector, it was wasteful expenditure. 

The committee, therefore, found it fit that this money is not approved under where the estimates had proposed but should be utilised to fix other gaps. The committee observed that the commitment fees had grown arbitrarily from Shs 20.6 billion to Shs 137 billion.

To confirm that, even in the corrigenda, the minister also realised that it was over budgeted and thought they would withdraw Shs 88 billion from that item but the committee resolved as follows:  “…even the balance should not stay there because it will be feeding into inefficiency on the management of loans, so that if there is no money, you do not go for the loan for the sake, you go for it after you have done a feasibility study. If it is construction, have land so that the disbursements occur immediately and we realise returns.”

So, the committee removed, from that item, the remaining extra fund of Shs 46 billion and accepted the minimum that states that you first mismanage (take E) up to the extent you are doing it; do not do it worse and in future, we intend to scale it down further.

The committee also observed that there was a huge amount of money over estimated on the Treasury bond costs; that is interest on long term borrowing. It had grown by Shs 1.34 trillion; the rate of growth of the interest should have some relations to the growth of the debt. 

The committee decided that out of this Shs 1.3 trillion increase in interest cost of the bonds, at least we leave Shs 400 to be wasted but we withdraw Shs 900 billion for purposes of intervening on other pressurising areas.

Madam Speaker, we do not have a lot of money and so, we think the little should be prudently applied. The committee observed in the corrigenda that Shs 86.4 billion was earmarked for construction of a convention centre at Munyonyo.

There was no management or contract relations indicating what this money would look in the books of Munyonyo and Government, neither was it stated as a loan nor as share capital or as a grant. So, it was like a giveaway. This being a private company where Government had initially invested a lot of funds and the controversy surrounding all those investments where Government is not earning any dividend and unclear circumstance of the shareholding, the committee found that it would not be prudent for us to continue authorising such negligence of expenditure. The committee thought that since we have more other pressing issues, it withdrew that money; it did not approve that expenditure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, allow information -

MR MWINE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to give information concerning Munyonyo. We handled this issue in the Committee on Trade; so far, we have managed to secure 25 per cent shares, which we were supposed to have secured in 2007.

However, Shs 13 billion is still unaccounted for in as far as shares are concerned. The dividends in Munyonyo for the past 15 years are also unaccounted for and to make matters worse, we interacted with the honourable Minister Musasizi, twice, in the committee and noticed that all the documents relating to Munyonyo were stolen from the Ministry of Finance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ISIAGI: Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Chair, continue.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Thank you, colleague, for that information. You can see that the committee, therefore, was constrained to go ahead with that allocation as suggested in the estimates presented in the corrigenda. Therefore, we sought to spend that money in more profitable ways for service delivery in the country.

Madam Speaker, all that money which the committee found to have been oversupplied or unnecessarily supplied amounted to Shs 1.629 trillion. As such, the committee went ahead to analyse the recommendations of pressure areas from our sectoral committees and picked priorities among priorities and provided accordingly. The recommendations at the beginning for priorities, which had been unfunded, was about Shs 22 trillion. The committee, therefore, did the harmonisation and reconciliation and came up with priorities, which start from page 48 up to page 114.

Some of them are about strengthening the Parish Development Model idea. 
Security, Monitoring, Inputs; for example, Madam Speaker, coffee in this country has been doing very well with the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) doing the quality assurance of the seedlings. In the past, the coffee was hit by the wilt. Since UCDA came in with quality assurance on the seedlings, I think this House must appreciate there was a change and there was a rise in coffee output.

The committee thought - moving away from that quality control by UCDA and having parishes look for seedlings haphazardly wherever they thought they could find; even the lumpens could enter and bring the – so, the committee thought before we build the capacity of the parishes to develop their quality seedlings, let us have the UCDA continue doing their work; and a token allocation was provided for such. This is for the good of the citizens of this country.

You are all aware that NAGRC and NARO are the institutions which do research and development, as far as agricultural inputs and methods of agriculture are concerned. The committee found it fit that if a parish has money and we want to grow, we have to modernise agriculture and we have to go scientific. NARO and NAGRC should be supported to do more of this research.

NAGRIC has to open several incubation centres - breeding centres around the whole country – in the North, East, West and they are capable of doing that but they need to be supported.

Madam Speaker, we also had to support a number of interventions on security. Security is paramount, where you are now going down to the lowest unit to empower our people. There must be a lot of monitoring. If you are the IGG, please, we need you at the parish. If you are Apex from the President's office monitoring unit, we need you at the parish. If you are an MP, we are saying, go to the parish. If you are an agricultural extension worker, go to the parish. All those interventions have been done to ensure that we get all the benefits of the Parish Development Model to strengthen and have it operate. 

You also need the Ministry of Works and Transport; you need roads. You cannot have parishes which do not interconnect. They must take their goods to the market. All that intervention includes road construction. We think inter-connective roads had to be handled but also marketing is paramount, as you do the production. We thought our emphasis selected few must be strengthened as far as their capacity to market and to do commercial diplomacy is concerned. If you produce coffee here, for example, then our embassy in Algeria, which controls Libya, Tunisia, Mauritania, Morocco. The record shows that our coffee sales to Algeria grew tremendously and the minister is aware of that. Just by the Embassy rotating around Algiers, no capacity to move to Libya, no capacity to move to Tunisia because you must fly, must drive heavily armoured vehicles but they are doing it. Supposing we invested something to enable them do more marketing, then you will find bigger sales. So, you do not produce without - also mechanisation of agriculture. The committee strengthened that.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the first estimates which were laid by the government had scrapped money from the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). That is women empowerment - I beg your pardon.

THE SPEAKER: It is called UWEP.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: UWEP; I think it is not yet time for us to withdraw from that. We still need to continue with such programmes; and the Speaker is also a woman, even many MPs are women. The Vice-President is a woman and so is the Prime Minister. I think this is the right time for us to be seen to be empowering women more. As such, the Shs 32 billion that had been withdrawn is now reinstated in this budget.

On top of that, the women's council have also been reinforced with some Shs 5 billion for their coordination. So, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, how much is for UWEP?

MR ISIAGI: It is Shs 32 billion, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, allow me then say that we have figures, which we are recommending for supply and as such arising from all the above, the figure below is recommended for supply and appropriation for Financial Year 2022/2023.

Table A, - I beg your pardon.

On page 115, we have a summary of the budget estimates. We have a recurrent budget for the Central Government; you will see the columns, the first estimates, the corrigenda and parliamentary adjustments. We have revised the budget of Shs 11.5 trillion for the Central Government. 

Referral hospitals from Shs 238 billion, the corrigenda interventions and parliamentary adjustments bring the budget total to Shs 259.6 billion. 

Foreign missions have a total of Shs 187.8 billion. 

Local Governments have Shs 3,732,805,550,000 and therefore, a total recurrent expenditure of Shs 15.6 trillion. 

The table in part B has a total of development budget of Shs 14.5 trillion together with the statutory expenditure of Shs 17.8 trillion, giving us a grand total of Shs 48.1 trillion.

Madam Speaker, we have a number of annexes. We have annex 1, which shows a list of all our public and state enterprises. 
We have a list, in annex 2, showing the status of core projects, as at 30 March 2022. The NDP III projects –

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you first correct the title of schedule 1 – “Recurrent Budget Estimates for Appropriation for Financial Year 2021/2022”; it should be 2022/2023.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. That was a big mistake, colleagues. Page 116; it should be 2022/2023.

THE SPEAKER: It is on pages 116, 126 and 136.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: So, let us correct that; the year is 2022/2023. I beg your pardon, colleagues, for the error and I thank you for being patient with us, as we have been working through a very tough period, where corrigenda were laid a day before yesterday. 
Page 126 is corrected. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

I beg to lay the original copy of the report of the committee. However, before I lay it, attached to this report is also a copy – we have a minority report, where we have colleagues who dissented on certain issues we did not come into agreement with and thought it wise to bring it to the Floor. 

We have a minority report, signed by four members of the committee, led by Hon. Kivumbi Muwanga, Hon. Ssemujju Nganda, Hon. Namugga Gorreth and Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist, joined by Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe. 

I beg to lay the main report of the committee and also, the minority report. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the committee. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and the committee as well. Can I have the Shadow Minister?

11.17
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to thank you. Last time, you directed us to make our presentation to the Committee on Budget and in the same vein, I thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget. Most of the issues we had on micro have been carried into the main report. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, just a brief comment before I make this presentation. 
We are making a budget in a particular economic environment that is peculiar to our country. We have runaway inflation with skyrocketing commodity prices. We are at war in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We have an economy –(Interjections) - We have an operation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

THE SPEAKER: So, we are not at war. Withdraw that one.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Our army has an operation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The economy is recovering from the impact of COVID-19. We have a large number of our schools and our children who are failing to even pay the Uganda National Examinations Board registration fees. So, it is in that environment and skyrocketing prices –

In the Committee on Budget, I commented on the widening gap between Southern Uganda and the Greater North, in terms of economic outlook. I made a case – a strong one – not just for the Parish Development Model but for the greater Northern Uganda to have a Marshall Plan. When you move in the length and breadth of Northern Uganda, you are stuck with pre-agricultural revolution living conditions of our people. 

I am not making a case that the South is rich and prosperous, but there is more to be done. Most of their children are in Kampala, literally reduced to being askaris, as a greater many sleep comfortably. Therefore, there is a greater need to make a Budget that speaks to those national conditions.

Madam Speaker, that is the – even the political condition has cooled down. There is more to deepening and widening our democracy. 

In particular, we dissented from the majority report on the following:

Unrealistic Annual Budget

The committee and the chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has elaborately spoken on Munyonyo. I will simply highlight a small matter that he has left out, for Members to fully appreciate the danger we face. We have construction of roads in the DRC, accumulated costs of cooperation, irregularities in the operations of microfinance –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just a small interruption. Members who are sitting at the extreme end, kindly reserve the extreme end for people with disabilities; it is free sitting.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, we have an issue with the Kapeeka industry. We still have issues domiciling the functions of science, technology and innovation. We have issues with the Parish Development Model and poor prioritisation of public resources.

Unrealistic Budget

The initially laid budget for the coming Financial Year 2022/2023 has been revised by an increment of Shs 879.73 billion from Shs 47.25 trillion to Shs 48.13 trillion. The increment will be financed largely by additional borrowing of an extra Shs 858.24 billion. This raises the total projected borrowing in the coming budget from Shs 18.85 trillion to Shs 19.71 trillion. This translates to an increment of 5 per cent. 

The adverse effect of this level of borrowing will be felt through interest payment, which will rise higher than Shs 5.5 trillion that was earlier projected, when the budget estimates were laid. This expenditure takes first call on the revenue collection and reduces funds available for service delivery. 

Critical to note is that revenue collections are projected to be Shs 25.54 trillion in the coming budget. This cannot fund the country's entire revised recurrent expenditure, which will amount to Shs 34.04 trillion. Therefore, we will even borrow to pay wages and meet our costs of running the Government in the coming year, which will be 71 per cent of the budget. Development expenditure is projected to be a mere Shs 14.08 trillion, out of Shs 48 trillion. That is 29 per cent of the budget. 

It should be noted that the projected growth in the projected budget is majorly driven by projected increase in domestic revenue (URA collections) that will rise to Shs 25.54 trillion in 2023 from Shs 22.42 trillion in this current budget. This is an increment of Shs 3.12 trillion. 

From the onset, this is unrealistic. For the past two financial years, revenue shortfalls have been registered amounting to Shs 3.59 trillion in the Financial Year 2019/2022 and in the last financial year, revenue shortfalls were Shs 2.37 trillion. 

Additionally, most of the tax and administrative measures, which URA relies on for collections, are underperforming. As of February 2020, 60 per cent of the total of 25 the tax and administrative measures were underperforming below 50 per cent as of Quarter Two. This casts further doubt on whether the proposed annual budget will be realised. This is mainly attributed to the failure to undertake evaluations of past tax measures to inform proposed measures for a subsequent financial year. 
In the table below, I have clearly indicated the taxes, the measures we took and their net effect. 

Recommendations 

Going forward, all the bills that will be laid in this Parliament should be accompanied by regulatory impact assessments. This will aid Parliament to determine the undertaken cost-benefit analysis. 

Parliament should amend rule 159 of our Rules of Procedure to specifically require committees to undertake post-legislative scrutiny. Madam Speaker, this will be new in your administration; it is an aspect that past Parliaments have not been doing - the responsibility of Parliament should not end with Bill scrutiny and ensuring that it is enacted into law. 

This will empower the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to undertake scrutiny of the tax and administrative policy measures passed by Parliament. This will aid in assessing the responsiveness of a tax and administrative measures in enhancing domestic revenue mobilisation and how they shaped the lives of citizens. However, caution should be undertaken to focus on outcomes and not replay arguments made during recommendations of the Bills. Presently, no Parliamentary committee has undertaken post-legislative scrutiny into any of the laws under their jurisdiction. 

Madam Speaker, if this is implemented, it will go a long way in enhancing - countries like the UK undertake a lot of post-legislative scrutiny. Before the next year comes, you are aware of the impact of the laws you have made and other measures. 

The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the celebrated Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry have spoken about Munyonyo. However, let me also re-emphasise a little bit further about Munyonyo.

This country is at risk of losing Shs 86.4 billion that could have been allocated to the construction of a conference hall at Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort. Good enough, we have cured this.

The facility is run by the Commonwealth Resort Limited. It comprises 60,244,836,480 shares, of which the Government of Uganda owns 15 billion (each worth Shs 1). The rest is owned by Dr Sudhir Ruparelia, Mrs Joytsna Ruparelia and Meera Investments Limited. 

Over the years, critical governance and accountability concerns have been raised regarding the funds the Government is investing in the company. They include the following:
Failure to convert Shs 14 billion into shares. These funds were spent in 2006 to construct internal driveways, parking yard and rehabilitation of a marina at the resort. This expenditure was in preparations for the Commonwealth Heads of State Meeting (CHOGM);

The Board of the company has failed to meet since 2017 and the most recent available minutes as well as resolutions, were last done in 2015;

The most recent approved financial statements approved by the Board were last done in 2015;

The Uganda Development Corporation, which holds the shares of the company, has failed to nominate board representatives. Hence, the Board is not fully constituted; and

Based on the annual reports and financial statements - for those that we have been able to look at - since 2011 and 2015 indicate the following – 

Madam Speaker, this table is there - In 2015, this company registered gross profit of Shs 6 billion but reported a net loss of Shs 3.3 billion.

The following year - I know the charges are there on the table and Hon. Nandala knows. In 2014, they registered a profit of Shs 4.9 billion and registered losses of Shs 3.5 billion. In 2013, the company made a gross profit of Shs 6.8 billion and declared losses of Shs 2.7 billion. In 2012, they declared profits of Shs 4.6 billion and losses of Shs 7.7 billion. 1n 2011, it was Shs 4.4 billion and losses of Shs 6.6 billion. In 2010, the gross profit was Shs 6 billion and losses were at Shs 6 billion. 

Therefore, how, on planet earth, do we continue to invest in a company that – over a long time – only registers losses but continues to build other subsidiary enterprises related to a company? I believe this is criminal on the part of this company. 

Other agencies related to this company that have gone on to grow over time are: 

Speke Resort Limited
Kabira Country Club
Speke Resort Munyonyo
Crane Management Services
Premier Academy
Goldstar Insurance Company Limited
Kampala International School Uganda
Rosebud Limited

Madam Speaker, there was an argument by this Government that companies that continue to register progress, but report losses, should attract a cost on the loss. Maybe we need to go back and revisit that decision of Parliament. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was here speaking vehemently on this policy – that you cannot tax losses. However, companies of this nature – that register these losses over time – should at least, in the long term, register a tax. 

I have spoken about Munyonyo and I think I have enriched the case of the main report. 

Construction of roads in the Democratic Republic of Congo

Given the deplorable state of roads and inadequate provision of road construction equipment across the country, it is insensitive of Government to allocate Shs 80 billion for construction of roads in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

Disturbingly, the total allocation to the project has surpassed the commitment that was expected from Uganda. The estimated cost of the project is $334.5 million, of which Uganda committed to contribute approximately $66.9 million (approximately Shs 254 billion). Last year, Parliament appropriated Shs 200 billion to Congo. Hence, the expected balance would have been Shs 54 billion. 

Therefore, the proposed allocation in the Financial Year 2022/2023 is in excess by Shs 26 billion because that is our commitment.
 
It ought to be noted that irrespective of their huge contribution to the revenue collection: 

a) 	The Kampala Capital City that contributes over 75 per cent of the domestic revenue is characterised by a network of potholes, with only 21 per cent of roads in good conditions. 

b) 	The tourism sector that contributes, annually, about Shs l.6 trillion to the GDP, is characterised by poor road networks to the national parks. Instead, priority has been placed on developing roads in the DRC, particularly the Mpondwe-Beni (80 km), Beni-Butembo (54 Km) and Bunagana-Goma (89 km. 

Instead of the costs being footed by the budget of the East African Community (EAC), the tax revenue of Ugandans is being used to deprive them of better infrastructure in their own country. This is akin to colonialism. It is common knowledge that several roads across the country are in a dilapidated state.

Recommendations 

Shs 80 billion should also go to enhance our reallocation. 
Additionally, as a best practice, all road projects should always be allocated at least 20 per cent for operations and maintenance within any given year. 

The accumulated cost of our involvement in Congo 

A total of Shs 436 billion (i.e. Shs 236 under Vote 130 and Shs 200 billion transferred from Vote 007 to Vote 130 through corrigenda) has been allocated for court awards pertaining to the case of DRC v. Uganda under Vote 130: Treasury Operations. This is for and above the actual award of provision of $65 million, which is equivalent to Shs 236.25 billion. This is an excess of Shs 200 billion.

Besides, ever since 2016, billions of monies have been appropriated for the litigation of this case. For instance, through supplementary, M/S Foley Hoag LLP, the law firm that represented Uganda, was paid Shs 7.8 billion (Financial Year 2017/2018), Shs 2.6 billion (Financial Year 2018/2019) and Shs 2.8 billion in Financial Year 2021/2022.

Furthermore, current operations of the UPDF in the Democratic Republic of Congo cost Uganda over Shs 249 million per day. The operations started on 30 November 2021. For the past 170 days, a total of Shs 42 billion has been incurred. However, in the Supplementary Schedule No.2 for Financial Year 2021/2022, another Shs 64 billion has been requested for an operation that lacks parliamentary approval. 

The allocations above are in addition to Shs 80 billion for the DRC roads construction.

Therefore, for the Government, there is need for us to reassess the economic impact of our involvement in the DRC in the broader scheme of the economy.

Recommendations 

Shs 95 billion should be reallocated from Vote 130 to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to cater for mechanisation, which was reflected as an unfunded priority in the ministerial policy statement.  

Shs 105 billion should be reallocated from Vote 130 to the Ministry of Health to cater for purchase of ultrasound equipment in health centres IV, for it was reflected as an unfunded priority in the ministerial policy statement.

Microfinance Support Centre

I will make a brief comment on microfinance because of the sensitivity of the matter. We need to interest ourselves in how it operates and how it meets the stated objective of the small enterprises. Going forward, there are a lot of issues and I will beg the relevant committee – Madam Speaker, instruct it to take keen interest. For some reasons, I have skipped a comment on microfinance. 

Kapeeka Industrial Park

Like other agencies – like we were criticising Munyonyo – it is also a private entity. We are committing billions of shillings of taxpayers’ money to Kapeeka. It competes in manufacturing goods with all other manufacturers that we do not help. I have spoken to Members of Parliament from that area – the road infrastructure going to Kapeeka is being depleted. 

So, we need to re-examine our reallocation on Kapeeka and ensure that this is not another way of haemorrhaging our national resources to go to a private entity that does not, in any way, reduce its prices on the market. Some of the products from there leave much to be desired in terms of quality. 

Model villages 

I will beg you to read this one because we have over spoken about the Parish Development Model.

Madam Speaker, I will beg your indulgence that the last section of this presentation be made by Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. I would like to invite you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Before Hon. Ssemujju comes in, I want you to interest yourself - and I know you respect the international agreements between countries. Much as we are constrained, we can look for money from elsewhere but we cannot breach an agreement that we made, especially on security matters, because the roads that are being constructed are security roads. 

We produce cement from Hima and Kasese; where do the suppliers pass to go to Congo? Our main market is in Congo. So, that suggestion of saying that you take the Shs 80 billion - it is not actually Shs 54 billion that is left, it is actually more. When that security agreement was being signed, at the time, we only had three signatories in the country: the President, the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah and myself; it was done at the beginning of the term. That is how that agreement came in. So, that should not be an issue. 

Let us look for money somewhere and have that done. On the issue of the Microfinance Support Centre, I will ask my committee to carry out an oversight role. Of course, this report also opens our mind: we need to do our oversight role. (Applause)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I reserve my comments. However, there is a small issue that I have left but which concerns agencies that do not lay their budgets: these are statutory corporations but they do not lay their budgets before Parliament, and a number of them have huge funds that go without scrutiny. 

Madam Speaker, I beg the ministers responsible to ensure that all corporations - like the National Insurance Corporation and the one in telecommunication, among other agencies - that go without presenting their budgets in any public agency, to lay their budgets here –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank Hon. Kivumbi. In fact, it is illegal, as provided for in the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, for any agency that we gave delegated appropriation in aid, to spend money without their budget being laid here and approved. 

Madam Speaker, you need to issue a directive that before – first that no organisation, agency or parastatal of whatever name, should spend money without first laying its budget before Parliament. It is unconstitutional and against the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. 

I seek for your guidance whether it is proper for these agencies to spend money that way.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this business of the agencies spending money without the authorisation of Parliament is wrong. The power is only in this House. Why don’t they get the approval?

11.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, by the way, I think as Parliament, we are sitting on our rights.

Section 11 of the Public Finance Management Act states that the Permanent Secretary will be the one responsible for appointing accounting officers. And accounting officers are responsible to Parliament, personally, even under the Constitution of Uganda. 

In this Public Finance Management Act, where Hon. Musasizi was our chairperson, it is clearly stated that no state enterprise or corporation shall have its budget implemented without bringing it to Parliament for approval. 

So, Madam Speaker, we have to take action now because out of the 65 enterprises, we have only 14, which have submitted. If the others have not submitted, it means they do not want to seek Parliament approval. 

The first thing is for the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to withdraw their authority as appointed accounting officer.

Secondly, to sanction those corporations immediately.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a list of accounting officers laid in this House on 31st March 2022. 

However, it is to my surprise, as per the report from chairperson, that only 14 institutions presented their report to this House. Based on that, we cannot continue giving money to accounting officers who are not responsible. The House is ordering the ministry to withdraw those people from being accounting officers. (Applause)

11.47
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am continuing and I hope it is page 14 –

THE SPEAKER: We need you to report back to this House on which accounting officers have been withdrawn, and lay on the Table the names of the people you have appointed as accounting officers.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, during the review of the budget - 

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, after your communication and instruction to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to have the minister from finance respond whether he has heard your communication and he commits himself?

THE SPEAKER: Nodding is not a sign of accepting. Honourable minister, can we have you on record that you have got the information and you are going to take action?

11.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Henry  Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act is very clear and we shall ensure that the law is followed.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you - and report back to the House.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, during the review of the budget, parliamentary committees identified very critical and key sectors touching people’s lives that have not been allocated money by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

These areas fall under health, education, agriculture etc. In the course of this presentation, those of us who have a minority view, will be proposing where additional funds can be got to finance those critical areas. 

In this budget, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not provided for example, Shs 9.9 billion to construct and rehabilitate Arua Regional Hospital - the orthopaedic ward, theatre, imaging centre, mortuary, staff and administration blocks. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has also not provided Shs 6 billion to build staff houses for Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital; Shs 300 million to construct a waste treatment plant at Kiruddu Hospital, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not providing Shs 2.8 billion for orthopaedic and ward rehabilitation for Gulu. 

It is also not providing Shs 5 billion for rehabilitation of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. 

Honourable members, majority of the people you represent here have no money to seek treatment abroad. These regional referral hospitals are their referral before they recuperate or meet their creator. This is their India, Nairobi and Turkey. 

In this budget, Finance is not providing Shs 70 billion to rehabilitate and equip general hospitals in Masindi, Bugiri, Apac, Kambuga, Iganga and Abim. It is also not providing money to functionalise radiology units in 10 regional referral hospitals. 

It is not providing Shs 20 billion to establish a phased national ambulance service. This task of buying ambulances is being abandoned to you, honourable Members of Parliament. 

In the budget, where you do not have money to finance the above and other critical areas, there is Shs 17.2 billion to buy vehicles for the Resident District Commissioners. There is Shs 8.3 billion to pay rent for offices of presidential advisors who officially now total to 139. This House needs to know that the list of presidential advisors now includes Full Figure, Catherine Kusasira, Buchaman (Laughter) For God’s sake, even if you are a blind loyalist, how can you approve rent for Full Figure when you do not have money for the maintenance of Intensive Care Units at Naguru, Hoima – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, isn’t Full Figure a Ugandan? (Laughter) Doesn’t she qualify to be appointed? Why would you talk about a person who is not able to respond or defend herself in the House? (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, our report is only making a comparison – 

THE SPEAKER: Why are you fighting us the Baganda? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: If this House thinks that maintaining – we are only drawing the attention of Parliament to items where we can pick money. But if – 

THE SPEAKER: Mention where to pick the money but do not give examples of Full Figure. (Laughter) Why are you against us the Baganda? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am going to find it difficult to read the report – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to make his presentation. Leave Full Figure alone.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are only making a comparison. If in the estimation of Parliament, it is more important to provide for “Half Figure”, then Parliament will do so. 

We do not have money for the maintenance of the ICU at Naguru, which is just Shs 400 million, Hoima – Shs 600 million, Entebbe – Shs 300 million – 

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, we approved a supplementary for Naguru.

MR SEMMUJJU: Moroto – Shs 600 million, Mbarara – Shs 800 million. So, you have money to maintain these presidential advisors whose names I have been advised by the Speaker not to mention, and no money to maintain Intensive Care Units? This Parliament has a duty to stop this madness. 

Members need to note that the Office of the President, this financial year, has been allocated Shs 147 billion in the budget. His residence – State House, has been allocated Shs 677 billion. This means that the country spends Shs 1.8 billion on the residence of the President per day. It also spends Shs 400 million per day on his office. When you total this, it means we spend Shs 2 billion on the presidency every day. 

Mind you, the known daughters of the President have all been married off and the known son has grown. He has even started a political movement called National Progressive Movement. The President and his wife plus their workers remain the only occupants of State House. 

It would, therefore, be immoral for this Parliament to approve Shs 677 billion for a residence of just two adults. Moreover, the President and his wife are both salaried people. The presidential – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju – honourable members, order. Hon. Alayo, can you stop conducting a meeting there? Honourable members, all of us deserve some kind of privacy. You cannot start describing somebody to that extent. The daughters have got married. The son has grown – who knows about your family? Why are you insisting on State House? Why don’t you talk about other institutions? Why don’t you mention State House other than describing the family? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to budget for a family whose members you do not know. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, we budget for your salary and your housing. Do we know your family and how many women you have? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: I have no problem discussing my children. In fact, when I came here to be sworn in, I came with all of them and my wife – 

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. 

MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that you have ruled Hon. Ssemujju out of order on his nomenclature, isn’t it procedurally right that his statements are expunged from the Hansard? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, go to the next item. Leave the President as he is. That is why he is number one. If you want to get all those benefits, become number one. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am reporting our minority view on the budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Read what is in the report.

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, let me read the report. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason the President is given a salary under the Presidential Emoluments Act is because the country expects him to buy himself tomatoes and onions. If the President is using his salary, he will appreciate when citizens complain about the high cost of living. 

We, therefore, recommend that since the Office of the President already has a budget of Shs 147 billion, we provide his residence Shs 73 billion. In our view, Shs 73 billion can take care of our President and his wife even if they are eating a cow and 100 kgs of rice every day. (Laughter)

The items that will be affected by this proposed cut are; donations worth Shs 140 billion, workshops and seminars worth Shs 2 billion, welfare and entertainment of Shs 3.4 billion, agriculture supplies – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, we are looking at figures. Honourable Members, let us be mindful of what we say and when. I do not think State House is about eating meat; there are other activities in State House. I respect his views and his report is political; how would he get votes from here if he does not talk about the President? Can you summarise?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have listed the items for which we think we can remove money from to finance your hospitals that I spoke about. I do not have to mention those items again. About Shs 580 billion saved under State House should then be allocated to the health sector to finance unfunded priorities.

We also disagree with the majority on providing Shs 50 billion to buy vehicles for the Internal Security Organisation operatives as opposed to providing Shs 20 billion to buy ambulances.

There is a proposal that we buy Internal Security Organisation 345 vehicles; we can buy them five and use the rest of the money to buy ambulances to take our people to hospitals.

Before we take leave of State House and the President’s office, remember, the flagship project in this budget is the Parish Development Model. This project meant to uplift 68 per cent of our people from poverty has been given Shs 1 trillion. The Office of the President and State House combined, Shs 797 billion. You can imagine 68 per cent of the population Shs 1 trillion, two adults Shs 797 billion. 

Finally, this Parliament needs to critically examine the budget of the ministry of defence. One item that stands out every financial year is classified expenditure. This year, Defence is requesting for Shs 2.9 trillion in classified expenditure-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Obama, if you want to speak, speak on the microphone; do not shout - the oil city people do not behave like you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Finance is providing Shs 1.9 trillion - of course they will come back through a supplementary and Shs 240 billion to buy vehicles.

We are all consumers of Defence and Security services but we do not like this sector to be turned into a bottomless pit for our national resources. Defence must not be turned into a cash cow for some people. We want to be sure that money meant for ordinary soldiers is not the one funding birthday parties for senior officers.

We have been approached by soldiers from the engineering brigade and their complaint is that they are not being treated as other scientists, yet many of them are engineers. Instead of funding birthday parties and political ambitions, this Parliament should provide money to build decent houses for our ordinary soldiers. 

We propose that we cut Shs 1 trillion from classified expenditure to finance construction of barracks and at least for the next four years.

We should further reduce the classified expenditure by another Shs 400 billion to finance unfunded priorities in agriculture, including buying of tractors, coffee seedlings, cotton seed multiplication - all these items are unfunded. 

Finally -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, the chairperson of the audit committee on classified expenditure is from the Opposition and from what I have received, no money went for birthday parties. So, a birthday party should not be brought into this debate; I have a report on the accountability on classified money.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate, but usually audit reports are brought in January; maybe you still have the old one. (Laughter)

Finally, classified expenditure is no longer a justification for hiding huge sums of money. Everybody in this region knows which type of military hardware that we have because they are sold like any other item from a factory.

Look, all the ammunition being given to Ukraine in its defence against Russia’s invasion are declared and sent in broad daylight. Stingers, javelin missiles, jets, tanks, tactical drones.

This Parliament must declassify our classified expenditure; you can no longer hide under classified expenditure that you are buying equipment; they are being sold like clothes. 

Madam Speaker, you will not say that we did not tell you. Thank you very much, for listening to us.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssemujju. And we have given you votes for making the political report and observations.

Honourable members, remember during the ministerial policy statements, we debated these reports; does anybody want to make a comment before the minister? Hon. Nandala, are you a member of the Committee on Budget? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not.

THE SPEAKER: Do not even waste your time to stand; we discussed this report and we are going to supply.

12.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for the good report. I think it is very good to talk about Munyonyo; these ones have taken a lot of our money and the expenses of the hotel, which is owned by the other side, are being charged on Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort so that it turns out as a loss. The earlier we removed our shares the better. 

Madam Speaker, two small things on arrears; the committee said that we should appropriate Shs 395 billion yet the demand of the arrears is over Shs 2 trillion - and these are from domestic suppliers. I want the committee to help us to understand; if the Shs 2 trillion is air, let them remove it from our books. If it is genuinely there, we should pay our people because domestic arrears affect local people and that is why people’s property is being taken over by banks and moneylenders.

I want the minister and the chairperson to help us on why out of Shs 2 trillion, you are budgeting only for Shs 395 billion.

Secondly, traffic is on the increase; I want the chairperson of the committee and the minister to tell us how much they allocated for traffic because buses are burning every day. Cars are getting problems because of traffic and the department of traffic in the Ministry of Works and Transport said that is underfunded. Now, is there money set for traffic and money which should be ring-fenced for purposes of traffic? 

Regarding loans and grants, there are a lot of loans on the balance sheet, which have not been used. I think there is a quick need to audit these loans and grants. The beneficiaries of loans and grants are the project managers, who delay projects so they can earn salaries and drive big cars and do whatever. I propose that as Parliament, we should make a recommendation to first implement the old projects, which have outstanding loans, before we borrow and put more money on our balance sheet, which attracts interest, penalties and so forth.

This year, we are going to borrow Shs 7 trillion from out; this is a lot of money. Instead of going for Shs 7 trillion, why don’t we first rationalise what we have, utilise all these old loans and see what can be done? Even those managers and permanent secretaries who have projects, which are delayed in their ministries, should be sanctioned. Otherwise, that is non-performance on the part of the project managers, permanent secretaries and ministries. 

Even ministers should be sanctioned; you cannot be a minister and supervise a ministry, which has a lot of outstanding loans, where work is not being done and Ugandans are paying commitment fees and interest.

Madam Speaker, if Parliament agrees with me, I ask that today, we recommend that:

The Auditor-General carry out a forensic audit on all loans we have borrowed. 

Sanctions be put on the project managers, permanent secretaries, including the ministers supervising them.

We should not borrow more money until we have utilised this one. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I first need clarification on the interventions we are putting on road accidents and traffic issues. Chairperson, can I have a response to that? 
 
MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, there is a budget in the ministry for management of road safety under UNRA. It was agreed that the Ministry of Works and Transport will harmonise their operations to ensure the money is properly handled within their departments and road safety activity is undertaken. It is a managerial matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Did you provide for it under UNRA and not under works?

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: It is under UNRA.

THE SPEAKER: Is that one of the mandates of UNRA?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, UNRA’s job is not traffic; it is to build roads. If the chairperson has put that money in UNRA -

THE SPEAKER: We would have that money under police and the Ministry of Works and Transport.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly. Madam Speaker, I want to give an example. 

Recently, we lost a Speaker; the entire House was there. If you multiply that by the number of vehicles - it was that. That was sickness - but suppose it were an accident and a Member of Parliament, commissioner, minister or a permanent secretary died due to a bad road - the cost of traffic is too high. Madam Speaker, the earlier we protect, the better.

One time in the Seventh Parliament, a Member of Parliament from a certain constituency died in an accident. I will not name the constituency. When we were here proposing that we put money, he got up and said we do not need money in the -

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you leave the dead to rest?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay. Madam Speaker, what I want to propose is that we need money for traffic in this budget.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: On road safety, they are multi-faceted. UNRA has money for road safety since they also do work related to roads. The police also has money for road safety. The Ministry of Works and Transport also has money for road safety. All those have budgets. There is even a department of road safety under the Ministry of Works and Transport and it has a budget.

THE SPEAKER: Can we look at that when we go to supply so that we are able to know how much money is in UNRA under road safety, how much is in Works under road safety and how much is in Police under road safety. 

12.16
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I know it takes a lot to scrutinise all sectors. I also thank the chairpersons of all the different committees that met these MDAs and received their budgets and interfaced with them.

Madam Speaker, I have a few suggestions. One, budgeting is our cardinal role here. The most important thing is revenue and expenditure. I pray that in future, we have multi-sectoral committees going for retreats to scrutinise - there are certain things we can talk about and help these agencies. Since these agencies did not even have the courage to present their budgets to us, we are appropriating minus them. It is grave, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, there are certain things we would like to talk about, for example, if you came to Kampala and someone asked you: does this city really look like a capital city? Every one of us will shy down. We had a grant of $75 million for lighting up this city but it is not here. US$75 million is revenue in the form of a grant. Those are lost jobs and lost beautification. We should be able to sit as legislators and talk about such things with these departments.

Secondly, we have grants from agriculture. We are talking about UCDA, which would be attracting much more money than what we are attracting now from promotion in coffee. Strategically, what are our embassies doing? You are with the Government of Qatar but you hear Qatar has given over $50 million to the Republic of Rwanda for coffee and the promotion of coffee is Rwandese coffee. Not in bad faith; we are all in East Africa. Uganda is the largest producer of coffee next to Ethiopia now. We are the leading producers but no one hears about our –

When you come to sports, Madam Speaker, our performance has been enormous. The National Council of Sports budget is not really convincing. We should go - and I intend, at supply, to clearly state that we should ring-fence the budget for sports. This is because it is suppressed every other day, yet every other day, when sportsmen and women run out of money, they come to you, Madam Speaker, and we end up contributing as Members of Parliament - (Interruption) 

MR SILWANY: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I want to give information to Hon. Nsereko. Whenever we budget for the sports subsector - One of the cardinal incomes in tourism for our young people, especially those who come from Eastern Uganda, where there is a lot of athletics - you always see the Kiptegeis of this country performing. 

Madam Speaker, we pass a budget for sports in this Parliament and the ministry of finance is supposed to actualise it, but it does not happen. The budgets end on paper. Madam Speaker, even if we ring-fence – this time, we want the ministry to commit that they are going to actually send this money as it is and as we have ring-fenced it. That is the information I wanted to give Hon. Nsereko.

THE SPEAKER: One thing I want to make the ministry understand is that these activities are put in a plan per year. It is not something that comes from nowhere. By the time they budget for them, the activity is already there. So, when you decide to cut off and the sportspeople start begging Parliament to give them money, it is unfair. 

It is not just about sports; we are promoting the country. That is the best tourism promotion we are doing for the country. (Applause) Talk about Kiprotich, Cheptegei – you are cutting those budgets and you cannot – (Mr Opolot Isiagi rose_) Yes, chairperson? 

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, I will give information that in our harmonisation in the committee, it was found that the National Council of Sports has a total of Shs 18 billion for a whole year, including salaries and everything. That is why they get stuck.

Now, the committee identified – in these reallocations – an additional Shs 22 billion to the National Council of Sports - (Applause) - including money for the Birmingham Commonwealth Games. (Applause) I would like to thank –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, much as you have identified that amount of money, the money for the main active federations must be ring-fenced by this Parliament.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, as I wind up on the matter of sports, I would like to thank the chairperson that they took note of that. Our view was that we have several games and for each game, we intend to bring an amendment where we have equal share for particular games, depending on their ratings and performances at the moment.

THE SPEAKER: There is information from the sports chairperson of here. Then, I will want to hear from the minister.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give the honourable colleague is that over and above the issue of ring-fencing monies for these federations and generally sports, it is also important that this Parliament considers expediting the amendment of the sports law because that is where part of the problem is.

You are going to get the money – this National Council of Sports, Madam Speaker, has a lot of authority. If we do not come up with an appropriate legal framework, these monies will go there but they may not end up with the beneficiaries. 

So, over and above the issue of ring-fencing, we should look at the idea of having an appropriate legal regime, for purposes of supporting that ring-fencing. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I hear from you?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I was giving information – the last piece. Honourable members, athletics has done us a very big favour. At the same time, the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) is trying its best. When we look at the netballers; so far, in Africa, our team is No. 2 and in the whole world – I think they are No. 6. (Applause)

Therefore, we need to maintain that and even go above. For us to do that, we need to ring-fence money for them. I want to urge the people, who are on the frontline of making sure that the money is spent, not to tamper with that money, which is for athletics, football and netball because that is our beginning point, before we spread to the rest. (Applause)

Finally – because I may not get the opportunity again – the money for road safety – the Shs 30 billion - must be ring-fenced. We need it today, not tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to wind up my plea, by making a prayer –

THE SPEAKER: You gave out your time. Okay, you finish.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable members, for the information you have given. For sure, I do not take it for granted. 

The sports sector contributes, to the entire world, more than $1 trillion. We have a lot of talent here. In your wisdom, Madam Speaker, you have directed the minister to come and state as he so wishes.

The problem is that the basketball team – you remember the other time they were going to Rwanda and had to seek intervention from private funds of the President, which he gave. So, we will not be running to State House for every sports activity. Let us budget now and help sports grow in this country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to thank the Budget Committee and all chairpersons of committees for the very comprehensive work and report they have made on the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023.

With the team, which has put all this together, I am confident that the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 will mark the beginning of the recovery of this economy. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the budget for the Financial year 2022/2023 has been affected by limited fiscal space, which necessitated repurposing of the budget. The report has clearly shown that there is limited room for further cutting the budget in regard to consumptive expenditure or cutting expenditure, which is not in line with the Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2022/2023.

However, I would like to note that there has been a recommendation to make cuts on the statutory expenditure, amounting to Shs 1.336 trillion from Vote 130: Treasury Operations. Colleagues, this is a breach of Article 160 of the Constitution, which demands that public debt has a first call on the Consolidated Fund.

Further, Madam Speaker, there is need to redeem promissory notes already issued for Lubowa Hospital, amounting to Shs 75 billion; failure of which will lead to penalties and loss of trust in the ability of Uganda to meet its obligations.

We would also like to note that there is a recommendation to cut the following allocations:

Shs 86.4 billion from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Government contribution to Munyonyo. This will derail Government’s plans to host the Non-Alignment Movement conference.

Reduction in the funding to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Uganda Tourism Board, which is not in line with Government’s strategy to support tourism recovery, a key sector for generating foreign exchange and a multiplier effects on other sectors of the economy such as agriculture, hospitality, etc.

Madam Speaker, we would also like to note that we are creating administrative structures, which is a prerogative of the Executive. 

Madam Speaker, my last point on the economy from the issues the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget raised, I would like to note that our economy has been affected by shocks, one after another, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the regional and global political conflicts and climate change, all of which have affected both the global and domestic economies. These developments affected Government's financial position through the reduction in Government revenue on one hand, and on the other hand, the need to increase Government expenditure to mitigate the adverse effects of the private sector and on the people's livelihoods, particularly the most vulnerable households. 

Due to the above shocks, the fiscal deficit for the Financial Year 2021/2022 was projected at 7.5 above the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility target of 6.4, mainly due to the impact of the pandemic and security-related spending to mitigate against spill overs from regional conflicts into Uganda's borders. 

With the pandemic subsiding, we have programmed to gradually return to the fiscal paths specified in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. In the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023, the fiscal deficit is projected to reduce to 5.6 of GDP, from 7.5 per cent. 

Public debt is projected to reach 54.3 of GDP. These are slightly higher than their respective targets in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. This slight deviation is mainly due to the need to ensure continued economic recovery, accelerate the transition to the 39 per cent of Ugandan households in the subsistence economy to the money economy and the need to have the first oil by the year 2025.

For this reason, Madam Speaker, the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 has had to include the following interventions:

The comprehensive rollout of the Parish Development Model. A trillion has been provided to ensure that each parish in the country is provided with access to Shs 100 million;

Furthermore, Government will maintain the funding of Emyooga with Shs 100 billion to provide seed capital for small businesses, including special interests enterprising groups and UDB capitalisation of Shs 85.5 billion;

Government committed to the oil and gas sector by providing additional Shs 715 billion to the programme on sustainable development of petroleum resources. This additional funding was provided following the announcement of the final investment decision in order to meet Government's obligations to UNOC and the petroleum authority;

Enhancement of funding to scientists, including science teachers – Shs 495 billion, in line with Government’s strategy to support research and innovation;

Provision of a total of Shs 495 billion for arrears to provide support to the private sector. This issue has been raised by Hon. Nandala-Mafabi;

Support the tourism sector by providing additional Shs 30 billion, following the full re-opening of the economy. This additional funding will be geared towards supporting the development of tourism related infrastructure, increase the focus on domestic tourism and support Uganda Tourism Board's efforts under the new brand of “Explore Uganda” to exploit the potential surge in tourism when COVID-19 and related travel restrictions begin to subside worldwide; and

Uganda shillings 40 billion additional funding has also been provided for the development of Mbale and Kapeeka Industrial parks in line with the increased focus on the industrialisation drive. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, it is important to note that we measure our performance against the Charter at the end of the financial year, after the budget execution. Assessment on whether or not we have breached the Charter is reported in the National Budget Framework Paper that is submitted to Parliament annually. 

Madam Speaker, it is, therefore, our considered opinion as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the committee reconsiders these adjustments, which I have mentioned. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. As Parliament of Uganda, we also want to register our dissatisfaction with your ministry for bringing corrigenda in the evening yet you expected a report the next day. This should be the last time, if I am in this chair - (Applause) – it should be the last time.

How do you supply the next day when corrigenda has come in the evening? How do you want this Parliament to perform? What are you hiding as a ministry? Even the people who wrote the report for you did so in anticipation. They ought to hear the Members’ complaints, for instance, the Shs 86 billion. You cannot just start dishing money left, right and centre. Honourable chairperson, do you have anything to say?

Mr OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, I thank you and the Members of this House, for the comments made and the advice given. I only request that we now move to supply the money. Thank you.

The Speaker: I put the question that the report of the chairperson be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider and approve the budgetary proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee of supply

THE CHAIRPERSON: IT team, please display the figures on the screen for the Members to see.  

Recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023 

Vote 001: Office of the President 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 183,275,094,000 be approved under Vote 001: Office of the President as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002: State House
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 458,881,135,000 be approved under Vote 002: State House as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 108,343,689,000 be approved under Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,267,694,925,000 be approved under Vote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 24,132,065,000 be approved under Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 33,887,665,000 be approved under Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 126,448,108,000 be approved under Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,326,335,945,000 be approved under Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 55,791,104,000 be approved under Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 41,368,395,000 be approved under Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 50,060,839,000 be approved under Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 103,328,291,000 be approved under Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013: Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 350,140,019,000 be approved under Vote 013: Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014: Ministry of Health 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 149,499,385,000 be provided for under Vote 014: Ministry of Health as recurrent expenditure for the Finance Year 2022/ 2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 110,513,793,000 be provided for under Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 125,694,489,000 be provided for under Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 38,834,191,000 be provided for under Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 244,121,127,000 be provided for under Vote: 018 Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 39,090,840,000 be provided for under Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 020: Ministry of Information and Communications Technology 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 55,456,510,000 be provided under Vote 020: Ministry of Information and Communications Technology as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
  
Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 36, 787,102,000 be provided for under Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 153,183,304,000 be provided for under Vote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 023: Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,215,000,000 be provided for under Vote 023: Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 109: Uganda National Meteorological Authority
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,099, 224,000 be provided for under Vote 109: Uganda National Meteorological Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,702,494,000 be provided for under Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,224,695,000 be provided for under Vote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 14, 858,460,000 be provided for under Vote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 152,172,582,000 be provided for under Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 28,043,775,000 be provided for under Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,830,908,000 be provided for under Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 116: Uganda National Medical Stores

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 507,042,988,000 be provided for under Vote 116: Uganda National Medical Stores as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 23,747,907,000 be provided for under Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 487,952,712,000 be provided for under Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 33,246,972,000 be provided for under Vote 116: Uganda Registration Services Bureau as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 108,852,499,000 be provided for under Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,156,851,000 be provided for under Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: On what matter do you rise, Hon. Nsereko?

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, we have here a challenge on recurrent expenditure. We propose that some wishful spending be vired and adjusted from recurrent to development. We would like to notify the House that from sub-programme two, which has management, we vired from Shs 4.41 billion, which is non-wage by Shs 1 billion, to maintenance of drainage channels. 
Then, from legal services nonwage, Shs 8 billion that is, in sub-programme two, Shs 3 billion to maintenance of drainage channels and works on drainage channels including Lubigi, Nakivubo Channel, Banda drainage, and Kasokoso drainage channel. 

We also propose – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nsereko, I would like to refer you to Article 93 of the Constitution of Uganda. Anything that has a financial implication – I expected you to have gone to the committee and made these proposals with them. However, KCCA will make an administrative decision on that. 

I put the question that a total sum of Shs 189,331,116,000 be provided for under Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,082,278,000 be provided for under Vote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,885,416,000 be provided for under Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,260,298,000 be provided for under Vote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, earlier during plenary, we agreed that only state-owned enterprises and public corporations that submitted their statements should be considered. We have a list of these agencies so it is only these ones that submitted their ministerial policy statements that we can consider. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we said is that we are considering the budgets but dismissing the accounting officers. We are going to stop them from being accounting officers. I am going to read the list. 

Vote 126: National Information Technologies Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 47,331,746,000 be provided for under Vote 126: National Information Technologies Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 127: Uganda Virus Research Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,048,096,000 be provided for under Vote 127: Uganda Virus Research Institute as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question out and agree to.)

Vote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 112,028,949,000 be provided for under Vote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 129:  Financial Intelligence Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,522,463,000 be provided for under Vote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132: Education Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,002,637,000 be provided for under Vote 132: Education Service Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 61,985,096,000 be provided for under Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134: Health Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,926,837,000 be provided for under Vote 134: Health Service Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 28,441,874,000 be provided for under Vote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136: Uganda Export Promotion Board

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,114,593,000 be provided for under Vote 136: Uganda Export Promotion Board as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137: National Identification Registration Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 56,465,888,000 be provided for under Vote 137: National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 138: Uganda Investment Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,736,462,000 be provided for under Vote 138: Uganda Investment Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 54,963,452,000 be provided for under Vote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140: Capital Markets Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,570,014,000 be provided for under Vote 140: Capital Markets Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to)

Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 495,770,983,000 be provided for under Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman Otaala, do not go. Stay. These are your budgets – a whole chairperson of a committee!

Vote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 68,351,641,000 be provided for under Vote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 60,116,823,000 be provided for under Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144: Uganda Police

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 679,607,401,000 be provided for under Vote 144: Uganda Police Force as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 289,652,533,000 be provide for under Vote 145: Uganda Prisons, as recurrent expenditure for the FY 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146: Public Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,047,194,000 be provide for under Vote 146: Public Service Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,925,795,000 be provide for under Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148: Judicial Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,618,034,000 be provide for under Vote 148: Judicial Service Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149: National Population Council

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 12,914, 070,000 be provide for under Vote 149: National Population Council as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 150: National Environment Management Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,693, 153,000 be provide for under Vote 150: National Environment Management Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,894,928,000 be provide for under Vote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Service as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 44,828,203,000 be provide for under Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153: Public Procurement & Disposal of Assets 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,180,166,000 be provide for under Vote 153: Public Procurement & Disposal of Assets Services as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 36,688,420,000 be provide for under Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 155: Cotton Development Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,806,661,000 be provide for under Vote 154: Cotton Development Organisation as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Charity, can you whip your group to vote and not be on phones. I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,115,883,000 be provide for under Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 157: National Forestry Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 23,589,540,000 be provide for under Vote 157: National Forestry Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 158: Internal Security Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 144,530,017,000 be provide for under Vote 158: Internal Security Organisation as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 159: External Security Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 91,087,271,000 be provide for under Vote 159: External Security Organisation as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 60,666,999,000 be provided for under Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161: Uganda Free Zones Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,640,952,000 be provided for under Vote 161: Uganda Free Zones Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162: Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,690,135,000 be provided for under Vote 162: Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,625,059,000 be provided for under Vote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 164: National Council for Higher Education 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,805,000,000 be provided for under Vote 164: National Council for Higher Education as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 27,486,666,000 be provided for under Vote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 166: National Council of Sports
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the chairperson and committee for having enhanced this sector. However, Madam Chairperson, you clearly said - and the House resolved - that ring-fencing of different entities matters. We are tired of coming here to become umpires in boxing matches between different federations that are fighting for allocations.

Madam Chairperson, if this House so wishes and may consider, the additional funding be shared as herein: Multisport international competitions be given a total sum of Shs 5 billion and it is not changing anything to do with the total figures. So, do not worry. I can see the finance minister doing this.

Football be given Shs 17 billion from the extra funding –(Interjection) – billion shillings. Football – it is within the National Council of Sports budget, as already allocated. These are details.

Athletics, boxing and netball be given Shs 5.6 billion to be shared equally amongst all. Basketball, rugby, cricket, Paralympics and motorsport be given Shs 4.75 billion to be shared equally.

The 15 other federations which include badminton, chess, cycling, golf, handball, hockey, kickboxing –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is a resource within the vote, not so? Does it change anything? It does not.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: The clarification I am seeking from him is; are you talking of the Shs 47.8 billion – the total you want to ring-fence? Okay.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. We would derive Shs 4.705 billion and 15 other federations which I have earmarked including tennis, volleyball, woodball, swimming, squash, pool, etc. We have earmarked Shs 2.990 billion to be shared equally. For other listed federations, some you have never heard of like rowing and others, another Shs 90 million is to be shared equally as growing federations. That would accrue the same total without altering the figure of what we have been given. 

I beg to propose, Madam Chairperson.
 
MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, within that figure of Shs 47,812,199,000, his figure is okay. However, as a Committee on Education and Sports, there was an issue of netball and athletics. I want this committee to understand one thing; where you have a big advantage, always make sure you support that corner.

Can we give Shs 3 billion to netball and also give Shs 3 billion to athletics? Maintain the figure for football and that Shs 17 billion. Distribute the rest but while keeping within the Shs 47,812,199,000.

I heard you talk of distributing Shs 6 billion or Shs 5 billion for three federations -

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Sorry, that is the additional. It already has that magnitude; that is the additional. So, what I am talking about is what has been added by the chairperson for redistribution. 

MR AOGON: You know, we need clarity. We are talking about the Shs 47 billion. We are not changing anything around the block but we are going into the details. So, let us protect the money for netball, athletics, FUFA and then have the rest also get theirs. Let us not fall down after rising up. (Applause)

MR NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, this is something, which I love talking passionately about. I am a father of a two-time Olympian. So, when we come in here and just say, “Give Shs 3 billion to netball; Shs 2 billion to football”, you do not have the capacity, as Parliament, to determine how much should go where – (Interjection) - yes. We have the powers but the determination and competence should be left to the National Council –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable counsel, there were budgets that were presented to the sectoral committees and we are doing appropriation, as per the budgets that were given to the sectoral committees. 

We are not making a decision for them but they had budgets, which were presented and then, it was presented in the ministerial policy statements. This House debated it, approved it and now we are appropriating; Counsel, with due respect.

Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 47,812,199,000 be provided for under Vote 166: National Council of Sports as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023 and the money that is going to the federations must be ring-fenced.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 301: Makerere University

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 356,281,659,000 be provided for under Vote 301: Makerere University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 302: Mbarara University

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 55,065,926,000 be provided for under Vote 302: Mbarara University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 303: Makerere University Business School

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 103,680,575,000 be provided for under Vote 303: Makerere University Business School (MUBS) as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 304: Kyambogo University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 135,875,964,000 be provided for under Vote 304: Kyambogo University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 305: Busitema University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 49,578,648,000 be provided for under Vote 305: Busitema University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 306: Muni University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,313,527,000 be provided for under Vote 306: Muni University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 307: Kabale University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 52,173,134,000 be provided for under Vote 307: Kabale University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 308: Soroti University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,852,860,000 be provided for under Vote 308: Soroti University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 309: Gulu University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,891,111,000 be provided for under Vote 309: Gulu University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 310: Lira University
 
The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,411,447,000 be provided for under Vote 310: Lira University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 311: Law Development Centre 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 24,326,940,000 be provided for under Vote 311: Law Development Centre as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 312: Uganda Management Institute 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 35,031,626,000 be provided for under Vote 312: Uganda Management Institute as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 313: Mountains of the Moon University 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 34,392,974,000 be provided for under Vote 313: Mountains of the Moon University as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: Before I get off the universities, there was Busoga University and Bunyoro University. What happened to them? We need assurance that there is money for Busoga and Bunyoro universities. (Applause)

Ms nakadama: Madam Chairperson, this is under the Ministry of Education but it is until the structures are put in place. Thank you.

The Chairperson: Is it when you get the structures that the vote will be given to those universities?

Ms nakadama: Yes.

Ms chairperson: Can you make sure that is done and we have our votes as Busoga University and Bunyoro University?

Ms nakadama: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. 

Vote 401: Mulago National Referral Hospital 

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 81,378,647,000 be provided for under Vote 401: Mulago National Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 402: Butabika Hospital

The Chairperson: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,793,828,000 be provided for under Vote 402: Butabika Hospital, as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Justine, thank you for being attentive. 

Vote 403: Arua Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,526,776,000 be provided for under Vote 403: Arua Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 404: Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,000,363,000 be provide for under Vote 404: Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 405: Gulu Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,434,657,000 be provided for under Vote 405: Gulu Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 406: Hoima Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,026,359,000 be provided for under Vote 406: Hoima Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: I would like to move a motion that we take the subtotals of votes. After all, the digits, numbers and votes are known to us. We have one thousand votes so it will take us hours here. Every single vote is displayed and where a Member has an objection, they can rise up. Therefore, I would like to move a motion that this House or this committee agrees that we move by subtotal, agree on the figures and that the question be put and we adopt it. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are going to batch them up but let us just finish with the referral hospitals. 

Vote 407: Jinja Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 18,154,307,000 be provided for under Vote 407: Jinja Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 408: Kabale Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,638,900,000 be provided for under Vote 408: Kabale Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 409: Masaka   Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,901,966,000 be provided for under Vote 409: Masaka   Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 410: Mbale Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,406,870,000 be provided for under Vote 410: Mbale Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 411: Soroti Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,259,458,000 be provided for under Vote 411: Soroti Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 412: Lira   Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,357,884,000 be provided for under Vote 412: Lira Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 413: Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,015,400,000 be provided for under Vote 413: Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 414: Mubende Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,083,875,000 be provided for under Vote 414: Mubende Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 415: Moroto Regional Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,250,626,000 be provided for under Vote 415: Moroto Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 416: Naguru Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,235,441,000 be provided for under Vote 416: Naguru Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 417: Kiruddu Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 24, 663,312,000 be provided for under Vote 417: Kiruddu Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 418: Kawempe Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,641,862,000 be provided for under Vote 418: Kawempe Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 419: Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,696,377,000 be provided for under Vote 419: Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 420: Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 23,707,492,000 be provided for under Vote 420: Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital for recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 421: Kayunga Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,826,771,000 be provided for under Vote 421: Kayunga Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 422: Yumbe Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,788,459,000 be provided for under Vote 422: Yumbe Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions abroad 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are going to batch them – Missions abroad are from votes 501 to 536.

CAPT. (RTD) KAHONDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I call upon the Hansard to capture all the details. 

(The report will be appended to the Hansard monthly bound volume of May 2022)

CAPT. (RTD) KAHONDA: Madam Chairperson, for Greater Bushenyi, where we have the five districts of Mitooma, Sheema, Buhweju, Rubirizi and Bushenyi, we have only one referral hospital: Kitagata. I have gone through the list carefully and I have not heard Kitagata Referral Hospital being catered for –(Interruption) 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: My friend, Hon. Kahonda, that is a policy matter. Just handle that gentleman because I even bothered to listen but did not hear a referral hospital in Greater Rukungiri. Do you remember Greater Rukungiri – Kanungu, where – There was nothing! Please, handle that in your caucus.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was of the view that, procedurally, we could go Vote by Vote because many people are watching outside there. We might be few here but people are interested to know how much Parliament has appropriated, for example, to Mbale Hospital or Bududa Hospital. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think he may have a point but it can be cured differently. The record should actually show Vote by Vote, much as we can pass the total figure here –(Interjection)- No, listen. Do you want to speak on my behalf? 

Madam Chairperson, the Hansard should actually reflect the details but we can pass the figure here as is being suggested. However, the Hansard should have those details such that tomorrow, if somebody was to read the Hansard, he would know exactly which particular mission got which amount or which amount was supplied.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, I had guided on that – that the Hansard should capture all the details of what amount goes to which institution, mission, university or local government. 

Missions abroad: Votes 501 to 536

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 187,819,330,000 be appropriated as recurrent expenditure for Uganda missions abroad for Votes 501 to 536 for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments: Votes 601 to 935

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,732,805,550,000 be provided for Votes 601-935: Local Governments as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Central Government Votes 001 – Vote 402

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,689,148,823,000 be provided as a total recurrent expenditure for Votes 001–Vote 402: Central Government for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am suspending the House for 20 minutes. We shall handle development expenditures when we come back.

(The House was suspended at 2.14 p.m. _)

(On resumption at 2.44 p.m., the Speaker presiding _)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

Central Government Votes 001-023, 101-166,301-313, 401 and 402

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,584,412,353,000 be provided for under votes 001-023, 101-166, 301-313,401-402: Central Government as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My issue is about the road equipment for the 16 districts which we unanimously agreed on that all the districts have road equipment. Are they catered for in this coming budget?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The money is in the budget.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Chairperson, Government, through corrigenda, provided Shs 28 billion to procure half of the road equipment for the 16 new districts but in our harmonisation, part of the money reallocated was raised to fill-up that amount by another Shs 27 billion to ensure that all the 16 new districts get road equipment. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The money was reallocated from Munyonyo to road equipment.

Referral Hospitals: Votes 403-422

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 30,665,000,000 be provided for under votes 403-422: Referral Hospitals as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Missions aboard: Votes 501-536

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 52,876,861,000 be provided for under votes 501-536: Missions Aboard as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments: Votes 601-610, 701-731 and 801-935

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Sh 930,664,877,000 be provided for under Votes 601-610, 701-731 and 801-935 as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Development Expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,598,619,091,000 be provided for as total development expenditure for the various votes for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,969,066,200,000 be provided for as development expenditure for statutory votes and specified officers under votes 001,007,130,101-108,131,133,144,145 for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Pension and gratuity for non-statutory votes 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 873,850,269,000 be provided for pension and gratuity for non-statutory votes for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Grand Total for Statutory Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the grand total of Shs 17,842,916,469 be provided for statutory expenditure, development, for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Total Budgetary Expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 48,130,684,383,000 – Committee, can you clarify on your figure vis-à-vis the minister’s figure.

Honourable members, as we wait for reconciliation between the two figures, I just want to confirm to this House that the only entities that complied with the statutory regulations are:

The Uganda Revenue  Authority,
The Electricity Regulatory Authority,
The Insurance Regulatory Authority of Uganda,
Kilembe Mines Limited, 
Mandela National Stadium,

The National Drug Authority, 
The National Water and Sewerage Corporation,
Pride Microfinance Limited,
The Uganda Civil Aviation Authority, 
The Uganda Communications Commission, 

The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited,
The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, 
The Uganda Property Holdings Limited, 
The Uganda Railways Corporation and
The Uganda Wildlife Authority - the rest did not. Action must be taken on those institutions that did not comply.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  Madam Chairperson, as we still wait for those figures, we would like to thank you for the stewardship you have shown in this matter. But also in the same spirit, having listened to the entities and corporations that complied, we have been in this House but there are two reports on these entities that we have never heard - Kilembe Mines and Uganda Property Holdings. 

We know that they are there and we have no doubt –(Interjection)- Hon. Byanyima is even wondering whether they exist. They are there. Uganda Property Holdings hold all properties that are held by the Uganda Government here and abroad, I think. It is the one that manages and runs them. 

We have not had reports from the committees that monitor these entities. This is the chance we need to use if we want a value-for-money audit at this time. 

We have been talking about revenue but we are never aware of where Government has shares and the contribution they give to the Consolidated Fund, how much money we have accrued in form of dividends from these companies and whether they are managed following the full principles of corporate governance. 

I think, honourable members, we should interest ourselves in these matters seriously but also request you, Madam Chairperson, that you request the committees that oversee these entities to step up their game and provide certain things to this House. You can imagine, you will walk out from here and an enthusiastic voter asks you about Kilembe Mines Limited. 

I am very happy I am seeing the Rt Hon. Kasule Lumumba here. Through you, Madam Chairperson - I know Rt Hon. Kasule Lumumba is a very wise and very gifted person in these matters; can she tell us something about Kilembe Mines Limited? She is from the Office of the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister, and I know she is very intelligent and able. As we await those matters, tell us about Kilembe Mines Limited.

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I hope Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, MP Kampala Central, has not usurped your powers as the presiding officer. The issues –

THE CHAIRPERSON: The first time Hon. Nsereko attempted to stand, he only got 115 votes – (Laughter) - and I was his campaign manager. So, he cannot usurp my powers; he is a colleague.

MS LUMUMBA: Next time, you will be the chief campaigner, Insha’Allah, God willing. 
Madam Speaker, the issues Members raised are very important and valid. However, I want to say that yes, I come from the Office of the Leader of Government Business but she has sent the Rt Hon. Nakadama Rukia Isanga to represent her in this House. 

As a Member of Parliament, although an ex-officio, it is a question on us to go and do our oversight role through the different the committees namely; the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee of Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. I would request, Madam Chairperson, that the Acting Leader of Government Business, designated by the Leader of Government Business in this House, comes to say a word. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have said something. What else do you want to be said? Can we go to the next? Honourable minister, I want you to reconcile this list. If there are accounting officers who did not comply, power must be removed from them immediately. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, Section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 reads: 

“14 The Approval of the annual Budget by Parliament

“(1) Parliament shall, by 31st of May…” – I will jump all that and go to section 13(11) (f). 

“13(11) (f) The Budget of the Public corporations and state enterprises” 

“13 (11) The minister will present, with the annual budget -
 the Appropriation Bill and any other Bills that are necessary to implement of the annual Budget; 
a treasury memorandum, specifying the measures taken by the ministry to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report of the Auditor-General for the preceding financial year, on the management of the Treasury.”

Madam Chairperson, this would have shown us the money the Government recovered but it was not submitted, which should have been included in the Budget.

These state corporations and enterprises generate revenue that should have been declared and –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, the point has been understood. Can we go to the total budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023?

Total Budget for both Recurrent and Development for the Financial Year 2022/2023

THE CHAIRPERSON: After reconciliation, we realised it was a typo. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 48,130,684,382,729 be provided for as the total Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023, which is inclusive of both recurrent and development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 of Shs 48,130,684,382,729 and supplied it with no amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you and congratulations! (Applause) I want to thank the Committee on Budget and the whole House for the good work done. I also want, in a special, to thank my former Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, now a minister. Thank you so much. I also thank Hon. Justine Lumumba and Hon. Nakadama. (Applause)

In a special way, I thank the Opposition. (Applause) Leader of the Opposition, you are a very good leader. 

3.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to join you in initially thanking the Committee on Budget for reporting in time. They could have done it on time, if they had voted yesterday, but we appreciate.

I also congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for passing your first Appropriation Bill. (Applause) It is no mean feat - it is a very tedious process. 

I want to contend that it has been good learning for our new comrades in the House. I want to encourage Members of Parliament to actively participate in these processes. You never know who will be the finance minister in my government –(Laughter)– so, you need to master some of these processes. Therefore, capability must be exhibited from the onset. 

To Hon. Musasizi, congratulations! It has been your first budget. I know we have spurred - you have been battered but you have battled too.

Madam Speaker, finally, it is our duty as Parliament, now that we want this budget to work for the people, to really and seriously undertake our role of oversight. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and that of the Commission that the first call on our budget - other than the normal recurrent - is to support the committees to dive in and do their work so that we can exercise our mandate appropriately. (Applause) 

Otherwise, I wish everyone the best in the next financial year so that we can show why we represent our people. Thank you. (Applause) 

The Speaker: Thank you. I want to thank the financial brains. We have the legal brains, but we also have the financial brains in this House: the Chairman BCU, with his colleague. Thank you very much. 

Can we go to the next item - can we go to the Appropriation Bill first? You never know, my voice might go and we will not have finished. (Laughter)

Bills
Second Reading

the Appropriation Bill, 2022

The Speaker: Honourable members, in compliance with Article 156(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Appropriation Bill, 2022 was read for the first time in this House on 31 March 2022. Upon doing so, and in compliance with Rule 152 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Bill was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny and ensure that the schedules thereto contain the allocations that were appropriated and supplied.

Honourable members, this House has already supplied the figures. Now, we are required to appropriate the figures as supplied in a codified manner by this House, through consideration and passing of the Appropriation Bill, 2022. The committee has finished its work. 

Honourable minister, can you move a motion.

3.17
The minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2022 be read for the second time.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Kateshumbwa, the honourable member for Kinkizi – it is supported by the whole House. Thank you. 

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: Do you want to speak to your motion?

Mr musasizi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The object of the Appropriation Bill, 2022 is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund a total sum of Shs 30,287,767,913,000 only. 

Madam Speaker, we presented this Bill before the Budget Committee and, I understand, they are ready to report back.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. Chairperson, do you have something to say? If you do not have, I can put the question.

3.19
THE Vice-Chairperson, Committee on Budget (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Madam Speaker, we have processed the Appropriation Bill and have a report ready. I beg that we proceed to the Committee Stage. We are just amending a few clauses.

The Speaker: Can you lay the report, plus the minutes on the Table?

Mr wamakuyu: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the budget committee on the Appropriation Bill, 2022. 

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2022” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Bills
committee stage

the appropriation Bill, 2022

Clause 1

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

3.20
THE Vice-Chairperson Budget Committee (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Madam Chairperson –

Clause 2: Issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund. 

Substitute the entire clause with the following:

“2. Issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund.

The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards the supply granted to the Government for the service of the year ending on 30 June 2023 the sum of Shs 30,287,767,913,000 only.” 

The Chairperson: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question on clause 2 to be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Schedule 

Mr wamakuyu: Madam Chairperson, I propose to move an amendment on the schedule to replace the amount in column 2 of the sheet of the Bill with schedules A and B for recurrent and development expenditure respectively. They are attached – A is for recurrent and B is for development. 
I beg to submit.

The Chairperson: I put the question that the schedule be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Appropriation Bill, 2022 and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2022

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2022 be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2022” be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2022.”

THE SPEAKER: The title is settled and the Bill passed. (Applause)

Honourable members, I sincerely want to congratulate all of you for passing this Bill, which forms part of the basis of our spending, and service delivery to the country.

I would like to congratulate the Committee on Budget, and like a Member said, what we have to do is to ensure we do our oversight role. In passing the money, we are doing our core role of appropriation as Members of Parliament, but what remains is the oversight. You need to monitor this money - the Shs 48 trillion. Where is it going? How is it going to be used? What is the output from this money? 

Therefore, I would like to sincerely thank you. The shadow minister of finance has been very productive in this session. My two shadow attorneys-general, you have done a great job - there is one here and a personal one. I would like to thank all of you.

Honourable members, I am not going to entertain matters of procedure and the like. The Members are tired. Let us first hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget.

3.28 
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank you for guiding the whole process – the honourable ministers and Members of Parliament, especially the members of the Budget Committee, who worked hard to deliver the first budget for the 11th Parliament. This has been new because Government had changed from sector to programmes but we managed to deliver in time. I thank everybody as well as the technical staff of Parliament. 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank you for the support you have given this process – (Interruption) 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just checking the tempers of my brother and finding out whether during this rainy season, we should advise farmers, even those around this House, to prepare to go and sow seeds – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order. 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: It is a rainy season -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order but from the Speaker’s office, you will see the clouds.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank you for the support you have given this process, since January, when we presented the National Budget Framework Paper, to date, when we passed the budget. 

The budget process is not an easy one. It has got a lot of back and forth and has tight timelines within the Public Finance Management Act. If it were not because of you, Madam Speaker, and the kind members of the Budget committee, the Finance committee and the entire House, this process would not have come to this point of conclusion. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business, and the Prime Minister, for the support she has given this process –(Interjection)- the Prime Minister is here. In the same vein, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the support, collaboration and the environment they have offered to us to enable us –  

Madam Speaker, as you said earlier, in this House, we have Members who support this process, especially from the finance background. I cannot fail to thank –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, they are thanking you. First listen.

MR MUSASIZI: My senior colleague, Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, whom I have had an opportunity to work with for all the life I have been in this Parliament. I would also like to thank Hon. Kateshumbwa. He supported us so much during the debate on the revenue Bills.

Madam Speaker, today, I needed a high level of encouragement and the Rt Hon. Justine Lumumba sat near me and kept encouraging me throughout the process. (Laughter) 

On behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we pledge continued support and cooperation to you and the House. We pledge to continue working closely with the committees, to which we directly report; that is the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Committee on Budget and the Committee on National Economy, including all the committees of Parliament. 

We pledge to continue working with you to ensure that this economy remains stable, continues to grow and continues to overcome the challenges that we keep facing from time to time, and we hope to count on your support as we drive our economy into the middle-income status. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues.

3.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for being so courageous, especially this week, when we have been starting sittings at 10.00 a.m. and leaving at night. I also thank the honourable members of this House for participating, in very good numbers. (Applause)

I thank the Opposition and the Independents for the support that they have given us. This time, we did not have many opposing voices. So, I thank you very much for standing with Government to see that this budget is concluded well.

I thank the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Chairperson of the Budget committee, the brains behind this budget and everybody who has been around to see that the work is well done. I thank you so much. 

Madam Speaker, today, we had Members who were supposed to go to Kakumiro, but they knew that their priority was to conclude this budget. So, I thank you very much for putting your budget as your priority. 

As I conclude, I want to call upon all the Members of Parliament to go to the Office of the Government Chief Whip and fill in the forms for the sectoral committees. 

THE SPEAKER: Do we have a Government Chief Whip? 

MS NAKADAMA: The office.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS NAKADAMA: They should go to the office and fill in those forms. I thank you and may the Almighty God bless you! Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I want to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – honourable minister of finance, I am talking to you. We are passing the budget in May and we do not want the misuse of the 3 per cent. We do not want the money to be misused in the cover of 3 per cent. This time, the 3 per cent must be properly checked. (Applause)

I want to commend all my committee chairpersons for the good work done: the commitment and vigilance that you have shown during this term. From 24 May 2021 when we took over this Parliament, to today, we have had 100 sittings. (Applause)

We administered 555 oaths in this place, we have passed 24 Bills and we only have one Bill left, which is that on public health.

Two Bills were withdrawn and the resolutions that have been passed are 62. Two borrowings have been allowed; we have granted 12 Members leave to introduce Private Member's Bills.

I want the Government to respect that it is a constitutional right that a Member can introduce a Private Member’s Bill.

We have paid nine tributes and we have passed 40 resolutions.   We have adopted 33 reports; we have had 95 questions during Prime Minister’s Time, and we have had three questions for oral answers. 

Urgent questions responded to are 123; ministerial statements are 83; statements from the Leader of the Opposition are nine; and statements from Members are seven.

I sincerely want to thank you. (Applause)

PROCLAMATION

The Statutory Instrument to Parliament of Uganda, the proclamation by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda:

“WHEREAS Article 95(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency, the President, has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;

AWARE that the First Session of the 11th Parliament commenced on 24th day of May 2021;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Article 95(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from Friday, 20 May 2022.

The pending business before the House and its committees is hereby saved. 

Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House in Kampala this 20th day of May 2022. 
Anita Annet Among

Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.” (Applause)

(The House rose at 3.44 p.m. and was prorogued.) 