Wednesday, 20 May 2015

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today being a Wednesday, the rules dictate that we are supposed to have Prime Minister’s question time but I am advised that the Prime Minister is not around. I am also advised that there was a previous ruling by the Speaker, then sitting, that the time can only be taken by the Prime Minister. 

Since the Prime Minister is not here, nobody else can stand in that place. So, we will use that time to continue with the rest of the business of the House. Thank you. 

2.15
MR RICHARD SSEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to bring to your attention an issue, which is of importance to the nation regarding the importation and use of pesticides. 

I remember some headlines talking about the dangers pesticides are causing to this country. I do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture will be around; good enough the Minister, hon. Bahati, is here and he may transmit this to the Minister of Industry and also of Agriculture. We would like to know exactly how the pesticides are imported in this country, how they are handled and the quality regarding these pesticides. 

Recently, some of the pesticides were banned from the global market. They include, Weedmaster and Roundup. They are known to cause cancer. Recently, there has also been a ban on the export of paper because when they carried out a lab analysis, most of our exported products had high doses of these chemicals. 

Mr Speaker, it has also been noted that people are using zinc phosphates, which is a rat poison, to preserve their beans and other grains. This is because most of the pesticides have become resistant to the bean weevil.

We have also had cases of organ failures right from the children up to the adults. We would like to know how the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Trade and Industry are handling these pesticides and chemicals. How are they going to control the importation of these banned pesticides, which are becoming very common in our environment? How are they going to control their usage in our food chain? 

Therefore, I am praying that there is a comprehensive report to this Parliament and to the nation within a given time framework. Otherwise, it is going to affect our economy as well as our health. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ssebuliba for raising this issue. All pesticides which are banned by the United Nations and the World Health Organisation are banned also in Uganda. There are those, which are coming in through illicit ways. 

I request the Minister of Agriculture to come and make a statement to that effect on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, tomorrow we expect a statement from the Minister of Agriculture on this issue raised by the member for Kawempe South. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

EXPANDING SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMME-REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012

2.18
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 for the programme expanding social protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. 

EXPANDING SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMME-REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 for the programme expanding social protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

NATIONAL HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED - REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2013

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2013 for National Housing and Construction Company Limited. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly referred to the committee for expeditious handling. 

REPORTS AND OPINIONS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following entities;
        (i) Uganda High Commission, Pretoria
        (ii) Uganda Embassy, Brussels
        (iii) Uganda Embassy, Kinshasa
        (iv) Uganda Embassy, Tehran
        (v) Uganda Embassy, Copenhagen
        (vi) Uganda High Commission, Dar-es-Salaam
        (vii) Uganda Embassy, Beijing
        (viii) Uganda Consulate, Guangzhou
        (ix) Uganda High Commission, Canberra
        (x) Uganda Embassy, Ottawa
        (xi) Uganda High Commission, Abuja
        (xii) Uganda Embassy Berlin
        (xiii) Ministry of Public Service
        (xiv) Kyambogo University
        (xv) Parliamentary Pension Scheme
        (xvi) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Treasury Operations
        (xvii) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Consolidated Financial Statements
        (xviii) Energy for Rural Transformation Project (ERT) (Bank of Uganda Component) IDA CREDIT NO. 3588 – UG

SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON KAMULI TOWN COUNCIL, JANUARY 2015

MS AKOL: I would like to lay on Table a special audit report by the Auditor-General on Kamuli Town Council, January 2015. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker

THE DEPEUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents that have been laid. The ones related to the High Commissions and to the ministries stand committed to Committee of Public Accounts and the one for Kyambogo University, stands committed to the Committee on COSASE and the one on special audit by the Auditor-General, stands committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts, for expeditious handling and reporting to the House and guiding us on how to proceed. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you recall that we had gone quite some distance with this Bill and I commented that the amendments were bigger than the Bill. In ordinary circumstances, we would have just sent it back to the people who drafted it but we are taking it in the spirit of the transition to pass it or do whatever is necessary for us to move it to the next level. So, let us proceed.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure under Rule 185(1) which states thus; “Unless the House otherwise directs or these rules otherwise provide, the quorum of the committee of the House shall be one third of its Members and shall only be required for the purpose of voting.”

Therefore, is it in order for this House to proceed when we do not have a quorum?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the procedural point you would have raised is if there was quorum. We have to establish that but you cannot say, “Is it in order to proceed when there is no quorum?” You have no authority to establish quorum; it is the office of the presiding officer which can do that. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is on that premise, therefore, that we seek your indulgence to establish if there is quorum and see if we can proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clerk, do we have quorum?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME


2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has – (Laughter)- has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and has not taken any decision.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE WHOLE HOUSE
2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati: Me Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the committee of the whole House. I put a question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015 

    II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on the East African Affairs -

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, when we adjourned last week, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a commitment to submit documents, which he has not submitted. I have been patiently waiting as papers were being laid on the Table to see if the minister had fulfilled his promise. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, arrange to lay those documents at the appropriate time. Honourable Chairperson, please, proceed. You have 10 minutes.

2.29
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs (MEACA) for the financial year 2015/2016.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 (a) and (d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on East African Community Affairs is mandated among other things to: (1) examine and comment on policy matters affecting the Ministry on East African Community Affairs;
(2) Monitor other EAC related departments under its jurisdiction;
(3) Examine critically the recurrent and capital budget estimates of MEACA and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like Members to move to page 16 of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR AYOO: I would like to start by highlighting the key policy issues of implementation in this financial year. One is harmonisation of laws. This is very crucial and it cuts across all protocols.

Harmonisation of Immigration Regime; Ensuring that Ministries, Departments and Agencies mainstream East African Community integration into their plans and budgets; Sensitisation and awareness creation among the population on EAC integration process.

Observations and Recommendations

Uganda’s trade with the EAC partner states

The committee observed that since the inception of the ministry in 2006, growth in exports and imports have stood at 10 per cent and 8.4 per cent respectively. The total value of trade has stood at 9.4 per cent. The low growth in trade is due to a number of factors in the region, ranging from the type or nature of commodities being exchanged; seasonality of the agricultural goods and war within some neighbouring countries.

The committee further observes that the ministry was unable to obtain information for the level of cross-border employment among EAC partner states. The ministry confirmed that since the manpower survey has not been made, information on employment was scarce and unreliable.

Committee recommendations

Government should make an asserted effort to ensure diversification, value addition, increment in the quantity, and improvement in the quality of exported commodities to the regional markets.

Taking into account Uganda’s enormous contribution to the EAC institutions and organs, MEACA should take special interest in ensuring a higher growth rate in trade volumes between Uganda and partner states, to realise value for money. 

The ministry should sensitise Ugandans about the job opportunities in the region and encourage Ugandans to apply and take up jobs in the EAC region as is the case for other partner states.  

Government should regularly carry out a manpower survey to establish the manpower needs and capacities.

EAC partner states need to engage to eliminate restrictions and barriers that have continued to hinder cross-border employment among partner states.

Static Budget Ceilings

The committee observes that MEACA has had a low and static budget ceiling since its inception in 2006. The incremental budgeting approach puts the ministry at a disadvantage and no attempt has been made to ideally determine the cost of the ministry’s mandate.
  
The committee recommends that the ministry clearly determines the costs of its mandate to match with the appropriate budget allocation.

Sector-Wide Approach

The committee observes that Government adopted a Sector-Wide Approach in order to harmonise the interventions of development partners, remove overlaps and avoid duplication of efforts, reduce transaction costs, enhance participation by all stakeholders, promote a holistic and forward approach to planning, funding development activities and provide common reporting, monitoring and evaluation frameworks for a given sector. 

The committee further observes that over time, this Sector-Wide Approach has weakened and full participation and coordination of all the sector stakeholders has declined.  This is partly due to the declining donor support to various sectors. While MEACA belongs to the Public Sector Management Sector, currently the benefits MEACA derives from the sector are minimal. 
 
The committee recommends that PSM Sector Secretariat should recognise the importance and role of MEACA and support it in the following key areas, to facilitate the realisation of its strategic objectives:
a)	Fast-track the mainstreaming of EAC activities into sectors and MDA plans and budgets.
b)	Enforce the harmonisation of national laws to conform to the EAC legal framework.
c)	Support sensitisation and public awareness.
d)	Fast-track the implementation of the Customs Union, Common Market and East African Monetary Union Protocols.
e) 	Expedite the enforcement of EAC integration across all sectors.

Weak Output or Outcome Indicators

The committee notes, with concern, that the output/outcome indicators from MEACA are weak and may not facilitate fast tracking of EAC integration.

The committee recommends that MEACA undertakes to review the output or outcome indicators for purposes of making them more specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time bound.

Mechanisms to enforce implementation of regional commitments
The committee observes that MEACA lacks the strong mechanism to enforce implementation of regional commitments in the respective sectors of Government with implementation of EAC commitments.

The committee recommends that MEACA establishes a check-list on EAC matters for all MDAs and the checklist should be used as a basis for funding. 

The committee further recommends that MEACA positions well-trained focal point officers in all ministries and districts to anchor the EAC integration agenda. 

Consultation of Parliament on EAC Matters

The committee notes that, as a coordination ministry, MEACA makes extensive consultations before developing country positions or papers for EAC regional meetings. However, MEACA does not consult Parliament before negotiations take place, citing Article 123(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The committee strongly recommends that MEACA should involve and consult Parliament, the people’s representatives, during the process of developing country positions on EAC regional matters and issues.

Coordination Forum for MEACA

The committee observes that although the coordination of political, legal, productive and social affairs is a key output of the ministry, there seems to be no clear strategic arrangement for the ministry to execute this role within the Public Sector Management Sector and how it is extended to other ministries, departments and local governments.  

The committee recommends fast-tracking of the rolling out of the national policy on EAC integration.

Public Awareness

The committee notes the progress made so far on the public awareness and sensitisation and appeals for more sensitisation to bring all citizens on board and an assessment of its impact in order to improve.

The committee recommends that MEACA fast-tracks the approval of the national communication strategy on East African integration to benefit the wider public.

Audit of MDAS on the mainstreaming of EAC matters

The committee recommends that MEACA continues to carry out an audit each year and report to Parliament before the ministerial policy statements of MDAs are presented to Parliament.

The committee further recommends that all sectoral committees of Parliament, in scrutinising the ministerial policy statements of the respective MDAs under their jurisdiction, should ensure that they have mainstreamed and adequately budgeted for EAC related activities.

Slow pace of harmonization of Ugandan laws, policies and strategic frameworks
The committee recommends that the ministry fast-tracks the harmonisation of Ugandan laws and policies to ensure value for money given to the ministry in respect to this activity.
 
Given the deadline of December 2015, given by the EAC Council of Ministers to complete harmonisation processes, the committee also recommends that MEACA submits a quarterly report to Parliament on the status of harmonisation of laws and policies.  

The committee further recommends that MEACA should undertake to conclude the process of amending the following 15 laws in the financial year 2015/2016 that have been pending for the last three years. The laws that are supposed to be amended are indicated there. I am not going to read all of them because of time.

Position of Minister of East African Community Affairs

The committee observes that the position of Minister of East African Community Affairs is still vacant and has continuously not been filled in the last three cabinet reshuffles. The current Minister of State is over-stretched in handling international, regional and domestic responsibilities.

The committee strongly recommends that the position of the Minister of East African Community Affairs be filled expeditiously to ensure smooth flow of work at MEACA and provide strategic leadership and coordination.

Underfunding

Uganda’s contribution to the EAC organs and institutions

The committee noted the underfunding for Uganda’s contribution to the EAC Organs and Institutions for the financial year 2015/2016 amounting to Shs 2.6061 billion as poundage loss due to the foreign currency exchange. 

Taking into account the current foreign exchange rate trend, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 2.6061 billion be provided towards Uganda’s contribution to the EAC institutions and organs.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance creates a budget line to cater for poundage loss that Government and its institutions experience during the foreign currency exchange.

Acquisition of office space

The committee strongly recommends that MEACA acquires land as soon as possible to build its own home singularly or in partnership with other ministries. 

The committee further recommends that additional Shs 617.1 million be provided to cater for renting a new premise for the ministry.

Public awareness and consultation on EAC integration
Mr Speaker, the committee observed that EAC integration is a key drive to economic prosperity for Uganda as envisaged in the National Development Plan and Vision 2040. Therefore, there is need for the citizens to be aware of the opportunities EAC integration provides so that they are able to participate and take advantage of them.

The committee recommends that an additional Shs 500 million be provided for the purpose of enhancing public awareness on EAC integration. 

Conclusion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, before you conclude, still on public awareness, there are some students whose names have got to go on the record of Parliament.

On page 21, paragraph no.9.8 (iv); could you read that for the record?

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, I have been using the executive summary but I have the report here. In conjunction with the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of East African Community Affairs coordinates the East African annual essay competition, where over 800 students participate every year. Uganda has for the past seven years been in position number one or two of winning the essay competition.

These competitions began in 2004 and are still running. Below are the highlights showing how students from Uganda have been performing at the national and regional level since 2008.

a)	2014:  The first overall Best student: AburVella Sandra S.3 of Mt St Mary’s Namagunga scored 76 per cent
b)	2013:  the second best overall student:  Ategeka Edgar S.4 of St Mary’s College Kisubi scored 70.8 per cent
c)	2012:  the first best overall student:  Akansasira Joan S.3 of Nabisunsa Girls School; her marks are not indicated.
d)	2011: the first best overall student: Okoth Victor S.3 of Mt St Mary’s College Kisubi scored 78 per cent.
e)	2010:  the second overall best student: Masalu Lillian S.4 of Nabisunsa Girls School scored 70 per cent.
f)	2009:  the first overall best student: Logose Maureen S.3 of Nabisunsa Girls School scored 77 per cent.
g)	2008:  the second overall best student: Nambafu Evelyn S.3 of Nabisunsa Girls School scored 75 per cent.

Mr Speaker, under that also, the capacity building programme to the business community through Kiswahili training has enabled 250 businessmen and women to transact business across the region especially in Tanzania and Burundi using the basic Kiswahili.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not concluded.

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, conclusion; subject to the observations and recommendations made herein, the committee recommends the approval of Shs 24,410,000,000 for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2015/2016 to enable it deliver its institutional mandate of steering Uganda’s regional integration agenda in accordance with the objectives of the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.

Vote 021 -  Ministry Of East African Community Affairs
    a) Wage Recurrent - Shs 0.750 billion
    b) Non-Wage Recurrent - Shs	23.081 billion
    c) Government of Uganda Development – Shs 0.538 billion
    d) Arrears – Shs 0.040 billion
Total   - Shs 24.410 billion

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank You, Mr Chairman and members of this committee.

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, before I move, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes and the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and report of the committee. Honourable members, the matter before us is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on the East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2015/ 2016.

That is what is for your debate and I propose that debate starts now. I will start with Aruu, Ayivu, Kilak, Rwampara, Fort Portal Municipality, Butambala District.

2.48
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, the chairman my good friend for presenting such a report. I am wondering who the Leader of Government Business is, before I begin my formal submission.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I am in charge at the moment. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Now that you are in charge, I would like this House to help me implore the Leader of Government Business in the House, if he has information or if he could find out from the President the matter in relation to the Minister for East African Affairs.

We learnt through the media; we did not receive any official communication that that ministry was left vacant in honour of the late hon. Eriya Kategaya to show that he left a vacuum. That was the information we read in the media. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the Leader of Government Business what is in the mind of the Executive, especially the President, in relation to filling that position.

From the presentation of the chairman of the committee, the work is a lot. I have seen in several fora, hon. Shem Bagaine representing the country in that capacity. However, it is about time we are told as Parliament when the position of the Ministry of the East African Affairs will be filled.

Two more questions in relation to that. In an event that we would like to keep it empty, for how long is it going to be empty? For how long will this country be mourning our dear colleague that many of us still miss, that we have to keep a portfolio empty? Life has to continue.

In addition, there are very many colleagues on the other side, Mr Speaker, who have been expecting to be ministers. (Laughter) However, this one position is causing a lot of anxiety among honourable colleagues. I have met many of them, some even saying, “That position is mine.” (Laughter)

A situation where over six people are all saying “That one is mine”, it is not very healthy for life in this House. I implore the Leader of Government Business - (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Odonga Otto, in order to say that Members on this side, without specifying who exactly it is, and generalising that they have been asking for that ministerial post? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, can you name the member for the member for Katerera as the person you had referred to?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, hon. Katoto is one of the people I have been talking about. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I was just imploring the leader of Government Business to please bring to the attention of the House when that portfolio will be filled so that life can continue in the country normally. Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee chairman for that elaborate report and I will give the support for the budgetary appropriation. Thank you very much.

2.52
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the committee for the good report. I will start from where hon. Otto has left. 

On the issue of the vacancy, I have a contrary view. The fact that the Minister of State has effectively acted in that position for the last three years indicates that actually one minister could serve in that portfolio and save taxpayers a lot of resources that can be put to better use.

I say this because the committee has identified areas where resources are needed and I am sure if you are to do some evaluation, you realise that the three years of the absence of the cabinet minister could have saved a lot of money and that money, if reallocated, could have addressed this funding gap within the ministry. Therefore, it is a test and I believe the chairman Movement caucus will take note and advise His Excellency appropriately.

On the issue of acquisition of office space, I do not know whether my memory serves me right that before, when we had EAC in this region, we had assets; we had land that was specifically meant for the EAC business. Therefore, I thought the committee would have come out clearly on where these pieces of assets or land are and recommend to this August House to allocate resources to embark on putting up a structure that can house the ministry.

Therefore, when the committee is lamenting about office space and having their current office premise rent expiring by 30 June 2015, I think as the August House, we need to look in that direction. If at all we have assets and land and if Government has land somewhere else, I do not think this should be a big problem for us as a country. I thank you.

2.55
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good report. 

I would like to get clarification from the chairman of the committee; I remember in 2013, the committee came up with a roadmap of moving to all the districts in Uganda to sensitise the community about the East African Community integration. Since 2013 to date, I have never seen the committee moving from district to district sensitising the community about the East African integration.

Looking at the debates various schools have been participating in, if you look at the names of the schools from which those students are winning right from 2008 up to 2014, you discover that these schools are concentrated only within Kampala and those are the schools that we consider as being the best. Now we need to ask ourselves, when will the school like Layibi College from Gulu produce those good students who will win in the whole of East Africa? When will students from schools in Amuru District excel?

This is a clear indication that we still have a very wide gap that needs to be filled in our education department. It looks as if our children from upcountry schools are not properly exposed to such kinds of healthy debates, which mould and make them more active and gain more in the future.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work done. I hope they will move and sensitise the community so that they are aware of what is going on concerning the East African integration. 

Finally, the committee in 2013 had a programme of holding meetings and monitoring all the markets bordering the East African countries. The committee moved to less than three border markets and after that, I would like to find out what programme the committee has for setting up the border markets. I thank you.

2.59
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee, especially the chairman, for the wonderful report submitted today. Just last year, they were in Mbarara and I heard them over the radio with the state minister; they were sensitising the local leaders. However, in the media, actually, when they were over the radio, very many questions were being asked by the locals and among others, you would notice that our local people do not understand whether we are in integration or something else. That exactly comes here, you can even see. When we are debating as Members of Parliament, you either see that we also do not understand that this integration is there or if it is there, then its role is somehow minimal.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inquire from the chairman; as a committee, are you aware of the border conflicts? For instance, just last year, our people in Isingiro were being chased away from Tanzania and this of course spans - I know South Sudan recently was trying to be admitted but what kind of integration are we talking about when we are saying our people should be assimilated and others are chasing them away? Are you aware as a committee that our people are not ready for integration? The integration we are talking about is of leaders.

About the minister - may his soul rest in eternal peace - but that position by the former Member of Parliament of Rwampara. That is not to suggest that it should go back to Rwampara - (Laughter)- but with due respect, that ministry should be given the attention it deserves. Looking at even the budgetary allocation; Shs 24 billion, a ministry, some departments and agencies even get more than hundreds of billions and we give a ministry only Shs 24 billion and expect them to execute their mandate, deliver, do public awareness and go down; honestly, I think we are not fair. 

Could the Leader of Government Business tell us why some ministries are ministries and others are some small ministries? In Animal Farm, it is said, “All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others.” We have seen this happen; some ministries are treated as if they are not ministries in this country and maybe, we deserve an explanation from the Leader of Government Business.

Finally, if we could go back, Mr Speaker, the reasons -(Member timed out.) 

3.03
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabalole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the presentation. I have a number of times been asking our economic strategy, when we are talking about the EAC, what are the economic interests of Uganda such that we know the minister to represent us and how to deploy. Is this EAC just a political show, how would you convince us that we should be able to invest in the EAC? The committee chairperson pointed out that the volume; there is a lot of trade going on between the East African countries, which is a very good development.

This trade has to go with our preparation, as a country, by establishing our presence technically but also to guide this economics. It is more or less like an informal arrangement. The way we coordinate the trade is just about Ugandans mobilising themselves and we are not seeing a purposive Government strategy that is aligning us as Ugandans on how we can benefit from the trade of this region. 

Therefore, we want to know our niche and maybe, you can guide us since this is the ministry responsible to know as Ugandans where can we put our energy to invest.

Mr Speaker, we lost many assets when the EAC was abolished. Kenya benefited very much; I am told even planes and others were taken by Kenya; Tanzania is where we were based but Uganda at that time we came out with very little. Of course, that was the time of Idi Amin. 

All this time I have not seen us take stock of that. How do we safeguard, in future, if another crazy person wakes up and we see the breakdown of this community, what are our safeguards, when we are putting in our investments? Where is the distribution of the resources? When we are negotiating, we want to know as Uganda, how are we benefitting strategically? Are we going to continue with the same arrangements by getting the Kenyans who are smarter business-wise to continue benefitting?

These are the issues we need our representatives and Government to enable us understand, first of all, to embrace this idea to know the benefits; yes, the public awareness is being raised but you can image our population which is even grappling with the concept of districts along tribal lines. They just think they can only survive within a tribe. What about when we are talking about such a broad concept? How do you filter it such that they are able to understand and embrace it? These are the issues; are we talking about the younger generation that we have had, the Swahili ones that we have just picked, those who are performing very well? What about we who now exist? How many MPs are familiar with the EAC?

I have been here but we have not even had sessions to see that we are brought on board fully to understand and internalise the progress we are making in this EAC.
Finally, Mr Speaker, I do not understand what the word “fast-tracking” means because we have been on this for a very long time. Fast-tracking; where is the yardstick of measuring this pace? How can we now monitor this fast-tracking? Are we comfortable with the speed at which we are moving? These are the issues I wanted to put across. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.08
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I would like also to add on the issue of awareness. It is true the committee has said they have tried to go to the communities to sensitise people about the EAC. Indeed, in my school, the students and pupils are aware of the integration and can sing the East African Anthem. However, I am worried that most of the leaders do not understand it and they are not compliant.

I would bet that even in this House few of us can sing the first stanza of the East African Anthem. It is upon us, the leaders, to try as much as possible to familiarise ourselves with this integration and to make it our role to also carry out awareness in our communities. 

I would like to raise an issue of hostility on the borders. The committee has not talked about the East African Games. Last year, when we travelled by road to play netball and football in Arusha, we were received badly by our friends in Tanzania and we wondered why they did not take us like In Kenya. In Kenya, it was marvellous but crossing to Tanzania, we were treated as though we were just ordinary citizens from Uganda. The other states are still hostile to this integration and I think the committee should put in more effort to find out the issues that Tanzania specifically has with Uganda.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of cross-border employment, the report indicates that there is no data and I am worried that we may be victims of trafficking in persons because if we do not know how many Ugandans are employed in Kenya, Burundi or Rwanda and now, there is insecurity in Burundi, how are we sure that Ugandans are safe and how many are there? The ministry should come out and do an assessment and get this data and inform the country on the number of Ugandans who are employed in those countries.

The other issue is about political federation. It is observed that we have different systems of governance; other countries have seven year terms; for us we have five years. When are we going to harmonise this? When are we going to have one president? Other presidents need to retire but because they are waiting for this political federation, they are still hanging on. Maybe, the earlier the better so we can see some people move and create space for others? Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the committee for a good report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have Kitgum, Kioga and I will close with Tororo County.

3.11
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. My concern, which I would like to draw the attention of the committee to is the common market. As a country, we should take stock of what we have to offer vis-a-vis our neighbouring countries. As we are aware, Kenya has gone ahead of us and we are opening the market; who is going to benefit from the Ugandan side? It is good to have a common market but we must, as a country, position ourselves strategically to benefit from that common market. If we are going to be consumers rather than players in the market, then we have a lot to worry about that we would lose in the process.

How have we, as a country, strategised and positioned ourselves to benefit from the common market? The agriculture sector is still limping; even the budget allocation does not tell us that we take agricultural sector very importantly.

Another issue, which is still hanging is the issue of bio-technology; our Bill is still outside this House and yet, it is already open in the neighbouring countries. Many of these have a lot to point on our side how well we are prepared for the common market. It should not be just a show but we must be equal players in the common market.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of political federation, as colleagues have already commented, there is a lot of suspicion in our neighbouring countries in view of our own country. One of the things which differ is the issue of the term limits in different countries because you must have something to offer to the federation table; if you do not own it, then you do not have anything. What is home here? How are you going to federate politically? What about the intolerance we have within our own country? What are we exporting and what are we importing? We must position ourselves; we must go there as a solid principled country in order to be respected.

If I hear my honourable colleague already saying, in Tanzania, they do not take us seriously – they are actually suspicious about us; power hungry people, people who are not trusted. The committee should have recommended a way of demystifying this. First, by cleaning our own house; we need to put our political ideology clear because if there is this confusion within the country, you treat your own as if he is your enemy, how do you expect people outside our country to, for example, if we go for political federation, God forbid, that may be we are also given an opportunity to be the ones to head, people will start thinking, “Are we trusted to hand over power peacefully? Or we are going to reach there and then, change the goal post?” 
These are some of the things as a country; we need to put our house to order so that people trust us in order for us to go there as equal partners not power-hungry grabbers, untrustworthy and the rest of it.

Otherwise, I thank the committee for this. We would want that emphasis to be put in place and we stand to benefit.

There was allusion to the job opportunities. Mr Speaker, I think Uganda is the only open door country where we glorify visitors more than our own. If you went to Kenya, for instance, to get a job is not an easy thing there; a lot of screening and a lot side-lining. But in Uganda, the truth of the matter at managerial level, we have more of foreigners. For instance, in the hotel industry, we have more of our brothers and sisters from Kenya than even Ugandans and it does not happen that our Ugandans have the same opportunities in the neighbouring countries.

In Rwanda, for instance, Mr Speaker, this business of forging academic transcripts or even wanting to have somebody to back you up before you get a job, is not the case. For them, it is transparent, you are employed on merit. Your academics are sieved if you have forged somewhere; sorry, you go back. However, here, they do not trust that even the people they are supposed to employ are not politically backed or someone has not forged documents. 

How do we position ourselves, Mr Speaker, as a country, so that we also benefit? We have a lot of unemployment in our country. How many are we positioning ourselves to export to other countries as we receive them in our country? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Like my colleagues, I would like to thank hon. Tonny Ayoo, the chairperson of the committee and his members for this good and elaborate report. 

Allow me draw your attention to the aspect of cross-border employment. Recently, when we were considering the Finance Bill, 2015 and particularly, on the aspect of single entry visa, we made a categorical statement on the Floor of this House that the requirement for this visa excludes members of the East African Community, implying that there would be free movement of labour. Of course, this is a positive trend that promotes the spirit of regional integration.
This House needs to be informed and updated regularly whether other East African countries are accordingly reciprocating the good intention of Uganda as demonstrated in the Finance Bill, 2015.

We would like to know if a jobseeker from Uganda goes to Rwanda and he wants to compete for a job in Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya, and Tanzania, how does he get treated there? Is the competition on equal basis following the same terms and conditions? Therefore, these are the areas that we want to know in as far as cross border employment is concerned. 

We are seeking clarification from the chairman of the committee whether this information is with the committee but in the event that this information is lacking currently, then this is one area, Mr Speaker, that the committee needs to take interest in and accordingly inform this August House.

Mr Speaker, this information is very useful because it can enrich our decisions in future concerning cross-border employment.

3.20
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee. I did not want to speak on this report but the trend of debate forced me to rise.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, we the Members of Parliament and citizens of Uganda should be the ones to embrace East African integration more than any other member state. Let me give you the justification colleagues. The problems that colleagues have raised are what should give us the impetus and the energy to put more resources to ensure that we track all the protocol and the treaty of the EAC. Why? Because there is the argument that Kenyans are very good in hotel industry; if we integrate, they will bring those values here and that will boost tourism.

If we want good governance and democracy, there is term limits in Kenya and so forth, then we shall be forced to have term limits. 

So, it is the reason why we need to move very fast to ensure that we have EAC and integration and it is we, the people of Uganda, that should move very fast. There is a saying that Jesus Christ, just like the Bible encourages very clearly, we should be the light of East African integration; let others be the darkness but let us be the light and light cannot be compared with darkness. 

Why am I saying so colleagues? Assume you are the owner of Coca Cola Company and you want where you will put your factory and have economies of scale and strategic advantage and you have a good road network, telecommunication system and banking system; Uganda is the hub and which country would benefit more? It is Uganda that would benefit more because if you have your coca cola factory here, then you distribute to South Sudan, Congo, Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania. 

Therefore, colleagues, we now have the opportunity to ensure that we give MEACA resources and push for integration. Some of you travel to Europe; if you get a Schengen visa you can move all over Europe. Our people are already integrating; if we reverse this trend, it means that at the border you have to go and get a visa. For me who stays at Malaba, my people want free movement and – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I have followed the debate in this House and there is no Member who is against integration. Members are just talking about plugging certain gaps in order to improve integration. However, my colleague is proceeding in a way that implies Members are against the integration in East Africa, which I think is not the case. We just want improved delivery of this integration. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Thank you for clarifying to yourself, my brother - (Laughter). Mr Speaker and colleagues, I really would like to beg the House and the chairperson to support the unfunded gaps. I was just saying that for us at the border, we want one customs border point so that there is free 24-hour movement. This also has impact on our pockets. If a truck or bus can leave Mombasa and it reaches Kampala within six hours without roadblocks, security checks or traffic, it means the businesspeople will lower the cost of doing business. Therefore, the advantage is very huge. 

The issue of terrorism is an intelligence issue. In that regard, we shall have a single intelligence unit within East Africa and a single police force within the unit to cut costs of operations. The benefits are so huge that, Mr Speaker, I do not have the time at the moment to elaborate. Therefore, I really would like to request, as we pass this budget, that the ministry we need to fund is the Ministry of East African Community. 

There is the issue hon. Otto raised, that we need to have a very serious minister at that level who can manage this very strategic sector of growth. This is because, colleagues, change is here with us. If you resist change, it will sweep you. Therefore, do not be worried whether some people are staying longer in power; the clock is ticking. Nobody can live more than a hundred years. Therefore, do not be worried about that. I really would like to request colleagues; Uganda, in the East African Community, should be like the trailer driver who gives way to a Benz. If you go to Tanzania and are harassed, please, forgive them. The Bible says forgive them. This is because at the end of the day, our children will benefit more. I beg to rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Chairman, would you like to move for the House to adopt your report in 30 seconds?

2.26
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the Members for the issues they have raised that would go a long way in enriching Uganda into positioning itself well to benefit from integration.

Mr Speaker, I had wanted to respond to some of the issues raised here but I think I now only would like to thank the Members. For those issues raised, we are going to take them up very seriously with the minister and the ministry. One of them is sensitisation, which should start from this House. This is what we have been calling for. I believe immediately after this budget, we have to have a sensitisation meeting or training with Parliament before we go to the rest of the country. For that, I assure Members and I would like to thank you. 

I would like to beg that the report and the budget of the committee be supported by this House and do pass, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on the East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2015/2016 be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, it is practice in Commonwealth parliaments that in such matters that we are handling, the Leader of the Opposition is given the opportunity to comment about issues in the report and that is when the debate will really be balanced. I do not know under what circumstances the Leader of the Opposition was totally ignored. I do not know what the intention was.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me just say this: I think you can see that even the minister for the sector has not been called to respond. Even the chairperson has not been called to respond, except to move for the House to adopt the report. That applies to the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business. None of them has spoken. Therefore, please, let us follow the spirit of the transition and move on. There is no time for all these things. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

3.30
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Vincent Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. In accordance with section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and related instruments, the committee considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of ICT and related agencies. In the interest of time, I will invite colleagues to move to page 6 where we have the observations and recommendations on vote 020, which is for the ministry.

Observations and Recommendations

1. Internet governance

For years, the country’s Top Level Domain Name (ccTLD) has been under the management of a private operator despite the fact that it is a national resource. The committee understands the re-delegation process of the country’s top level domain name that requires consent from the current manager with elaborate processes presided over by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) and to some extent the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). 

A roadmap for management of the country’s top level domain name was developed in 2014/2015. The roadmap is a result of the engagement by Government with the current manager and the global internet governance entities. To that end, a national governing team has been established that includes the current manager, Government and the private sector. 
  
The committee recommends that Government continues to pursue the multi-stakeholder approach in terms of governance of the country’s top level domain name and completes the transition as soon as possible in order to align the country’s ccTLD with the country’s cyber security strategy. 

2. Data Protection and Privacy Bill

In view of the collection of personal data by various Government agencies as well as private entities, it has become apparent that the Data Protection and Privacy Bill should be enacted as soon as possible. The essence of the Bill is to protect individuals whose personal data has been collected by regulating collection and processing, spelling out the rights of the data owner, obligations of the data collector and data processor and regulating handling of the data. 

The committee recommends that the Bill should be handled expeditiously and brought before Parliament.  

3. Communications Tribunal 

The ever-changing developments in the communications sector that are technological in nature require a dedicated tribunal equipped with technical staff to be able to resolve disputes in the sector. The Communications Act of 1997 that was repealed as well as the Communications Act, 2013 speak to this requirement. Unfortunately, the tribunal was never set up in the initial law and even two years later after enactment of the current law, the tribunal does not exist. The committee learnt from the ministry that they had approached the Judicial Service Commission requesting for judicial officers to preside over the tribunal. 

The committee recommends that given the various disputes in the sector that require arbitration, the tribunal be set up to serve the purpose for which it was envisaged. 

Uganda Communications Act, 2013 Regulations
Under Section 93(3) of the Communications Act, 2013, regulations made shall be laid before Parliament. However, these regulations have not been laid before Parliament. The committee learnt that the regulations will be ready for laying before Parliament by the end of this financial year. The requirement for laying the regulations before Parliament was to ensure that they are consistent with the spirit of the Act. 

The committee recommends that the 30 June 2015 deadline of laying the regulations before Parliament be adhered to, to enable effective operationalization of the law. 

4. National Postcode and Addressing System 

In order to successfully implement the national postcode and addressing system, it is imperative that the legal framework is in place including the policy and the law. The ministry plans to develop a National Postcode and Addressing System Policy next financial year. Other East African countries have developed their national postcode and addressing systems and moved a step further and linked them to the national identity card database. Indeed, there are plans under the Northern Corridor Projects Framework to harmonise the national postcode and addressing systems within the region. 

The national postcode and addressing system is necessary for lending institutions like banks, insurance firms, fire-fighting companies, ambulance owners and generally for the growth of e-commerce. The national postcode and addressing system and the national identity card data used together reinforce authenticity and promote trade, security, tourism and infrastructure in the country. It is, therefore, urgent that the ministry completes the legal framework for the postcode and addressing system. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT urgently establishes the legal framework for the national postcode and addressing system. 

5. Inadequate Funding and Unfunded Priorities in the Sector

The committee observes that whereas Government recognises access to efficient and affordable ICT services in promoting private sector investment as an engine of growth in the Ugandan economy, according to the National Development Plan, the proposed budget allocation to the ministry - Shs 7.498 billion, which is 0.12 per cent of the national budget - is inadequate to realise this aspiration. 

This is despite the sector’s contribution to the economy where it contributes two per cent to GDP, employs 1,300,000 Ugandans and contributes over Shs 400 billion in tax revenue from the telecom industry alone. It is unfortunate that the sector has unfunded priorities, some of which are critical to the operations of the economy and the country’s security such as cyber security. The other unfunded priorities include business process outsourcing centres and e-Government initiatives.  

The committee recommends that funding to the ICT sector be adequately enhanced to at least 0.5 per cent of the national budget to stimulate investment in the sector, accelerate socio-economic growth, increase productivity and enhance employment opportunities, especially for the youth. 

6. E-Government and Service Delivery 

E-government is the delivery of services from Government to citizens, businesses and government agencies and vice versa using ICTs. Many countries that have been successful in implementing e-government have also had improved GDP; for example Kenya, Rwanda, Malaysia, South Africa and South Korea have reduced their costs of doing business. 

In Kenya, the post office has been transformed into an e-government service delivery centre popularly known as HUDUMA. In these centres, citizens can renew their identity cards, passports, drivers’ licences and get a land title in a very open and transparent environment. 

Government’s efforts in e-governance have been evident through the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) where the cost of bandwidth has reduced from US$ 629 per megabyte per second to US$ 266 per megabyte per second. Additionally, and most significantly, there is URA and their adoption of IT as an enabler of service delivery between the taxpayer and the authority. The increased revenue can be attributed to the use of ICT. Renewal of driving licences has been made easier; it takes three days to renew a permit from two weeks previously. The graph below is basically just to show the aggregation of the figures in internet cost.

The committee recommends that Government should adopt the Kenyan model of adopting the provision of services through the post office infrastructure.

Vote 126 - The National Information Technology Authority - Uganda

I will invite colleagues to move straight to page 14 of the report, which are the observations and recommendations: 

1. Cyber Security

The matter of cyber security has become an issue of national security in many countries the world over because of the high dependence on internet-based information systems that run various aspects of the economy. In Uganda, cyber security has been one of the unfunded priorities in the sector that has left the country compromised as far as our cyber engagements are concerned. What is true, however, is that various individual organisations have prepared themselves against possible cyber attacks or incidences. Unfortunately, for many of these, they do not have the ability to detect and prevent. 

To address this, the country urgently needs a national Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) that will be a service organisation responsible for receiving, reviewing and responding to computer security incidence reports with a national focus.  The relevance of the national CERT will be to have a centralised coordination point for cyber security issues, to develop expertise to support and assist users to quickly recover from security incidences, keep track of any developments in the security field and create cyber awareness. 

I will move to the last paragraph there. With all this knowledge of countries where cyber attacks have been a reality and have brought economies to their knees, it is inconceivable that we continue to regard it as an unfunded priority, yet it clearly borders on national security. For Uganda to be at a comfortable level in terms of cyber security, the country needs to invest an estimated US$ 18 million. These expenses can however be spread over the years. To start on the foundation of a national CERT, the National IT Authority-Uganda (NITA-U) would need to recruit staff of which there is a funding gap of Shs 1.2 billion; in addition, there is a requirement of Shs 3.26 billion to procure the infrastructure as well as build the capacity necessary to combat possible cyber attacks. 

The committee strongly recommends that Government should stop compromising the country’s critical agencies that are dependent on IT systems by providing the necessary financial resources to establish a national CERT necessary for implementing the National Information Security Framework (NISF). 

2. Business Process Outsourcing  

Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) has potential to create employment. The countries where BPO has been successful such as India have had a well developed IT-enabled services strategy and the industry derives its success in conglomeration benefits. In Uganda today, the BPO industry is anchored on the concept of call centres and a bit of accounting services and data entry. Business Process Outsourcing is the contracting of a specific business transaction. 

The committee recommends that Government invests an additional Shs 5 billion annually to develop the sector. 

3. The National Backbone Infrastructure

The National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure and e-Government Infrastructure Project (NBI/EGI) aims at connecting all major towns countrywide onto the fibre optic cable and connecting MDAs onto the e-Government network. 

Phases I and 2 of the NBI were completed with 1,400 kilometres of fibre optic cables laid. The primary data centre and metropolitan area network were set up. The NBI connected 45 sites within Kampala and Entebbe and seven public universities. Private companies are also utilising the NBI as of now.

Phase 3 will provide an alternative route to sea cables through Masaka-Mutukula as opposed to reliance on the eastern border. This will improve the stability of the internet in the country and reduce the cost of bandwidth. A total of Shs 7.2 billion was budgeted for taxes but only Shs 2.5 billion was provided.
 
The committee observed that establishment of NBI is an important step in establishment of IT infrastructure in the country, which has reduced the cost of doing business and promoted e-government services. So far, by connecting 55 MDAs to the National Backbone Infrastructure, Government has saved about US$ 3,300,000 and the cost of a megabyte for bandwidth has reduced drastically to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up in two minutes.

MR BAGIIRE: I will go to the section on the Uganda Communications Commission on page 18:

1.  Analogue to Digital Migration 

The committee recommends that Government implements its own policy by unbundling UBC in addition to raising the necessary resources to conduct a successful analogue to digital migration process in line with the ITU agreement.  

2. Mobile Money

Mobile money has contributed to the country’s financial inclusiveness. Many people, who traditionally did not have access to formal financial services, are now participating courtesy of mobile money. The service has been so successful to the extent that it accounts for transactions worth Shs 13 trillion annually - Shs 1 trillion less of the country’s national budget of Financial Year 2014/2015.

The success is attributed to the growth of mobile telephony services with over 20 million subscribers. Given the growth and magnitude of mobile money as a financial service, it has therefore become imperative that its regulation is guided by a clear law. Today, the service is performed through an escrow account held by a telecom company in a commercial bank. By doing this, Bank of Uganda, the regulator for financial services, considers its mandate covered. Unfortunately, there have been convictions in the Commercial Court of six MTN staff for fraud of Shs 3 billion through unauthorised access and electronic fraud. This state of affairs is a clear indication that there is need for a streamlined regulatory environment for mobile money.

The committee observes that there should be a system that monitors transactions on both the escrow account and the digital mobile money platform in real time. The absence of this creates a fertile ground for unscrupulous individuals to create imaginary money/digital money that may not necessarily be reflected on the escrow account. 

The committee recommends that the ministries of finance and ICT should evaluate the operations of mobile money with the aim of assessing the risks associated with the service. That evaluation should be translated into legislation given that digital payment systems are rapidly affecting financial infrastructure.  

The ministry should adhere to the plan to table the Uganda Communications Commission Regulations where we have value added services of which mobile money is one of those value added services. 

3. Rural Communications Development Fund

The Rural Communications Development Fund (RCDF) was established with a purpose of taking ICT to under-served areas. The fund has had visible success in the area of computers in schools that have aided the examination of computer studies at A-Level. It is worth noting that computers have a productive lifespan of four to five years. However, with the removal of the extra one per cent from RCDF that was sent to the Consolidated Fund, UCC will have to re-examine the scope of the fund in terms of operations and also see how they continue with the support of computers in schools.

The committee recommends that given the reduction in the fund’s resources, RCDF should focus on ICT in education by replacing the old computers in schools and creating more computer laboratories specifically in sub-counties that have private secondary schools and no government-owned or government-aided secondary schools at all.   

The committee also recommends that RCDF should operate independently just like the Road Fund.     

4. Consumer Protection and Quality of Service

The growth in ICT usage specifically in communications has also witnessed an increment in the poor quality of services. The poor quality of services continues to be manifested through dropped calls, manipulation of data bundles, inappropriate billing and delayed connection time among others, which have set up the consumer for exploitation. To the credit of the regulator, they have found a remedy for unsolicited messages by putting data aggregators to order as well as providing an Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) Code of #196# for opting out of messages solicited or otherwise which allows a user to stop any provider from sending the messages.

In other jurisdictions such as Kenya, the regulator has implemented mobile number portability, a service that allows the user to maintain the exact number even after porting it to another operator. In other words, in the context of Uganda, it breaks the barrier of 077 being strictly for MTN; a user can port the exact number to Airtel. 

The committee recommends that as a consumer protection measure, the regulator should consider implementing mobile number portability.  

5. Uganda Telecom

The committee recommends that Government should expeditiously explore means of keeping the company afloat as its demise will have an adverse effect on the telecom sector and the economy in general. 

Mr Speaker, the committee scrutinised the itemised budget for the Uganda Communications Commission as per section 29 (3) of the Public Finance Management Act and found that there are aspects that are important such as improving infrastructure at the Uganda Institute of ICT, Shs 3.132 billion; construction of a boundary wall estimated at Shs 290 million; maintaining UCC’s office building and equipment, Shs 3.5 billion. However, the sector’s unfunded priorities such as cyber security are more important to the country. Based on that, the committee is constrained to approve these three allocations: improving infrastructure at UICT, construction of a boundary wall and maintenance of UCC’s office building and equipment. 

The committee recommends a reallocation of Shs 4.67 billion as indicated in observation 6.6 (i) of this report for the establishment of a national CERT. Additionally, Shs 600 million from the above items should be reallocated for the integration of ccTLD and the national CERT.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee calls upon Government to consider ICT as a priority. I now move that considering the observations and recommendations of the committee, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies:

Vote 020, Ministry of Information and Communications Technology
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 6,496,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 1,081,000,000 
    c) NTR from UCC - Shs 3,639,000,000
This gives us a total of Shs 11,216,000,000

Vote 126­­­, National Information Technology Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 9,182,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 4,192,000,000  
    c) Non-tax revenue - Shs 25,826,000,000
This gives us a total of Shs 39,200,000,000

Uganda Communications Commission; as you are aware, this is appropriation in aid
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 46,192,671,930
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 51,017,855,100 
This gives us a total of Shs 97,210,527,030

Posta Uganda
    a) Operating expenses - Shs 19,931,537,000
    b) Posta Uganda collects Shs 20,215,767,000 in NTR.

I beg to report and I urge the House to adopt this report. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on ICT on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes that are associated with the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes as well. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Honourable members, I now propose that we debate the report of the Committee on Information and Communications Technology on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/2016. The debate starts now. Each member contributing will have three minutes.

3.49
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I have got few comments to make. 

The first one is about the computers which are given to secondary schools. I appreciate the ministry for enabling students learn computer studies, which is very important in this current era. The challenge we have is that these computers given to schools are not repaired. Most of them have broken down; they could be having one or two functional computers. 

The other issue is that the teachers for computer studies are not enough. We went to a secondary school where they had one teacher for computer studies. He teaches from senior one to senior four. If he falls sick, no computer lessons take place. I would like to know whether they are training more teachers so that they can handle this issue of inadequate computer teachers. Otherwise, you find that most computers are just wasted. 

The Uganda Communications Commission is providing computers in districts. I would like to know the criteria used in providing these computers. This is because some politicians are using computers given to the district as tools for campaigns. In the end, they recruit LCIs to learn computer skills and yet these LCIs may not even use them after learning or have access to them in future. I would like the minister to tell me what criteria are used and what category of people are supposed to be trained so that we make these computers useful to us in our districts. 

I would also like to talk about waste. In my house I have a number of televisions, computers and telephones which are now broken and I do not know where to put them. Is there any plan for disposing these assets? I know that these computers have got some harmful materials in them. What plans does the minister have to collect all these equipment so that they are either recycled or they are disposed of properly in a less harmful method.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to talk about mobile money. This service is very handy as we send our money very fast. However, the challenge is that when your money is lost or if you make a mistake when sending money and the money goes to a wrong recipient, that is the end of your money; you will never recover it. I therefore would like to know what procedure is there. It is not very easy to recover the money. The person may not even accept that he or she has received the money. The process is good but we need to have a policy to safeguard the transferred money. Since it is useful, let us endeavour to make it safe for our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. However, I have some few concerns. 

On page 26, under “operating profit before tax”, I wonder whether that is Shs 284,000,0000; if it is, then it means that in this period of computer literacy, it is only Uganda that is not making a lot of profit through the globalisation of the computer world. If it is Shs 284,000,000, then we wonder because every day, there are many phones - over two million - which are imported into the country. If there is a proper tax system – and you said that through the internet, there is better computerisation by URA and assessment and I have witnessed this- then it means that we should expect more money to be received because there is transparency. We also expect that if a person buys a phone worth Shs 2,000,000, the VAT on that amount would generate more money. 

Looking at the recurrent expenditure on page 27, we cannot have a recurrent expenditure which is higher than the expected income. Therefore, we think that when you were looking at the policy statement – Please, brief us on why the recurrent expenditure should be more or higher than the expected income.

Lastly, I would like to speak about mobile money. We expect the mobile money service to be generating a lot of income because with every transaction, all parties involved pay some money. It seems the ministry is not taking care of these transactions; otherwise, you would not even come here to request for more money because that sector can generate a lot of money and thereby sustain itself. I support your report. Thank you.

3.35
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for this report. 

Specifically, I would like to go on record to commend you for at least finally remembering the private secondary schools. It has been a very big challenge especially for the schools that have decided to offer education in sub-counties where there are no government establishments. That they are unable to access computers or computer laboratories established by Government has been very unfair.  

I would like to thank you; in this report it has been said that the one per cent that was removed from the RCDF is already biting UCC and from what they say, it seems they have now to rethink how to handle these programmes. I would like to suggest to the chairperson and the Ministry of ICT that as result of getting these services to those schools that really need them, especially the disadvantaged schools, why don’t you also consider maybe Government leaving out schools that can afford computers? I have always talked about schools like Gayaza, Ntare among others - those schools that you really know can afford to have laboratories in place and replace their computers. Government can then concentrate on schools that are private but not profit-motivated and cannot afford the equipment. Most importantly, computer studies are now compulsory.

Lastly, I would like to find out from the committee how far they have gone with helping Ugandans that live across borders and are still facing high tariffs when it comes to airtime charges. I would like to give an example of my home district, Kabale, where the sub-counties that border Rwanda along Katuna are charged Rwanda rates. When you reach there, they tell you, “Welcome to Rwanda” and you begin paying at that rate and yet these are villagers who cannot afford the expensive air time. They are now being forced to use the Rwanda network lines to be able to communicate and it is cheaper. This is what they use to call us and yet they are in Uganda. How are you going to help them? Thank you.

3.59
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get further clarification from the members of this committee and the chairperson on the issue of sensitising the population on the dangers of using ICT gadgets. That is very important because people are using these gadgets including computers, phones but how does one protect their sight and the like as a responsibility? Many people just take it as fun and have gone to the extent of giving children phones to answer yet we are aware that they have health hazards. How far have you highlighted this?

On the issue of the quality of the gadgets on the market, we have so many junk phones on the market which people buy and after two months, they are already spoilt and some vibrate in a funny way. How do we ensure as a country, through the work of the committee, that we have only quality and licensed or approved ICT gadgets on the Ugandan market?

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the mobile money service, many of us have glorified the use of it but I wonder; is this arrangement a vote of no confidence in the banks of Uganda? The Government licenses the banks we have, which are numerous, and also the mobile money services and yet the use of mobile money services does not have that guaranteed protection of transactions therein.

I personally have lost a lot of money. Once you click by accident and it goes to a wrong account, you cannot retrieve it, even if you try to call MTN. I tried calling them when I lost Shs 400,000; they cannot help as far as that is concerned. As long as the recipient gets the money in advance and withdraws it, you cannot pursue and put that person to order. Therefore, how are protecting the Ugandans from this fraud? 

Why have you allowed this business to compete directly with the banks, which we have been licensed and established and yet we do not have much guarantee? Wouldn’t it have been prudent that we specify how much money can be transacted through the mobile money services rather than leaving it open? Millions of shillings are just channelled through this service yet we do not have limits and guarantees.

I would also like to talk about e-waste management. These gadgets are plenty on the market. On average in Uganda, an adult holds two mobile phones. Whether it is a wheelbarrow pusher or a Member of Parliament, people struggle to have more than one phone. However, the problem, as the honourable colleague said, is where to dump phones that are faulty.  In my house I have over 20 packed away in a certain box. I do not know where to take them. I have two of the old type computers in Kitgum and I do not know where to dump them and yet we are encouraging these gadgets to come in. How are you partnering with NEMA to ensure that our environment is safe from these old gadgets?

One of the problems which Uganda is facing - (Member timed out.)

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I am happy that the Minister in charge of ICT has been around for long. He knows that the privatisation of UTL was under the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, and I am happy he was the minister. That is where I will begin from. We privatised UTL; we did assets stripping and promised that it was going to improve the sector. Recently, when the investor wanted Government to bring money, Government said “No, we cannot add more money” and they requested the investor to put in the money. We cut our shares from 51 per cent to 20 per cent. What are the benefits we have got from this privatisation exercise? You are coming up to tell us that we need to invest more money in UTL when Government told us that we better keep it privatised so that we get money.

My Speaker, if you audited UTL very well, there are a lot of losses, and not real losses but money which came from Government in a funny manner that paid for bills which were not there yet we thought this would help. The so called investor must have only collected money out of this country with the help of some people in Uganda. I would be happy with the Minister of ICT if he explained to me what happened in UTL when you told us that the investor is going to do all.  

In that regard, I have requested that you allow me to present a motion to set up a select committee to deal with privatisation. It is better that way because you will see a lot of mismanagement of public assets through the privatisation process.

Currently, they are not issuing frequencies to people who want to open radio stations. However, if you have money, you will buy a frequency. I would like to know who those people are who are allocated frequencies without radio stations. Is the minister aware that there are frequencies which have been given away and the people have no radio stations? Who are those that you allocated frequencies to without capital investment? 

On appropriation, I have heard the chairman of the committee telling us that the Ministry of ICT is going to get NTR from UCC. I thought we appropriate money for ICT. Is it that they do not have enough money for their travels so they have to go to UCC? It is us to appropriate money to ICT and UCC should operate in its own way. These are the people making UCC a problem by going there and getting money illegally for travels and using it for their expenditure. I would be happier if UCC is made to operate on its own and if the ministry wants more money, we appropriate for it.

On MTN, Airtel and other operators, we are experiencing a lot of dropped calls and when your call drops, they charge you. There is no consumer protection in Uganda as far as this communication is concerned. We should know what will help us. Operators like MTN, Airtel and many more are robbing us through dropped calls. (Applause) We have no consumer protection and yet UCC would be happier to get a commission not because MTN has collected but because we, the consumers, are suffering. We are in danger. Unless we deal with these multinationals who are cheating us left and right, we are really finished. Therefore, what is the role of the Minister of ICT as far as phone consumption is concerned and what is the role of –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee together with the members for the report. 

The first issue I would like to talk about is switching from analogue to digital transmission. We have a deadline of 17 June 2015. However, from what is contained in the report, it seems there is a lot that they still have to do. They are requesting for a second signal distributor. I wonder when that will be done. For now, UBC is not in position to finalise whatever it has to do and if we are to switch off the citizens of this country especially those who are still on analogue, how are we going to compensate them? Have we sensitised the people in rural areas about the switching from analogue to digital? I think we need to do a lot more. Now it is only the elite in Kampala who know about the switching. Therefore, we need to do a lot before we switch off on 17 June 2015.

My second issue is about the e-government. I think we are pushing for e-government and service delivery. However, it looks like the budget we have is just 0.5 per cent of the national budget which is still not yet there. I am requesting that at least we give ICT whatever it needs to ensure that e-government and service delivery is working. Information and communication technology cuts across all operations in the sectors and we need it. That is why you find that many of the sectors are inefficient and ineffective because we do not network. If we are only looking for 0.5 per cent of the national budget, which is still not given, I think we should do a lot in order to ensure that ICT gets the budget that it needs.

Lastly, I would like comment on the implementation of the National Security Information Framework. There is a lot that we have to do. We cannot compromise our security. We are putting a lot of money in defence and security but if we do not take into consideration the fact that we need to have a national CERT, I think we shall have a problem as far as cyber security is concerned. Therefore, I call upon all members to support the budget and also support whatever ICT is asking for in order to have the national CERT to implement the National Security Information Framework. I thank you.

4.10
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to re-echo the concern of our colleague regarding the distribution of computers to schools that do not have power. We expect that all the schools in this country should be having computers and all our children should be learning and communicating using computers but some schools do not have power. You find powerful computers lying idle in schools that do not have power. Honourable minister, what plans are there in order to extend power to all our secondary schools?

On the dangers of disposal of computers, is there a policy that when a computer has worked for so long or when one desires to dispose of their computer, they can take it to such a place and it will be safely disposed of? Can we have that policy?

My other concern is that of connectivity. We thought that the desire of the Government would be to have every Ugandan able to communicate but we find shadow areas that are not covered by any network and you make reports and nothing is done. Honourable minister, what is the policy for covering those areas that do not have network at all? We know that there is a policy that bars erecting of more masts and we want several network companies to work together. However, people are left helpless; when you approach any of these companies and they do not help you, what are we supposed to do? 

I have three sub counties - Kiyanga, Kanyabwanga and Bitereko - that do not have network. Can you help us, please? We need to know the policy. I am talking about areas in Mitooma but there are other areas in Uganda that are not covered by network. Women get problems at the time of giving birth and they cannot call for help; people get sick and cannot call for help. It is a big problem. We know that you focus on the amount of money but we have areas where people have their money and they would be willing to pay but are not able to access the network. Even we, their leaders, cannot access them.

Lastly, I will comment on lack of consumer protection laws –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have presented before the House and I also thank the ministry. 

I have a concern; this morning I read in the press about the behaviour of one of the telecommunication companies and that is MTN. I do not know whether we all read that they have laid off quite a number of engineers they have in Uganda and they were protesting how they are being handled because their work has been sublet to ZTE, a Chinese company. They have to now reapply to the Chinese company. There is a problem there. Can you intervene and save Ugandans from losing all these jobs and causing unrest in the country?

I would like to comment on what my colleagues have been talking about – the issue of mobile money. I support the committee, which urged the ministry to come up with a policy or a Bill to enable us regulate this mobile money service. As my colleagues have said, the mobile money transactions rest with the companies. We do not even have records. If you lose your SIM card or should it fail to work, you lose all the money in it.

Above all, much as we think it is user-friendly, if you have a problem with your card, even if you are in Nwoya, you have to travel to Kampala because they do not have regional offices. They only move in vans. They can only replace your SIM card if you registered for mobile money in Kampala; not even in Gulu or any place. I believe this is giving people a lot of hard time and they are losing money and yet from the start, they looked so promising. We need protection from Government. They should come up with a policy.

Mr Speaker, on the issues of dropped calls, we need to protect our people. This happens with all the telecommunication companies or networks - MTN, Airtel, Africell and it is even worse with UTL. Sometimes you subscribe for monthly services but you cannot communicate and your money is not refunded and yet you cannot send a message when you do not have credit on your phone. What is that unfairness? Should we just look on as our people are being exploited? I feel the ministry should help us and protect us from this exploitation. I beg to submit.

5.17
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA	(NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very good report and I thank the ministry for the work done to make sure that at least we try to become ICT compliant. 

Having said that, I would like to seek clarification from the committee chairperson and the ministry and this applies to every government department and cuts across the agencies. In the spirit of the East African integration, how far has the Ministry of ICT negotiated with the companies to have harmonised call rates? This is a very important element, like one of my sisters who comes from near the border with Rwanda said. Rwanda telecoms supersede the Ugandan telecoms. 

I also face the same challenge at the Tanzanian border. When you are near the border, you get onto the Tanzanian network – Vodacom – and you are unable to receive Ugandan calls.  How are we preparing to make sure we have a harmonised East African integrated mechanism for single rates and even the wavelength especially across the borders?

How is the ministry helping the other ministries to become totally ICT compliant, to make sure that we have within NITA-U - I remember when NITA-U was being established, there was a call for us to have a one-stop centre, where we can get all the information about Government. As we rollout to the education institutions in the countryside, how are we reaching every sub county? 

There are serious local governments which are implementing government programmes; how are we facilitating them with computers and internet facilities so that as we transact business at national level, we are able to know and transact with the lower levels? This is a very important communication mechanism; we need to improve the channels of implementation and tracking and make sure that government programmes are well-tracked using ICTs. 

I cannot leave out the mobile network system whereby they now market bundles. You are enticed to buy so many bundles and you pay for a month but quarter way into using them, you lose money. Is there a mechanism to regulate this? You are enticed into purchasing a bundle for a week or for a month and you pay heavily; it is a way of siphoning money from the public, as my brother said. How do we protect the consumers to make sure that we rationalise this - (Member timed out.)

4.20
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the committee for the work done and the Ministry of ICT in general. 

I have a small comment on RCDF. My constituency has benefitted especially through training of communities in ICT programmes and I must report to this House that it has really been very good. I would like to thank the ministry, particularly UCC, because every time they did this, they would request the Member of Parliament to directly participate, including selecting the participants. Therefore, I was fully in charge and I must say that the programme was very good. However, I am disappointed to see this one per cent reduction is going to cause some bit of challenge regarding that service.

From the committee and perhaps the ministry’s recommendations, concentration on buying computers and laboratory equipment for schools, both government and private-owned, tends to relegate the other aspect of training the communities. I call upon the ministry and UCC in particular to continue with this programme. Find mechanisms of making sure that this programme still remains because it has been a success everywhere. Up to now, people still demand for such services because this has helped them a lot.

Mr Speaker, just like my colleagues raised, I would like to also comment on the mobile money service. I equally would like to thank the committee because in their recommendations, they have put it categorically clear that we need to regulate this business. If there are a group of people who have benefited either positively or negatively it is the Members of Parliament. Every time you are called by a member in the constituency telling you that they have either lost someone or they are organising a programme, the first thing they will tell you is that they are registered. Therefore, there is no debate; –(Laughter)– you have no escape. There is no way. The first thing this person will tell you is, “I am registered, honourable, do not mind”. As you remind that person that you are in Kampala which is very far, he or she reminds you of that very fact.

The biggest challenge we have in this, just like hon. Anywar and others have said, is that there is a lot of theft with this service. Just make a simple mistake and send that money to a wrong number, getting it will be a very big challenge. How –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have more contributions. We are going to use two minutes each now.

4.23
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for their report and I have no objection in passing it. 

I have only two questions to the minister. A year ago, several members of our village were shot at and we lost a woman and two girls had their legs shattered. Before the shooting, someone was calling and making threats using an MTN number. Our problem has been, since last year, the capturing or arrest of that person. There was a policy that whoever buys a mobile phone or a card is registered and has a photograph. To date, the police have failed to retrieve the photograph of that caller. Therefore, I am wondering, was that registration of any use? Are the photographs helping anybody? Can they try to improve the system so that we do not have problems of that type?

Secondly, I want to comment on the loss of money through mobile money services if you make a mistake. I am connected to MTN but when you lose the money, they tell you that you call the other party and if he or she agrees to send back the money then they shall retrieve the money for you. We are really confused; can something be done? I was just adding to the complaints of the Members, otherwise thank you for the report and I request the Members to pass the budget.

4.25
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join the colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report. 

I have two concerns to raise. The ministry has gone a long way to remove these roaming charges in neighbouring countries but the problem is that the charges in other countries, like my colleagues have said, is still exorbitant. The other day we were in Tanzania and to call Uganda using an MTN line costs you Shs 6,000 per minute. However, when you get a Tanzanian line, it is only restricted within Tanzania but to call Uganda is equally a disaster. I think those rates should be harmonised.

The other issue is that telephone companies like MTN and Airtel in other parts of the country like Bukwo still operate on a very low network, just 2G. This is not effective enough to access the internet. Therefore, this has hampered the access to internet especially in schools which were served with communication computers; they cannot readily and retrieve information.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to know from the honourable minister and the committee what plans they have for areas which have not been served by the UBC television station or radio station, now that we are moving from analogue to digital. What provision do you have for such areas like Bukwo? We shall continue talking about it until such a time that we access UBC Radio and Television. I hope as we near the age of digital, you are able to provide an answer to that one. Thank you very much.

4.27
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my friends in appreciating the committee for the good work done. 

My concern is on page 14 of the report about cyber security. Honourable minister, how secure are we in the cyber world? I have looked at the committee lamenting. Honourable minister, you are fortunate enough to have built and constructed roads - the physical roads here - and now you are with ICT; we need secure roads in the cyber world. Not many of us are aware that you can have protection everywhere but the cyber world is supposed to be regulated. We need to have this Computer Emergency Response Team. We need to have money for this ministry for the development and transformation of this country, let alone hon. Baryomunsi’s ministry. You can be healthy but the cyber attack has no regard. Nearly 95 per cent of most of the crimes that are being committed are ICT based.

We have just heard from Bubulo. There is no single crime these days, which is committed without - Is our Bank of Uganda secure? Are our banks secure? If you got to know how much they suffer locally without letting us know, how so many hackers have gone into their banks, you would all be afraid to keep your money there. We have just registered for identity cards and all our photographs are there; you are going to get and experience what we call identity theft. Somebody takes hon. Bagiire’s photo properly with all the details and transacts on your behalf online. Are we secure, honourable minister? What can we do to give you more money so that you secure us? We might be having the jets, the guns but cyber security is not defended by jets and guns and gunships. We need to be cyber secure.

Mr Speaker, if we are to take ICT as a policy or as a government programme, this is a matter that we need to rethink and invest a lot of money gradually, so that we are secure –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to compliment the work of the ministry and especially the chairman of the committee and his team. I compliment them for the good work done.  

In particular, I would like to make reference to the connections they are making and the supply of computers in schools all over the country. This is a very good project and we would like to request that this Parliament supports the budget of this ministry so that they are able to cover all the schools across the country. In my district, a good number of schools have been connected and supplied with computers already. Unfortunately, some of them that have missed have been calling for the ministry to supply and to date, they have not yet received.

Secondly, skills’ training is very good because the communities around those schools, when mobilised to come for the training, come in overwhelming numbers. However, the resources that are allocated are not enough to do the training for everybody that would like to attend. Therefore, 

I would like to request that you enhance the resources that are put in this area to enable the communities that live around, especially young people who are interested in learning ICT skills. It is a very exciting thing to the youth so I would like to request that you ensure that all the schools and communities that live around these schools get trained. In my district, training was carried out in –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the Members for a job well done. However, I have a concern on page 23 about the recommendation of the committee that Government should do something to keep Uganda Telecommunications Company afloat because its demise would be more damaging. 

Mr Speaker, we have just heard that other private telecommunication companies like MTN are seriously downsizing their staff and also out contracting work to other companies. I think this is the time for us to move and save our own. If we have 31 per cent stake in UTL and the major shareholder has financial problems, I think this is the time for Government of Uganda to come in and amend the Act so that we will be able to take over this company and run it. After all, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has proved that even as a country, we can run these private companies and also make profits. National Water and Sewerage Corporation is now getting awards even at international level.

I therefore wish to support the committee and say that you better move and bring amendments to the Bill on privatisation so that Government moves to take over this telecommunication company and we begin to run it. MTN and these other telecommunication companies have business everywhere so why would you want to sit here and give business to other people and not do our own yet opportunities are there for us to also do business in this era? I would like to call on the committee and Government that amendments be made.

Secondly, I would like to know from the chairperson. Why do we make people register their SIM cards and yet at the same time, we cannot use them to deal with some of these simple problems and mistakes that are going on? Was there any need for us to register SIM cards? Even when somebody has mistakenly sent his money to another number that is registered with photographs and all the details, it still becomes very difficult for a person to retrieve their money. Where exactly is the problem because everything is there but retrieving the money becomes a problem. That means the companies are not ready to help the people but –(Member timed out_)

4.35
MS SYDA BBUMBA: (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report and I would also like to thank the ministry for the progress so far made in making Uganda IT compliant. 

Mr Speaker, one of the biting problems facing this country is the high unemployment of the youth and Business Processing Outsourcing (BPO) can help in reducing this unemployment. Uganda has got a lot of advantage with regard to using this outsourcing. The geographical location of Uganda gives it an advantage to trade with any part of the world on the same grid and also the time zone makes it easy. 

Mr Speaker, we are lucky that our children and some of us can speak the Queen’s English, which is an advantage in business process outsourcing. Business outsourcing can provide 24 hours employment with minimum space required. However, this business has not been giving the due importance it deserves. Government is investing in quite a number of sectors with the view of creating employment. India, overnight, created millions of jobs when they started business outsourcing, in spite of their difficulty in speaking English. 

Mr Speaker, this outsourcing could help further by arresting rural-urban migration, if the rural towns got connected to IT and their people are able to work for - (Member timed out_)

4.37
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the Members to thank the members of this committee for this report. My concern is about the FM radio frequencies. 

Mr Speaker, some of us and other people have tried to apply for FM radio frequencies in this central region. However, as we speak, they have no more frequencies to offer. What they tell you is to either look around for those who got them many years ago and are carrying them in their briefcases or find someone who has failed to run a radio station. When you engage in that business, it is very risky and expensive. 

Salt FM radio experienced that when it bought one of the members and they suffered a lot. What are we going to do? Some of us applied, made the payments and the papers are there but we have waited for many years. 
Sometimes we are advised to set up in Karamoja or far away from the central region yet we are based here. We need help. One time when we engaged the honourable minister who is now the Prime Minister, he said that they are buying a gadget or machine, which would adjust these frequencies and squeeze them so that one can fit in-between CBS because one would also want a frequency, which is a bit nearer. We have waited, prayed, knelt down and called Allah, but nothing has come. How will you recall those who are carrying them in their briefcases? 

Lastly, I would like to thank the commission, which helped to supply computers to most of our schools. However, in some hard to reach areas like Koome Islands and Mpunge, we have not yet received these computers and yet we have seed schools there - (Member timed out_) 

4.40
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee. When I heard Members talking about mobile money, I wish to know from the minister the control measures they are putting in place. This is because most of our people are being exploited. Ignorantly when they go to deposit money, they are charged and yet when you are sending to a person, you are also charged. That is double taxation. We need the minister to give us some of the control measures being taken so that our people are protected.

Secondly, 10 to 15 years ago, the late Mr Nsadhu launched a mast in Moroto. To date, it is still a white elephant. What went wrong, honourable minister? Can we know the plan for that?

Mr Speaker, can we be protected from these mobile service providers because we continue to get irrelevant messages on our phones and these messages are also taxed. If you open these unsolicited messages, you are charged. Can we have control over this? Why should you send a message, which message I do not want to read and make unnecessary calls to my phone?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I wish to support the committee in their call for increased funding to this particular sector. I recall that two months ago, Mr Obama, the President of the United States, was launching what is called, “ICT and mathematics” in every school. The American children must begin embracing and learning ICT and mathematics as core subjects because they have realised the way to go is ICT and for you to know what is happening in the world, you must be knowledgeable. 

Therefore, I think the ministry should also go a long way in improving this and I support them when they call for increasing the funding –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for this very extensive debate. Honourable minister, you will prepare your responses and lay them on the Table. Mr Chairman, move the House to adopt your report in 30 seconds.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg that the House do adopt the report and considers the Budget as presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Information and Communication Technology on the ministerial policy statement and the Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

4.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for Financial Year 2015/16. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the minutes of the committee meetings with stakeholders on the ministerial policy statement for Financial Year 2015/16. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I wish to beg for you indulgence that I present the executive summary of the report and I beg the indulgence of Members to refer to the comprehensive report uploaded on your iPads. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Madam Chairperson.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 12 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, sectoral committees are mandated, among other things, to:
    1. To examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction.
    2. Examine critically Government recurrent and capital Budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

In line with this mandate, I now have the honour, Mr Speaker, to present for your consideration and adoption, the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the Financial Year 2015/2016 covering the social development sector.

Scope

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2015/2016 for the following votes:
    a) Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    b) Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission
    c) Votes 501-850: Local Governments

The report covers the following aspects - I beg to skip that and go to methodology.

In considering the policy statement, the committee -
    i. Held meetings with the political and technical leadership of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Equal Opportunities Commission, National Youth Council, National Women’s Council, National Council for Children, National Council for Disability, National Library of Uganda, Uganda National Cultural Centre and the Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group. 

    ii. We reviewed and analysed the following documents:
    a) The Ministerial Policy Statement for FY 2015/2016
    b) Alternative Policy Statement for FY 2015/2016
    c) Corrigenda to the Draft Budget Estimates for FY 2015/2016
    d) Previous reports of the committee on ministerial policy statement 2014/2015.

Mr Speaker, I will go to budget performance during the financial year 2014/2015.

Financial Performance 

This section examines the financial performance of the ministry. It discloses the funds released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as at 31 March, 2015 and the extent of absorption by the ministry.

During the Financial Year 2014/2015, Parliament approved a budget of Shs 62.792 billion to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Shs 42.753 billion was released by end of March 2015 and only Shs 37.927 billion, reflecting 88.71 per cent, was spent as indicated in table 1 below. Honourable colleagues, I invite you to table 1.

The low absorption was registered mainly under taxes at 37.0 per cent and this was largely due to taxes that had been budgeted for procurement of vehicles that had not been procured by the end of the third quarter.

The 116.41 per cent release performance under arrears was mainly due to a special release of Shs 172 million towards workman’s compensation arrears.

Indicative Budget allocation for FY 2015/2016
The indicative Budget estimates for the Social Development Sector in the Financial Year 2015/2016 is Shs 84 billion, out of the National Budget of Shs 17,956.45 trillion, representing 0.46 per cent allocation for the Social Development Sector.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been allocated Shs 71.595 billion excluding taxes and arrears, reflecting an increment of Shs 10.803 billion in the nominal values and 17.77 per cent compared to Shs 60.792 billion for financial year 2014/2015. Out of this, Shs 2.377 billion is for wage recurrent and Shs 20.976 billion is non-wage recurrent. Shs 48.242 billion is for domestic development as shown in table 2 below. 

The three per cent reduction in wage recurrent is due to the adjustment in line with the wage allocation of some staff in Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as advised by the Ministry of Public Service through the corrigenda to the Draft Budget Estimates for FY 2015/2016. This was presented to Parliament. 

An additional Shs 2.278 billion was also allocated to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to facilitate payment of pension for the FY 2015/2016. Honourable colleagues, the details are in table 2.

Observations and Recommendations 

Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme 

The committee is happy to note that the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme has been considered in the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2015/2016. Whereas His Excellency the President made a pronouncement during this year’s Women’s Day celebrations in Kabale, that money had been set aside to fund Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, the committee is concerned that only Shs 1 billion has been availed in the budget for financial year 2015/2016 leaving a funding gap of Shs 116.2 billion. This is quite big, Mr Speaker. There is need Government to make concrete commitment to fund this programme.

The committee recommends that Shs 116.2 billion be given to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to kick-start Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme so as to unleash the potential of women in Uganda.

Promotion of green jobs and fair labour market programme

The committee was informed that in an effort to address the challenges of unemployment and promote decent work in the country, the ministry has come up with a project on promotion of green jobs and fair labour market. 

The five-year programme (2015-2021) was approved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with a financial implication of Shs 863 billion. The programme is aimed at strengthening externalisation of labour and monitoring mechanisms, promote and support research, innovation and creativity in the informal sector and reduce occupational accidents, diseases and industrial pollution at workplaces.  

The programme will be implemented in collaboration with Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports; Ministry of Trade and Ministry of Water and Environment. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Government commits at least Shs 5 billion to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to kick-start the implementation of this programme in the financial year 2015/2016. 

Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE)

Government, under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, has for the last five years, been implementing the expanding social protection programme for senior citizens with support from DFID and Irish Aid. The programme, which was being piloted in 15 districts, spread in all regions of the country with a payment of Shs 25,000 per month per beneficiary. 

The committee was informed that the ministry has prepared a more affordable roll-out strategy for consideration, which takes cognisance of the need to balance three key considerations namely: impact on old age, poverty and vulnerability, affordability as well as social and political acceptability. Further, the proposed roll-out plan will enrol 100 oldest persons in each sub county of every district starting financial year 2015/2016. 

The committee was further informed that Government has provided Shs 7 billion to roll out SAGE, leaving a funding gap of Shs 26.730 billion. 

The committee recommends that Shs 26.730 billion be given to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to start the roll-out of SAGE programme.

The committee recommends further that Government should make a concrete commitment to roll out the senior citizens grant to cover all districts of Uganda.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should expedite the policy on social protection to strengthen the mechanism for coordination of social protection programmes in the country.

Youth Livelihood Programme	

The committee appreciates the development contribution that the Youth Livelihood Programme has made in improving livelihood incomes, especially among the youth. During the committee field visits to selected districts in eastern Uganda, the following shortfalls were identified in the implementation of the programme: money being shared among group members, corruption among responsible officers, inadequate facilitation for monitoring and supervision of the programme, among others.

The committee therefore recommends that the ministry strengthens and tightens monitoring and evaluation measures to ensure that the programme achieves the intended objectives.

Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, should institutionalise youth development programmes and link them to the National Development Plan.

There is need to mainstream disability issues in programmes and projects of all sectors to adequately cater for the needs of persons with disability as is the case with gender, HIV/AIDS, and climate change. This is just making it as a crosscutting issue.

Welfare of children in institutions under the ministry

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is mandated, among others, to provide care, protection and empowerment of children in its institutions; that is, remand homes, rehabilitation and youth training centres. 

The committee was informed that what is currently being provided to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is inadequate to cater for the increasing numbers of children in these institutions. 

The committee was further informed that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has allocated Shs 547 million against the required Shs 2.722 billion representing 20.09 per cent of its budget for financial year 2015/2016.	

The committee therefore recommends that the Shs 2.175 billion be given to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be able to provide care and protection of children in these institutions as well as making the institutions operational.

Industrial Court

Mr Speaker, the committee is happy to note that the Industrial Court became fully constituted and began its operations in July, 2014. The committee was informed that in order to increase productivity in its operations, the Industrial Court requires an additional Shs 1.759 billion to enhance its capacity.

The committee recommends that Shs 1.759 billion should be provided to enable the Industrial Court function properly.

Occupational Safety and Health 

The committee observes that Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006 mandates Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to conduct regular inspections and monitoring in all workplaces to ensure compliance with the labour and occupational safety and health standards. Further, the Act provides for licensing and inspection of workplaces, certification of plant and machinery and approval of architectural designs for fees provided under the regulations.  

The committee was informed that the ministry had realised Shs 945 million as non-tax revenue in the first three quarters of 2014/2015.

The committee recommends that the Department of Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) strengthens its inspection and supervision roles in all workplaces to ensure strict adherence and compliance with labour standards as well as ensuring that good conditions of workers are maintained.

The committee further recommends that the ministry re-tools the department of OSH and more funding be given to make it more efficient to enhance revenue collection.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development develops a strategy and action plan to address gender concerns, especially in oil and gas development in Uganda.

Compensation of Government workers 

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that according to Workman’s Compensation Act, 2009 and International Labour Organisation Convention, Government is obliged to compensate workers who get injured and acquire diseases at workplaces. 

The committee was further informed that the ministry has accumulated arrears amounting to Shs 4.781 billion, which need to be cleared in the financial year 2015/2016.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the government opens a budget line under the ministry to provide for workers’ compensation, just like it is the case with statutory court awards under the Ministry of Justice.

The committee also recommends that Shs 4.781 billion be provided to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to pay off arrears.

Establishment of Kiswahili Council

The committee observes that Article 6(2) of the Constitution of Uganda states that Swahili shall be the second official language to be used in Uganda. The Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community Article 137 provides that Swahili shall be the lingua franca of the Community. 

Further, the directive made by the 10th Council required that all member states should establish national Kiswahili councils under the ministries responsible for culture in order to promote trade and labour movements within the region. Therefore, Uganda, as a member state of EAC, is obliged to operationalise the Council’s decisions.

The committee recommends that Government expedites the establishment of the Kiswahili Council. This will enhance Uganda’s ability to get employment in the region as well as ease the ability to do business.

The committee further recommends that Shs 500 million be provided to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the initial establishment of the Kiswahili Council. 

Office Accommodation for the ministry

The committee was informed that the current office accommodation for the ministry is on sale and a notice has been issued regarding the sale of the building and that the ministry should be prepared to accept the terms and conditions of the new management. 

The committee was further informed that the ministry spends a lot of money on rent, which would have been strategically allocated towards acquiring permanent premises. 

The committee therefore recommends that Shs 64 billion be given to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to purchase office space.

Labour Productivity  

The committee observes that as Uganda desires to acquire a globally competitive middle income country status, in accordance with the Vision 2040, the country’s economic performance and level of global competiveness remains low to the global benchmarks. 

The committee also notes that Uganda lacks a mechanism for coordinating various activities to bring about improved labour productivity in the country.

The committee therefore reiterates its previous recommendation that the ministry fast tracks the establishment of National Productivity Centre to prepare Uganda’s labour force for regional and global competitive employment.

Labour Market Information 

The committee observes that the Ugandan labour market is faced with notable mismatch between what the education system offers and the labour market requirements. 

The committee appreciates the need for an establishment of labour market information systems that will provide quantitative and qualitative information and intelligence on labour market that can assist labour market agents in making informed plans -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up in two minutes. 

MS KOMUHANGI: The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the establishment of labour market information systems to be able to help education providers align course provision with labour market needs through analysis of labour market trends.

Mr Speaker, with the time given, I do not know what to do. We have a recommendation - Let me only read the recommendation on externalisation of labour.

The committee recommends that Government, through Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, expedites bilateral agreements with the receiving countries so that Ugandan labour force abroad is monitored and tracked.

On establishment of National Council for Older Persons, the committee recommends that Shs 1.4 billion be provided to the ministry to facilitate the establishment of National Council for Older Persons so that issues and concerns of older persons are adequately addressed. 

On Gender Based Violence, the committee recommends that Government commits resources and develops strong framework for sustainable intervention to prevent and effectively respond to domestic, sexual and gender-based violence and that the ministry fast tracks the establishment of a one-stop centre for gender based violence to provide for immediate reporting, investigating, medical examination, counselling and providing legal services to gender-based violence victims. This will help ease the process of conviction for gender-based violence perpetrators.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should expedite a policy and action plan for elimination of gender-based violence.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that there is progress reporting to Parliament on gender-based violence.

Under crosscutting issues, Mr Speaker: 
    a) Gender mainstreaming
    b) HIV/AIDS
    c) Environmental and Climate Change

The recommendation of the committee on this is that the committee urges all sectors to critically scrutinise and analyse their budgets to ensure that all crosscutting issues are addressed and complied with, as stipulated in the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

On budgets for statutory bodies, the committee reiterates its previous recommendation that statutory bodies be given their independent votes to enable them function properly. Wage is a right. Therefore, the committee recommends that the wage bill for the statutory bodies be fully catered for by Government.

National Women’s Council

The committee recommends that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development liaises with Electoral Commission to ensure that election of women councils is given priority like any other council to enable it to effectively execute its mandate.
Mr Speaker, this body is the only body that is not on the roadmap of the EAC.

National Youth Council

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the amendment of the National Youth Council Act to lift the term of office of the council from four years to five years, just like other councils on affirmative action.

Mr Speaker, there was an impending strike on this. Therefore, we call for the immediate amendment of the National Youth Council Act. 

The committee recommends that the Youth Council enhances and strengthens its monitoring and evaluation role to ensure that youth development activities reflect value for money.

National Council for Disability

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the amendment of the National Council for Disability Act, 2003 to give powers to the council to disburse grants to districts so that its monitoring role can be strengthened. 

The committee also recommends that the ministry procures a permanent and disability-friendly accommodation for the council. This council is the only council that does not have a home and yet it is a council of persons with disability.

On National Library of Uganda, the committee recommends that the ministry, in consultation with the Solicitor-General, expedites the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the Office of the President so that the National Library of Uganda recovers its land title.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should secure more conducive office space for the National Library until the Nakawa-Naguru development project is completed.

National Council for Children

The committee recommends that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development appoints board members of the council for purposes of policy guidance and reports to Parliament accordingly.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should, in consultation with Ministry of Public Service, ensure that staff gaps are filled for effective operation of the council.

On the Uganda National Cultural Centre, the committee recommends that the annual wage subvention be increased from the current Shs 27 million to at least Shs 1 billion to enable the cultural centre cater for workers’ salaries.

The committee further recommends that Shs 2.28 billion be given to the National Cultural Centre to carry out renovations of the National Theatre as well as Nommo Gallery. These centres are in appalling conditions.

Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission

I will invite Members to go through that and I will go straight to the recommendations.

On Gender and Equity Certificate, the committee recommends that the Equal Opportunities Commission develops a checklist for auditing compliance in all MDAs and local governments and make thorough audit of budgets of all sectors to ensure that they comply with the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

The committee recommends that Shs 12 billion be provided to enable the commission executes this mandate.

On the visibility of the Equal Opportunities Commission - I think I will skip that and go to focal persons at the district level. On this, the committee recommends that Shs 217 million be provided to Equal Opportunities Commission to enable it to enhance collaboration with the local governments.

Votes 500-850 – Local Government

On staffing structures at the local government, the committee recommends that Government recentralises community development functions for proper supervision by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

On Functional Adult Literacy (FAL), the committee recommends that Government should increase funding to Functional Adult Literacy so that the illiterate people can be empowered to participate in development activities.

Government should facilitate FAL instructors and provide learning materials to facilitate better learning environment.

Monitoring Special Grants

The committee recommends that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development enhances its monitoring and supervision role to ensure that these grants reflect value for money.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the funds be sought to address the critical yet underfunded areas within the Social Development Sector and that issues like unemployment, social protection, gender-based violence, occupational safety and health be given special attention in financial year 2015/2016 for the Social Development sector to increase household incomes, promote equality, enhance the availability of gainful employment and increase access to quality social services, which in turn will contribute to Uganda’s Vision 2040 of being a middle income country.

Subject to the above observations and recommendations, I beg to move that this august House approves the Budget estimates for the Votes under the Social Development Sector for Financial Year 2015/2016 as follows: 
Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
Recurrent
    a) Wage - Shs 2,377,447,000
    b) Non-wage - Shs 20,976,443,000
    c) Arrears - Shs 1,004,045,000
    d) The total is Shs 72,599,976,000

Development
    a) Government of Uganda - Shs 48,243,041,000

Equal Opportunities Commission
Recurrent 
    a) Wage - Shs 2,517,151,000
    b) Non-wage – Shs 1,380,000,000
    c) Development – Shs 300,000,000
    d) Taxes - Shs 62,500,000
    e) The total is Shs 4,259,651,000

Local Government Conditional Grant 
Recurrent
    a) Non-wage- Shs 7,141,000

The Grand Total for the entire Social Development Sector is Shs 84,000,627,000

Mr Speaker, I beg that this report be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2015/2016. The debate starts now. We will be taking three minutes for a start and we will move from there. 

5.15
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairperson for the report. I must say it is a wonderful report. 

Mr Speaker, I am a bit taken aback especially when you see what is provided for under the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. When you have Shs 1 billion against a shortfall of Shs 116 billion - If that is the standard we are going to use to set the pace, then it means we need 117 years to achieve the objectives of the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme.

I would like to put more emphasis on 4.3, which is on the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE). For five years now, it is known that the government has been implementing this programme but in less than 20 per cent of Uganda. This is something that was promised to all Ugandans of qualifying age.  

From what the chairperson has recommended - She recommends that the shortfall of Shs 26 billion be secured. From what she read, there is a provision of Shs 7 billion to top up what is availed by the donors. However, the donors would be comfortable if we had about Shs 10 billion. 

In the narrative to the ministerial policy statement, it is clearly indicated that they were going to provide Shs 10 billion. However in the budget provision, it is Shs 5 billion and not Shs 7 billion, although I am happy to hear from the chairperson that it is now Shs 7 billion. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very sensitive issue. 15 out of 112 districts are benefiting. However, old age is universal. You cannot say that these old people in Yumbe, Katakwi and Kaberamaido deserve the service more than the ones in Pallisa, Tororo and other places. We have to convince Ugandans that this is a service that recognises the peculiar situation experienced by the older persons. 

It is therefore my call to this House that we do not endorse or pass this Budget in its current form unless we have secured the remaining money to at least have an additional Shs 10 billion to roll out this programme. 

I do not think that we should still be talking about piloting. We should be talking about full scale implementation so that all the older persons in Uganda feel that they are equally treasured. If we do this selectively, that is discrimination and it is very unfair to some of those older persons in those other parts of Uganda who could be poorer and worse off than those in the districts that are benefiting. 

Mr Speaker, even in some of those districts that are benefiting, not all those - (Member timed out_)

5.19
MR KENNETH ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members as a whole for a wonderful report. 

I would like to continue from where my colleague from Pallisa left off and express my concern over section 4.4.3 of the report, which deals with Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment.

In 2011, this programme was launched in 15 districts in Uganda. It was supposed to be a pilot programme that, over a period of five years, should have covered the whole country by now. I would like to tell this House that if there is any programme that I have seen working in this country, it is the SAGE programme. I have seen it work in my constituency. I have seen the old men grow younger because they get money. It beats my understanding why we cannot get Shs 26 billion only and roll out this programme in every sub-county in every district in Uganda. What are we waiting for? 

Most of these older people are actually carrying more responsibility because they are looking after orphans. There has been a generation gap due to AIDS. We see all these ragamuffins on the streets. This is as a result of being orphans and these children are being looked after by elders. Once these elders begin earning a steady income, the problem of street urchins will stop. I have seen it in my constituency.  

I would like to go further than my colleague and say that we should not pass this budget until the government gets for us Shs 26.7 billion. With this amount, we would be able to roll out SAGE in every sub-county in Uganda and bring on board 100 of the poorest older persons in this country. Please, these are our grandparents! We have some of them in this House who would benefit so why don’t we do this?

These elders are our registered voters. They have worked so hard to bring this country to where it is now economically. I think that this would be a small token of our appreciation, for what they have done for this country.

However, SAGE has only two problems and this is why nobody is interested in it. One, SAGE requires only very little –(Member timed out_)

5.23
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I would like to ask the chairperson that at an appropriate time when we do not pass this, do not get worried because we are so concerned about the citizens of this country.

I would like to talk about two or three issues: One is the issue of Community Driven Development (CDD), which was supposed to help the women get empowered. A woman was supposed to be the chairperson, homesteads were supposed to be clean, toilets to be made available and such things but the money has been reduced. I do not know what has become of it but I feel that such monies should be added because it helps the community as the impact is felt. 

On the issue of SAGE, I still would like to emphasise that the older persons are suffering. They are travelling from upcountry to come for meetings in the centre. They have contacted people and are really in grief. They are wondering what this country is up to.

If a neighbouring district is being supported and you are in the neighbouring sub-county and are not being supported, you definitely feel so bad. This is discrimination of the highest class. We feel that Government should not discriminate amongst its people. Let the older persons be supported. 

The Irish want to get away from this because Government of Uganda was supposed to put money in the basket and then the Danish also put some. However, it is only the donors that are giving money and the Government of Uganda is not committed. Why don’t we commit ourselves and put money so that our people are supported?

We are saying that if Government is not willing to give the Shs 26 billion – they are saying a minimum of Shs 10 billion. If they have given Shs 7 billion, let them add so that there is a minimum of Shs 10 billion and at least 100 oldest persons in the sub-counties are supported. If that is not embraced, we are not going to pass this budget.

On the welfare of children, you will realise that the institutions under this ministry are not being supported much, most especially the remand homes. Mr Speaker, imagine a child who is in conflict with the law from Lira is taken to a remand home in Gulu. They are not accepted there because there is no food, the teachers are not there and the health facilities are not sufficient - (Member timed out_)

5.29
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to appreciate the Committee of Gender for the work well done. I however hasten to say that the budget proposed by the committee, in my view, is very small.

In order to reduce poverty in any country, one of the drivers of poverty reduction must be community capacity building. Why we have invested a lot of money in most of the poverty reduction strategies and have not achieved a lot is because there has been little in respect to capacity building and community empowerment.

In respect to the women livelihood programme, I am excited. Whether is entrepreneur or livelihood, I know comparison has been drawn from the youth livelihood. I have been bombarded by women in my constituency asking me why we considered the youth leaving out the women. I therefore would like to support the aspect of considering the women.

On the other hand, one of the evils, which must be combated in poverty reduction strategy, is elimination of inequality. To those who are saying that we only want to target 100 old men and women in every sub-county, I think that is a proportion of inequality. We must therefore be in position to provide monies sufficient to provide for all people of old age. 

In respect to piloting, I think this must have stopped. If we do not have enough money to carry on with this scheme, we had better abolish it rather than promoting discrimination and inequality in the disguise of causing development or social change.

I would like to strongly submit that either this money be found to adequately fund the scheme to provide universally across the board for all those persons who qualify or else, we close the project and say that it has failed instead of coming under attack and people thinking that we are here to legislate for discrimination. I thank you.

5.28
MR JACOB OBOTH OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will rise to support the sentiments of the previous speakers and I would also like to thank my good friend who is the chairperson of this committee. She is wondering what is happening.

If you take anything for granted, it becomes dangerous. If you are a country or home and you do not give due respect and dignity to your elders, it is shameful. If those who find themselves on the wrong side of the law have to beg you for assistance, there is a problem.

The Ministry of Gender and Social Development should be asked what social initiatives they are making to deserve their mandate if the elderly are not being taken care of. In five years, you have covered 15 districts. I do not know any district in Bukedi that is benefitting from this arrangement but when you go to any meeting, you will see a frail looking old man raising up his hand.

Definitely the question asked is, when are you giving us our Shs 25,000? I do not know about you but I know about the older persons from my area. Shs 25,000 makes sense for them. That is the very reason I rise up to support a call to boycott passing this budget. What will I go and tell them now that we are going to electioneering? Should I tell them that I have been in this Parliament for four years and said nothing and also failed to deliver for the older persons?

Their prayers are more heard and that is why the attrition rate in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is high. I would like to caution those who are there now that they have to find a way of getting the Shs 26 billion so that this is rolled out to every sub-county. It is not asking too much. Government can find these 100 or so from each sub-county. These older persons have given service to this country. We have to treat them with dignity. 

Some of them have lost everybody and are living on their own. Why can’t Government come out and support them? Is that asking for too much? Is it being unfair if we said that this budget should be put on hold so that we task Government? Are we not performing our rights if we are appropriating year in, year out for five years –(Member timed out_)

5.31
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The comments I would like to make are about this issue of providing support to the elderly.

I am one of those people who are members of the forum for elderly persons and we have had an opportunity to go to the districts where this programme is operating. What Members need to know is that we have discovered that if say a programme is operating in Kyankwanzi, all the elderly in the neighbouring districts come to Kyankwanzi for the benefit. This is causing a lot of pressure to the 14 districts that are benefiting. 

In addition, 14 of the beneficiary districts are being funded by donors. It is only one district that is fully funded by our Government, which sends an indication that the government has consented and agreed to go ahead with that programme.

Mr Speaker, if the programme does not go on, I do not understand whether the government is sending a signal that even the 14 districts will be deleted and scrapped from the programme. Therefore, the problem we have is that we have all got elderly persons in our own districts. Recently in Buhweju, we hosted one of the government ministers and he assured the people that at least 100 eldest persons per sub-county would be included in the programme.

Now if we get only Shs 7 billion, I do not know what that Shs 7 billion is going to do. It is waste, in my view. Government would rather be clear and say they are not going on with the programme but we are saying, Government must go on because the premise has been set. We should see all the elderly people in all the districts and sub-counties getting involved in the offer of the SAGE programme.

Mr Speaker, if this programme does not go on, what does it imply? Those children that are surviving on the elderly, mainly the orphans that were left behind by people claimed by the AIDS scourge will not go to school, they will not get drugs and they will not get food. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am asking the government I support to concede immediately and provide the Shs 26 billion so that this programme continues and commences in every sub-county so that there is a roll over and every sub-county benefits. This is a political demeanour and it will not work well for us as a party, as a Government and even as Parliament. We have to be clear because our Government cannot play double standards and we allow this. That money should be availed by hook or crook. Government has money and it cannot fail to get Shs 26 billion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we never do it by crook in this House. (Laughter)

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that statement. We are saying Government should use all the available means at its disposal to get that money so that our elderly people are respected and honoured, having done to them what we have done to others because we have started somewhere. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.35
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Women Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I support the debate by my fellow colleagues. I was waiting to stand up and talk about SAGE because all the districts in Acholi do not have SAGE. 

In 2012, I walked to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and asked, how come all the districts in Acholi do not have SAGE? I also asked them the parameters they use. They told me that there was war in Acholi and so they did not go there to use those parameters. That was 2012 but now it is 2015. I was going to stand and talk only about the Acholi but I am very happy that all my colleagues are speaking the same language about SAGE.

Mr Speaker, in Kole and Apac where there is SAGE, the elderly from the neighbouring sub-counties come and pretend to be from those districts. When they pretend, they lie and these are old people. They lie because they also want to get the Shs 25,000 that the other people are getting. What can we say about equity? This thing has turned some of our elders into liars. 

I am begging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stop underfunding the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because you are breeding inequality. We would wish that all the districts in Uganda benefit from the SAGE programme. 

I have visited many districts where SAGE is practiced and you can see that there is a difference in the lives of the older people there. Some have bought goats with this money. They get a loan and buy an animal so that they can – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, honourable colleague and Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. What you are saying is very right especially regarding poverty levels. The information I would like to give you is that when Government had the proposal of the SAGE programme, they asked UBOS to help Government and come up with the statistics of the poverty figures. 

When they realised that the figures were going to be used in the 15 districts to allocate those funds, even the officials in UBOS had their own conflict of interest. It was for that reason that even the 15 districts, which they picked are not necessarily from poverty stricken area. They just kept on picking districts depending on the interests of the officials at UBOS who were carrying out the statistics about the poverty figures in the country. Thank you.

MS LANYERO: Thank you for that information. I think maybe that also explains why in the whole of Acholi region, there is no district that is benefitting from SAGE.

Mr Speaker, the money that is - (Member timed out_)

5.39
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at me, I am almost there. (Laughter) I am becoming an older person. My argument is that I do not know the criteria Government of Uganda uses to give the Gender Ministry almost the lowest budget year in, year out. I have always asked that question and I have never got the answer. I think the minister in charge will give me the answer.

All of you in this House should have done statistics. When you are doing statistics, you need to get the sample size and when you are looking at the sample size, you should get a number that is representative enough. Out of 112 districts in Uganda, you only chose 15 districts. That percentage is around 14.1, thereby leaving out the bigger percentage of 80 plus and you also say that you are working. 

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to state that I have the older people we are talking about in Bungokho North. These are people who cannot even afford to buy salt, sugar or paraffin yet they do not have electricity in their houses. Like my friends have already alluded, the orphans that they care for need basic needs because they cannot afford education. 

To equip a child in a UPE school you need at least Shs 100,000 per month. I join colleagues that if it is hard to roll out this system in all districts in Uganda, let us say, we cannot afford and we stop wasting time in Parliament; we have other issues to handle.

Uganda shillings 26 billion to the government of Uganda - indeed we have the money, but I do not know why sometimes we pretend to make Members of Parliament suffer - (Member timed out.)

5.43
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, chairperson for the report. To begin with, I have an issue with this report.
Madam Chairperson of the committee, I am addressing this to you. When you read the report, you find several recommendations; for instance there is one that Shs 4.78 billion should be found to pay for compensation under the workman’s compensation Act. There is a recommendation that Shs 1.4 billion be found for establishment of National Council for the older persons.

When you proceed to the figures submitted for appropriation, and the report says that, subject to the above observations, we recommend that this House approves the budget as follows: -What is the effect of the recommendations you made? Where are you now leaving the money for those who were injured; and we are saying money should be found? 

At the end of the day, we are approving something when your own effort has not been captured. If you are to present something as it is, then what is the purpose of us changing the budgeting process, and we consider this budget before it is presented. There is need to change these figures. 

On the issue of SAGE, which every other person has spoken about, I come from Busoga sub region and I would like to say that no district in Busoga is benefitting from this Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment for the elderly people.

We have also been informed that in Acholi no single district is benefiting; in Bukeddi, no district is benefiting. However, to specifically talk about Acholi, the reason given for the omission of Acholi is that there was war; they did not gather statistics. Do you have to punish the elderly in Acholi because there was war and leave them out?

I therefore join my colleagues and insist that if we have elderly people in Kayunga, Omoro, Bulamogi; if we have these people in these other places, then we have every reason to say we cannot pass this budget.We shall be so unfair to them; because in some districts - I had an opportunity to visit districts like Kyegegwa and Kyankwanzi which are benefitting. But you find senior citizens –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MS LAWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for this good report. I also thank the committee for noting the shortfalls under the youth livelihood programmes. 

It is true there are serious gaps in the implementation. I know some money was provided for mobilisation and sensitisation which was supposed to be undertaken by district and sub county officials.

However, in a number of sub counties you will find that the youth are not aware of what is going on; they have not been given information or guided on how to benefit from this programme. For instance, in Pader, during this financial year that is coming to an end, about Shs 350 million was allocated for the youth in Pader. But up to the end of April, only Shs 62 million out of this was approved for about 10 groups. This is only two months to the end of the financial year; and yet the youth need to be supported; the youth need this money because they have problems. By supporting them under this programme, we will be solving so many problems in the community. I appeal to the ministry to strengthen their monitoring and supervisory roles.

On the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment, there is need of rolling out this programme; but there are serious concerns as my colleagues have been saying. We know it was piloted in 15 districts; yes maybe it could not be started throughout the country. However, it is now five years down the road; we have been having questions on the criterion that was used for selecting these 15 reasons. I cannot be convinced that even one district from Acholi sub region was not identified or considered because there was war during the assessment. This programme started in 2011; the war in Acholi sub region ended around 2005 to 2006. When did they conduct this assessment?

It is very unfortunate because they are now saying it is spread all over the country; in all the regions. When you go to the North; yes it is in West Nile sub region; some districts are benefiting. Coming to Acholi sub region –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent Woman Representative Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report. I want to find out from the committee how the Shs 1 billion will be implemented this year. Is it going to be in building structures, guidelines, buying cars and motorcycles to establish the women’s fund? Because it is a peanut compared to the number of women in this country.

Fifty one per cent of the population are women, and remember these are the voting machines – (Interjection)– yes women are the ones that vote; and so they should be supported. We need to operationalise the gender and equity certificate; this gender and equity certification according to the law is based in Ministry of Finance.

However, the Equal Opportunities Commission is supposed to be consulted. I do not know how the commission is going to oversee the implementation of gender and equity certificate yet it is housed in the Ministry of Finance. They are the ones supposed to come up with guidelines.

Equal Opportunities Commission is just consulted and yet they are the people that are mandated to see that gender and equality in this country is on track. Are they in charge or they are just hanging there and the ministry of finance is going to do everything?

Many people have talked about this funds; I am concerned about the National Women’s Council. For the last four years we have been talking about it. I do not know why it cannot be operationalised. They do a lot of work and the little money that is now sent to the districts is used for meetings which are for the executives. Why are we paying salaries for the secretariat of the National Women’s Council when they are not operationalising the issues on the ground? Are we only paying meetings? I believe it is important that we stand up and demand from Government that the National Women Council elections take place.

On the issue of Youth Livelihood Fund, when they put up this fund, I think there was no budget for monitoring the implementation of the fund. The youth have been trained but nobody follows them up because when you look at the structures at the district, they cannot even manage to get fuel to go and monitor the activities of the youth.

Therefore, this fund, if not well monitored, is going to end up failing like the other one. There is need to put a component of monitoring such that this – (Member timed out.)

5.52
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative Agago): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to start where hon. CD Lowila stopped in regard to the social protection programme money. For us in Acholi sub region, we are not happy because it has been five years now, and we kept on expecting that this programme at least would touch some few districts in the sub region. Since we have not seen it, we will not support any money that will be in this budget for this item because we are not going to benefit from it unless we get assurance that  this coming financial year  the 21 districts that you intend to cover will be included in Acholi sub region.

Mr Speaker, it would not be wise for this Parliament to pass monies for just selected districts when other districts are not benefitting. Fifteen districts are not even a quarter of a half of the districts in this country. Therefore, we must all agree that this budget must put all the money that was required, not  only the Shs 7 billion that the chairperson has suggested here. We would like to request that we amend it to have monies reallocated from everywhere else in the budget to take care of this; minus that, I do not think we will be able to move.

Secondly, I would like to speak about women council. Women councils have not been supported all along but all the other interest groups have been getting support. Women council is the only interest group that has never been getting support. Therefore, I would like to request that the ministry this time round - because there was some money. I remember also this Parliament kept asking the ministry, where is that money which is intended for activities of income generation? It is called IGA. This money was being deposited in the districts but not all were receiving either. This money would enhance the activities of the women council to at least have a few groups have income generating activity. But the money is not being received by all districts. 

Therefore, we would like to request that this ministry kindly makes sure the monies that are remitted in the districts are equally received - even if it is small but make sure all districts get because if women hear of such and such a district receiving and the others not getting, it really demoralise women in terms of what they plan to do.

Lastly, I would like to make a comment on the request for purchase of office – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we agree on adjusting the time a bit to accommodate – can we reduce to two minutes?

5.56
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am making a clarification on the point of the welfare of children in the institution under the ministry. This surely is positioned as a priority but it is greatly underfunded. And in that respect, you find that the street children who happen to be the group which will be taken care of by the ministry are not conspicuously mentioned here. Therefore, as the committee was informed about this serious underfunding – (Interruption) 

MS NTABANZI: Mr Speaker, he is a member of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he a member of the committee? Please sit. 

5.57
MS SYDA BUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North Nakaseke): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very good report. My first concern is on children who are remanded in regional remand homes. These children take a long time to get justice because they have to be taken to the scene of crime and quite often the remand homes do not have the money to transport these children.  It is said that “Justice delayed is justice denied”; therefore these children stay without justice because of inadequate funding.

These children are subjected to poor feeding, poor health facilities and poor rehabilitation facilities because one of the reasons why they are remanded is to have them rehabilitated but they do not get the rehabilitation and quite often, they run away and go back and continue with their crimes. Therefore, it is important for the remand homes to be decentralised so that they are closer instead of having regional remand homes.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also add my voice on those who have talked about the women council. The elections for women council were last held in 2007 –(Interjection)– yes, 2007; and in the road map for the electoral commission, they are not indicated anywhere. Therefore, if they are not going to be conducted in the current elections, it means that the Local Council one will not have complete councils because these women are supposed to be the secretaries for women affairs. I thank you.

5.59
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU: (FDC, Busongora County North Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have about four issues for which I would like to plead with my colleagues that this report should not be adopted by this House.

One, on the 4 December 2014, the Rt. Hon. Speaker, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, directed the Minister for Gender to include Kasese Youth Training Institute in the budget for financial year 2015/2016 because it was devastated by the NRA war in 1986. It has never been rehabilitated and therefore, the youth in Kasese are stuck. 

I brought this matter to the attention of this Parliament and the Rt. Honourable Speaker ruled that it must be included. It is not included and therefore it will be unfair to pass this report.

The second aspect is to do with the age programme. Some of our parents who are of age, in my view are surviving because we are able to meet their daily needs. However, there are quite many parents, elderly women and men who do not have any form of support from anybody apart from themselves.

Mr Speaker, even you, you are about to become of age and very soon you will get to that bracket. However, the privilege that you have is that there is a law which will provide for you and enable you to meet your daily needs. Imagine a peasant who has never got a salary since they were born and they are only missing Shs 25000.

Mr Speaker, it is very unfair and unbecoming and if this House can adopt this report unless you do not have elderly people that is when you can pass this report. I would like to plead with my colleagues that – (Member timed out.)

6.02
MR JOHNY SASSAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whenever we meet with the Minister of Finance and we ask them why they underfund some ministries, especially the Ministry of Gender, which ideally could be the mother of all ministries, they say what they ask for is what they give them. 

I would like to thank the Ministry of Gender for having come up with a comprehensive programme and activities which need Government funding. 

I call upon members that apart from looking at the Budget from the Ministry of Finance, look also at the Ministry of Gender and the several projects which are in the Budget in the Ministry of Finance, you will get a project having billions of money and that money always goes to the West. 

I wish you could also scrutinize when that stage comes or bring here the report of Finance and look at it very well, you could help this committee and Ministry of Gender that we can identify idle monies in those projects which can fund the activities in the Ministry of Gender.

Secondly, I am very happy with the labour and productivity centre as it has been proposed. If you look at our labour force we have in Uganda, its marginal productivity is either negative or at its best at zero or less than 10 per cent. This could be very good and I wish they make it a policy that every graduate in Uganda at whatever level should first go through this centre and get a certificate of competence before the person can be employed in Uganda.

If you look at their productivity and output, efficiency and effectiveness, it is very demanding and I wish this centre could be expanded to all regions of Uganda to cover all ministries – (Member timed out.)

6.05
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for the good work done. I will talk about Uganda women empowerment system. When the President made a pronouncement on 8th  May in Kibaale, I was one of those who said God has answered our prayers as women. 

Some of us went to the extent of informing our fellow women in the countryside that this time things are coming our way and those of you who have been handling issues with women, women are usually good in a way they save their money and whatever money you give to a woman, that money will be put to good use.

Honourable members, especially my fellow women Members of Parliament, I am looking at this in a way of economically empowering our women. You know how women have suffered for quite some time. Unless Government puts this deficit in the Budget, we should put our feet down and say no, we shall not pass this Budget, until this funding gap has been bridged. 

Therefore, I felt I should add my voice so that the women of Uganda can also be helped because the women cannot do the way the youth have been doing; they cannot go on the streets, for them they are humble and waiting for what – (Member timed out.)

6.07
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this chance. I wish to commend the committee for the report and also support them on the issue of getting a home. I am recommending this not only for the Ministry of Gender, but also for all other ministries, departments and agencies that do not have a home.

Mr Speaker, this country got independence in 1962 and this is now 2015. That means as a nation we are 53 years old and at 53 many Government departments and ministries do not have a home. Assuming at 53 it was your child without a home, look at me I have not made 53 years, but I am old enough and should be having a home - (Laughter) - so the Leader of Government Business through you, Mr Speaker, should tell us what plans Government has to provide a home for all Government ministries, departments and agencies so that we stop wasteful expenditures in rent.

On the senior citizens grant, I would like to support the position of the committee and also my colleagues. I would like this to go on record that for districts that are benefiting from this project of SAGE like Nebbi District, this project has made His Excellency the President very popular and to me it is an opportunity for Government to be able to channel all resources to where there is high demand. 

I wish to support my colleagues that this project benefits the people of other districts just like it is benefiting the people of Nebbi. I support the committee that the – (Member timed out.)

6.09
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very elaborate and clear report. I would also like to say that I support this report and especially where it highlights youth, SAGE and Uganda Women Entrepreneurship programmes because, I can say that much as the government has focused on infrastructure development, if we continue developing infrastructure only, I wonder who will use the infrastructure, electricity and roads without empowering the women and youth.

The women who are 51 per cent that is 17 million people and above and you give them Shs 1 billion, who is going to get that money and for what. The youth, are 78 per cent of this country; yet even the youth livelihood programme has not been addressed. Every time we go out and meet them, the youth are still asking what programme we have for us. 

I would like to say that Government should look at the Ministry of Gender critically because I think it occupancies half of the institution or nation which need a big support. If you cannot support the Ministry Gender meaningfully then I think we are doomed to see that there will be no development.

My second point is about a recommendation that has been made on page 30 and this is about the staffing at local Government. The committee is recommending that the community development functions should be recentralised. I am wondering, where is the spirit of decentralisation; and if the community development staffing is inadequate we would rather ask Government to ensure that those staff positions are filled rather than decentralising them. 

If you decentralise them I can assure you, you will see a staff from the ministry once a year in a district because they are not even there; they themselves are understaffed and unfunded and they are not being facilitated adequately. So I would really like to –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the job well done though there are some things that are still wanting but we thank them for what they have brought on board.

I will talk about two things. I would like join my colleague a member from Zombo. Centralising the community development officers; I do not think the justification which has been given is worthy moving with because we would be killing the decentralisation policy. Already the CAOs are here; medical officers are also fighting to come here; the labour officers  are coming here. I think if we go by this, we will be killing the decentralisation policy. 

Secondly, on the issue of the women’s fund, I really stand strongly to support that this money should be found and not only the women in this House should support, even the men who have wives who are here should come on board and support us and Government looks for this money. I hope they are hearing.

On the issue of the senior citizens, if there is any colleague here in this House and in your constituency they are not getting this money; for sure they are going to use that against us. Honourable members, let us stand up and not pass the budget and make sure we get this money.

Finally, on the issue of FAL, I think we have left FAL to work on its own. It is really underfunded and even the facilitators are getting very little money if not nothing apart from bicycles that were given.

Mr Speaker I request the chairperson and the Ministry to look for something small because it is really helping the women especially if you look at the FAL classes, the people who are there who have enrolled, the majority –(Member timed out.)

6.14
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee members for coming up with a very wonderful report. I want to agree with the committee on the person  with disabilities or people with special needs. We really need to increase the budget for these people. They are suffering most especially children. I remember in March this year we visited these schools as a Committee on Equal Opportunities, we discovered that these children are neglected. Parents just throw their children in those schools, they are not well funded, there is no clear method of identifying them so some of them are just growing in their homes; they are in villages and even proper supervision is not in place. So we need to increase on that budget.

Secondly, I want to support members and I want to stand with them that we need to roll out special protection fund in all districts. Hoima is disadvantaged because they are just neighbouring districts that are benefiting from this programme: Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, and Kiboga. 

So we have been receiving many questions from the elderly as to when they are receiving their money. We have answered and explained and now we cannot explain any more. We need this programme rolled out to all districts and I want to stand with members. We should not pass the budget until we get this money to pass this programme. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

6.16
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I join colleagues in thanking the committee for the detailed report. I want to start from the SAGE programme. We have really suffered trying to answer and we cannot answer any more. I want to thank the members for what they are now deciding that we do not pass budget minus this money. In fact we have been supporting this SAGE programme. For the last three years, we have been giving resolutions. However, I was wondering when will these resolution of Parliament ever be implemented. Now this is the way to move. We should not pass this budget minus the money. We cannot explain any further; we are tired.

Two, I want to support the committee on the women councils. We should elect new women councillors and on the women council, there is this fund that has been going to the women council for income generating activities. Previously, it has been 3 million; then it was increase to 3.5 million. When you go to my district, at least we received in 2012 and 2013. When you visit these groups that benefited, the Minister of Gender can even give me witness because she also visited it; it has really done great to these women groups. They were getting one million and when you look at the activities that they have done, there is one that went for solar panels; of course in my district we do not have electricity and these women are charging telephones, they are even using it for salons –(Member timed out.)

6.19
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. It is very important to consider SAGE. It has helped elderly people in my district and in the district that are being served. What we have to do, let us scrutinise the budgets of different departments so that we can look for this money because it is necessary and this is a promise which is in the manifesto; let us deliver. 

Therefore, I support other members that we should look for money and make sure that we roll out for this programme. However, at the same time we should not say that we will not pass the budget because they have not provided for all the money. Even us, when we began, we started with few sub counties, then we rolled out slowly year by year. So if we can get some money to begin with and we begin with 100 people per sub county throughout the country that one can help us – (Interruption) 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am always the last person to put a colleague on a point of order. However, only recently, we were in Kyankwanzi, his constituency witnessing the same programme and a every good a speech was given; and his old people were looking very well. Every one gave a very good speech and promises were made that we are very optimistic that we are going to roll out the programme to all the districts that have not been covered. Now is it in order for a member to deviate from the flow of the motion - from submissions by other members who have not benefited from this programme. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kyankwanzi, you have been given information, it is not a point of order –(Laughter)– please conclude.

MR SSEMUGABA: Mr Speaker, I am in support of looking for more money so that we roll out. Although I was stating that we may not get all the money required, we should - What I am supporting is that we roll out this programme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that Napak?

6.22
MS STELLA NAOME (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like some clarification from the committee on 4.4.5 about the welfare of children. 

As a mandate of the ministry, in the last financial year 2014/2015, this Parliament had appropriated funds to ensure that the children from Karamoja are rehabilitated and taken back to Karamoja. However, to this effect, even in this statement there is no mention of rehabilitating those street children from Karamoja. 

I really wonder whether the committee has ever endeavoured even to visit these children and also to find out whether the transition centre – Koblin – is rehabilitated and prepared to receive these children. It is missing in the policy statement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally Nwoya District.

6.23
MS ADONG LILLY (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. I have two concerns. One is about the welfare of children who are in the remand homes. I have been talking over and over again on the Floor of this House. We have Gulu Remand Home which is being run by NGOs and the district. Literally, the district is failing to run this remand home, yet I believe it is under the Ministry of Gender and I have not seen it anywhere. Can you really make a provision for it? 

Otherwise, we are creating more criminals because children are taken there with probably minor criminal offences, but they learn worse habits from there. They jump over the fences becuase they are not being catered for. Can we have mercy upon the people of Gulu because that one caters for the whole of North: from Kitgum; all the districts around take the children there. It is the districts that are supposed to contribute money for managing this remand home, yet it may not be completely their mandate.

Secondly, I would also like to request – I do not know whether they have to work hand-in-hand with OPM – about Labora Youth Centre. It is a very big institution that has been constructed under OPM and it is being run by a project, but it is for the youth centre. OPM is almost literally failing to fund that centre, yet it could be taken up by the Ministry of Gender and used for training the youth and others.

Lastly is on the SAGE, we are at the gateway to West Nile. Immediately you leave the Nile, you go to a place where all elders are being honoured. Therefore, the Nwoya elders are saying soon they are going to stage a roadblock. If they see the money going to West Nile, they are going to stop it - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think this report has received sufficient debate and we need to come to a close. However,  let me guide on the issue that has been raised in the way of moving forward.

The Rules of Procedure of Parliament anticipated this kind of situation. However, we are in the transitional laws and that is why this difficulty is being presented to us. Under Rule 138(2) of our Rules of Procedure – if we look at it again –where a difficulty with figures that need reconciliation; where the desires of the members are that monies be found. Those issues are captured and the Speaker has the right to refer those matters for harmonisation to the  Committee on Budget so that they can look at it again; go through the budget again, look at where possibilities are and then come back to the House and advise us how to move - (Applause).

However, this is hardly the stage to say, “Do not pass it” because you would have put a roadblock on the whole situation. However, you highlight the issue. I am going to ask the chairperson when she comes to sum up  and  capture this particular debate in her final recommendation that the House can adopt it and at an appropriate time, we get the  Committee on Budget to look at this and then we deal with it. This is because you cannot ignore this debate at all; there is no way. 

Therefore, if you can make that recommendation from the chair as part of the committee’s that this money be found, then we can forward it to the Committee on Budget later and then they look through the budget to see what is possible and what may not be possible. 

6.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I must thank you for the overwhelming support and I think this is very desirable for our country.

Mr Speaker, the areas that are being emphasised by members include funding gaps on SAGE; children rehabilitation centres; finding money for Women Enterprise Programme; money for funding gender and equity certificate implementation and election of women councils. Mr Speaker - (Interjection) – that is under children.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed Chair.

MS KOMUHANGI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg that those recommendations be recommitted to the  Committee on Budget  for reconsideration. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is being proposed by the Chair is that an avenue be created to reconsider those issues that they are recommending. That means that the report is accordingly amended to that effect. Should we adopt it as now amended to accommodate all those issues? There is also the issue of Kasese School. This is hardly the stage to handle it. However, the  Committee on Budget  has the authority to look at the whole picture of the budget and look around. 

That is what we did for teachers in 2012. That is what we did for the medical workers in 2013. The trend is there; the records are there. Therefore, this is what we are going to do now for this sector so that it can be looked at properly. Yes, Busongora North.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move this House that the chairperson – for record purposes – also mentions Kasese Training Institute and then we can move. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, your guidance is good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok. Kasese Training Institute has been raised as a commitment by the House.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, it was not only Kasese, but also Gulu; there was also Koblin –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us handle it in this spirit; Lira then Agago?

MS ONGOM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like to appreciate the chairperson for accepting to pick these very crucial issues to be recommitted and taken to the Committee on Budget. However, I would like to know, at what time are they going to bring it to us so that we access and see that really our wishes are captured in the budget? We are going to pass this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is this, just like the Committee on Budget handles the budget framework paper, Rule 138(2), which I have just given to you allows the Speaker where issues of inconsistencies are to refer those issues to the  Committee on Budget Committee, saying look at the budget and see if these matters can be found. 

Just like it happened with the teachers, they did not find all the money; they found some money. Just as it happened with the medical workers, they did not find all the monkey, but they found some money. Therefore, they will be able to make recommendation to the House that we have been able to find this or all of it or part of it then you can take that decision when that time comes. That is the way to move forward; Agago then West Budama South.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That ruling is really very wise. I thought that would require at this point this Parliament to refer this report so that we take care of those issues that have been raised –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. This is a report on the ministerial policy statement. It is only at the end of it that those inconsistencies are brought out altogether and referred to the Committee on Budget. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: I agree with the ruling and guidance of the Speaker, but I would like to add something now that we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the House. It could also help us. 

As information, on 17 April 2015, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on finding resources. As this matter is referred to the Committee on Budget, we ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to make it difficult for the Budget Committee to harmonise this. Otherwise, it is a matter that puts us into a very serious situation.

Mr Speaker, as we were debating; I looked at some of the 15 districts and I wondered at first whether they were using the letter “A”; and then I found Apac and Amudat. I went thereafter to letter “K” and I found Kyankwanzi, Kyenjojo and Kyegegwa. There were seven Ks. I went to  letter “N” and I found Nakapiripirit, Napak –(Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the guidance you are giving is very relevant and I hope that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will comfort us as the Budget Committee does it’s work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me put the question to the adoption of the report of the committee with those amendments that have been supplied by the chairman of the committee. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Ministerial Policy Statement on the Budget Estimate for financial year 2015/2016 as amended be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock and it is 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 May 2015, at 2.00 p.m.)
