



Tuesday, 26 May 2020


Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will be making a slight adjustment to the Order Paper to allow the item on the supplementary request to come ahead of the Bill, which is on item No. 3.

Honourable members, yesterday was 25 May 2020, which is marked as Africa Day. It is exactly 57 years since the Organisation of African Unity was formed. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I congratulate the African Union for this achievement. It is my sincere hope that the African Union will continue to stand for its principles of promoting unity and solidarity among African states, coordinating and intensifying co-operation for development, safeguarding sovereignty and territorial integrity of member states, and promoting international co-operation within the framework of the United Nations.

Secondly, honourable members, a few weeks ago, we lost a very dear teacher and deputy head teacher of Gayaza High School, Miss Ann Cutler. She passed away in England. She served Gayaza High School for over 40 years and trained and groomed many ladies, some of whom are here and hold high positions in all walks of life in Uganda and abroad. She was one of the missionaries of the Church Missionary Society, which gave great service to this country.

I also take this opportunity to thank the Church Missionary Society for the job it did all over the country, especially to promote health and education and this was done mostly before independence; before we could stand on our feet. We would really like to thank them.

Also on a sad note, we have heard about the death of Mr Jimmy Kirunda, a football icon. He captained the Uganda Cranes for over 10 years. He was the man who led the Uganda Cranes to the African Cup of Nations finals in Ghana in 1978 where we reached the finals for the first time. Although we lost 2-0, that match remains engraved in our memories as a major achievement in football for Uganda. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I convey sincere condolences to the football fraternity, the people of Uganda and his family. I invite members to observe one minute of silence for Mr Kirunda and Miss Cutler. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, over the weekend, I was able to interact with some small operators who have been in the COVID-19 lockdown. Among the issues they wanted us to bring to the attention of Government is that many of them – because they have not been working – will have difficulty meeting their rent obligations for the last three months. They have used up their savings because they were not working. They have also used up their capital to survive and the loans they took will also be coming due. 

They asked us to inform the Government to see how they can be assisted to overcome this situation. I hope that when the Prime Minister comes to speak to us on Thursday, perhaps he could touch on the proposals for supporting the Ugandan people in different sectors.

There were a few matters of national importance. However, there are those, which are COVID-19 related and I think they could be answered on Thursday. The Prime Minister will be here to specifically talk about COVID-19. Therefore, all those members who had questions related to COVID-19 – hon. Angura, hon. Mbwatekamwa and hon. Aogon – will ask their questions on Thursday when the Prime Minister will be here to discuss the COVID-19 situation. 

I will give the other members one minute each to raise their issues. Hon. Kalwanga, I think you should raise a question to the Ministry of Health because I do not think it is a matter of national importance. The one of Tinkasiimire has already been raised and so, we are not going to repeat it. Let us have hon. Rwabushaija.

2.51
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national concern regarding the academic health and safety measures that are to be undertaken by the Ministry of Education and Sports when the learners in the candidate classes restart schooling.

The pertinent issues we need the Ministry of Education and Sports to guide us through, prior to the reopening of the schools are as follows:

Accommodation of teachers
Madam Speaker, statistics indicate that about 70 per cent of the teachers in schools are not accommodated by the schools but they rent and stay in their homes and in some instances, far away from the schools where they teach. Therefore, my concern is, what measures are these schools going to put in place under the guidance of the ministry to ensure that there is minimal exposure of teachers to the coronavirus as they commute to and from the schools? It is also important that we protect all the students and teachers who are not staying at school.

Madam Speaker, we have schools in the border districts. Given the high risk of the spread of the coronavirus within the districts bordering our neighbouring countries that seem to have a bigger challenge in curbing coronavirus, with the reopening of schools, there is need to cater for the candidate classes. What measures shall we put in place to ensure the safety of our learners, teachers and the support staff? We know that many of these teachers could be in one district while working in the next district. 

I will give an example of Namisindwa that broke away from Manafwa but some teachers continued staying in Manafwa yet they are teaching in Namisindwa. As a result of that, we know that there is a challenge because even if the district is still under lockdown, there is a problem that these people must move to the next district to carry on with their duties.

We also have the learners and some of these teachers who use public transport. What will happen? If the district is a challenge and there is no health and safety within the districts where they preside, they must cross over to another district. That also causes a challenge in as far as both the learners and teachers are concerned.

There is also need to plan for the teachers who need public transport to move because some of them come from far away and teach in the different schools –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on this particular matter - the issue of schools opening on the 8th – whether this Parliament has been consulted and whether we have comprehensively debated because the corona cases are just increasing. The prevalence is worse than when we locked down the schools. We now want to take all the children in Uganda back to schools.

So, I am seeking your guidance on whether the Government should not come to this Parliament and tell us whether we are ready to open the schools. In my opinion, it is not advisable to take anyone’s child to any school at this particular time. Therefore, I am seeking your guidance on whether it is already tried law or whether this Parliament can be engaged further.

In my constituency, people are not willing to take their children back to school. Schools are dangerous like churches; they are dangerous like markets. So, we seek your guidance on whether Cabinet has consulted you as the Speaker or whether this Parliament will be engaged at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I instructed the Minister of Education and Sports to come and brief this House and the country about the measures and plan to reopen the schools. I hope that she will come. They should not go to the Media Centre; they should come here so that we can engage and ask questions and get clarification.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Primary Education)(Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I appreciate the concern being raised by the member and the concerns being raised by the honourable colleagues.

I would like to make it clear to this House that yesterday, Cabinet sat about this issue and put up a committee that is going to look into this. We, as Ministry of Education and Sports, have not yet come out to inform the public that the children are starting on the 8th.

So, I want to allay your fears dear colleagues, that you give us an opportunity. We shall come out and if it requires coming here before Parliament, we shall definitely have to come and inform you. So please, we have not made a statement as Ministry of Education and Sports that students are starting on the 8th, please.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to correct you. It is not “if it requires”; you are obliged to come and talk to the country from here, so that we can seek clarification and answers from you. 

MS SENINDE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We know Members of Parliament are a key stakeholder in the education of our children. We shall definitely involve them.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education and Sports sent guidelines to all district education officers in Uganda on how schools will open on the 8th. It has a specific date; I even have a copy.

So, is the minister telling the truth to the Speaker of Parliament? Is the minister telling the truth to this country? Are schools opening on the 8th or not? Be unequivocal on that and tell us when you will bring the statement and whether those of us who do not want to take our children back to school can be subjected to a different national examination later, when we feel it is safe.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate what the minister is saying. However, the challenge we have as leaders – The President said candidate classes will go back to school and then after a few days, the respective departments received the communication that candidate classes will be opening soon. That is where the information of 8th is coming from.

However, Madam Speaker, when you are down in the constituency, they will be asking you – like the honourable member said about the teachers – even the boarding schools need social distancing. However, boarding schools have deckers in these rooms; one sleeping up and one down. How are they going to maintain social distance? 

Secondly, these are the answers that the public is interested in before any other debate, that you want a classroom of social distance. Senior four students sit in one classroom with one teacher. How are they going to have the social distance? Will the teacher be teaching on screens or what? Those are some of the things that the public is interested in before any pronouncement related to going back to school is made, Madam Speaker.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I speak now, Dabani Primary School is where we have the quarantine centre for Busia District, with almost 110 people. The majority are Kenyans. There is Bwera S.S and other schools.

However, as I speak now, the district education officer of Busia has a circular from the ministry and from the particular minister, saying that the schools must open on 8th. As I speak, the villagers have started fearing with the need to migrate because they know that their children are going to a school where people have been quarantined.

Therefore, the minister should be clear and say they made a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are just now speaking to ourselves. Honourable minister, this issue is very important. We need urgent attention, urgent information; the country needs to be allayed of its fears. When can you come with a statement?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to pledge to this House that next week, we shall inform this House on Tuesday, because we have not sat down as a ministry. We are trying to discuss this with Government to see what can be done.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: What about the circular? What should the local Governments do about the circular? It came from your ministry.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is true that there has been something running on social media as a circular. However, I want to make it clear to this House that as Ministry of Education and Sports, we have not yet distributed a circular to that effect. We are still discussing this issue and that is why I am informing this House that we shall come back and inform the House when we are ready.

THE SPEAKER: Does anyone have that letter?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, there is an address from the Permanent Secretary to the effect that private schools have been instructed to pay their teachers. So, the honourable minister cannot negate her responsibility to say that she is not in charge of the ministry or that there is no effective communication.

Madam Speaker, that goes back to the issue you stated that they should come to Parliament, where they can be asked questions on behalf of the public. For example, if we are to ask the honourable minister that as we talk about students going back to school, are we aware that the parents who are supposed to finance them to go back to school have not been at work for more than two months? How do you expect them to pay for registration, to pay for shopping and some school tuition? These are answers we need here, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, let the minister come here and categorically disown all letters. If she says that, then the entire country shall know that there is no single communication.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, some of my people – the teachers – have been calling me from Mitooma District to say that their head teachers have been calling them and informing them to be ready, that the schools will open on Monday for candidate classes.

I do not know. So, I am asking for clarification from the honourable minister. If the circular has not been sent out, where are these people getting the information to the extent that the head teachers are calling their teachers to go and reopen schools? If the circular has not been sent, then when are the schools going to start? When are the candidate classes supposed to start? We need clarification. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. I think we have talked about this for the whole week. Minister of Education and Sports, we need this information badly. 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I want to, once again, make it very clear to this House that we have not set a date when the schools are starting. Therefore, we must make it clear, as Government, that we shall come back and communicate to the public when the schools are reopening. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let me invite hon. Ndeezi who had an urgent issue. We have taken a lot of time on this issue. 

3.05
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the beginning of the COVID-19 lockdown, the Ministry of Education and Sports has been coordinating the current school programmes that have been aired on the media including TVs and FM radios. People with disabilities in general, and hearing impaired persons, have noted with serious concern that this information is not being translated into sign language. This means that deaf students are not accessing these lessons.

We have also noted with concerns that special needs education subjects are not among the subjects being aired on the media. This means that our people are missing out on these lessons. 

We request to know when the Minister of Education and Sports will start providing sign language interpretation of all the lessons on televisions. Secondly, when will special needs education subjects be taught through the media including television and FM radios? Madam Speaker, these are the two questions I would like to be answered. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you have heard. The special needs people are not able to access the lessons that you are sending. Do you have something to say about that? 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ndeezi for that concern. I would like to, however, make it clear that we have been carrying out lessons on UBC, and we have a sign language person there. As far as the materials are concerned, the National Curriculum Development Centre has prepared materials for the children with special needs. I wanted to make that clear.

The other television stations like NTV and NBS have been carrying out teachings that are not sponsored by the Ministry of Education and Sports because we are using UBC. That is why we afforded to have a sign language person there. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ndeezi, are you satisfied? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. If we are really serious about materials, I would pray that some of the materials be withdrawn from these children. If I am given permission tomorrow, I would like to lay on Table the materials given to primary one children which are printed from the New Vision. They do not match with the teaching standards for children of primary one.

Now, if you talk about the number of materials delivered in our constituencies, actually, there is almost nothing. A sub-county is given one paper, which is not part of the syllabus and writing system of primary one. I do not think –

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify on this Floor whether what they are supplying to the children is what is supposed to be given to the young children, basically in lower classes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think it would be better if you brought the materials printed from the New Vision so that we can see the way forward.

MR SSEWUNGU: I will deliver them tomorrow. It is killing the name of NCDC. As a professional teacher, I cannot accept that when I am a Member of Parliament from Kalungu County West. What is provided to our children through the New Vision - the double sheets like the New Vision paper are not supposed to be given to children of primary one and primary two. It cannot – Madam Speaker, since you have allowed me, tomorrow, I will lay them on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ndeezi –

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, this has to be very clear; the responsibility of designing the curriculum and the syllabi is by the NCDC. So, when my colleague comes to inform this House that what has been prepared for primary one is not for their standards, I think that is unfair and it is not right. 

Madam Speaker, the work that has been prepared for all these classes is by the NCDC. The NCDC is the institution that is responsible for designing the syllabi. Therefore, what the honourable member is raising is not true - unless he has something different. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us see the materials which hon. Ssewungu is bringing tomorrow. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to ask the minister to help us understand whether the lessons conducted on the media are replacing lessons that were supposed to be conducted in classes, or they are just to occupy children during this time when they are doing nothing?

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Ndeezi?

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, you remember when we enacted the Disability Act; we said a television station must ensure that all information of national importance is translated into sign language. We put it in the law as a condition for granting all the permits for television stations. Therefore, I am requesting the Ministry of Education and Sports to invoke this provision of the law to ensure that all television stations participating in airing lessons to provide sign language interpretation. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: In addition to the Minister of Education and Sports, I think I want to call on the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to ensure that the law, as we made it, is fully implemented by all the television stations. Thank you.

Hon. Waira and – Hon. Nyendwoha, your issues will be addressed when the minister comes to discuss the floods in the whole country. I will give you an opportunity. After hon. Waira, then we shall have hon. Sebaggala and hon. Burundo.

3.13
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UPDF has destroyed over 30 boats of my fishermen on Bugoto Landing Site and Misoli Landing Site. 

Madam Speaker, I know Parliament has pronounced itself over this matter several times, but the UPDF has gone ahead to harass the fishermen with impunity.

Madam Speaker, people have been fishing since time immemorial before even UDPF came into place, and all types of fishermen coexisted. Why is UPDF now harassing fishermen?

There are about four types of fishermen on the lake. God put somebody on or near the lake knowing their survival would be the lake, just like God put somebody in Ankole to survive on cattle.

However, Madam Speaker, people living on or near the lake are not being given chance to survive. Government is using UPDF to protect an investor or a fisherman in China to the disadvantage of a person who lives on or near the lake.

Madam Speaker, Parliament needs to help the local fishermen living near the lake so that they can also survive. I move that Parliament compels the responsible minister to clearly explain how the local fishermen are going to survive on their lake, which God gave to them. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I request that you instruct the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to go and interact with these fishermen whose boats were destroyed and also question the UPDF why they are destroying these people’s boats. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Defense and Veterans Affairs is here. Do you have something to say?

3.16
THE MINISTER OF DEFENSE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We would be honoured to work with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to first of all investigate the statements made by the member and also work together to make sure there is harmony between the UPDF and the fishermen.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is invited to go and investigate the situation in Bugoto, Busubi and Nabyama in Bunya and give us a report at the earliest opportunity. They should also interact with the responsible minister and his department.

3.17
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a matter of national importance concerning the plight of the students who were relocated from Bududa to Bulambuli due to landslide problems. They are more than 500 in number.

Madam Speaker, these students were taken to Masaba Senior Secondary School early last year. However, to my surprise, from the third term of 2019 to date, the Office of the Prime Minister has not paid school fees dues to Masaba Senior Secondary School. 

The school is now constrained. They have written several letters to the ministry and the Office of the Prime Minister but all letters have landed on deaf ears.

Now, it is my humble prayer that Parliament intervenes to help the students who are already traumatised by the landslides. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Who is in charge of these students? Oh! I see, it is the Minister of Relief, Disaster preparedness and Refugees.
3.18
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you very much, honourable member for raising that matter. It is my first time to hear that fees dues for those students are not paid because it should have been covered under the displacement programme that we have had.

And you can recall, Madam Speaker, those students were sent home before the end of the first term. Therefore, if they were not covered, I will take the matter up from my office and ensure these students go back to school. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is now Government assurance that the school will get fees.

MR BURUNDO: Madam Speaker, I am laying on Table a copy of one of the many letters that Masaba Senior Secondary School has been writing to the Office of the Prime Minister. Thank you.

3.19
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My issue relates to the Ministry of Education and Sports. Since the Prime Minister will come here on Thursday, let me give some light on what I am going to say on that day.

As we talk about reopening schools, whether for only candidates or not, there are so many things that should be put into consideration. There is no way we can think about reopening schools yet they were actually closed when we did not have any Covid-19 case. Government should take serious precautions as they reopen schools to operate.

Private institutions are supposed to pay teachers’ salaries and each and everything. Right now, when the parents are in lockdown, there is no way they can meet the personal requirements of students for school.

Madam Speaker, it is my proposal, through you, to His Excellency, the President and the National taskforce to, before reopening schools, first ease lockdown on parents. This will enable them to go back to their workplaces and I move that they be given a month or one and half months to prepare to send their children back to school.

Otherwise, right now, even if Government said that candidate classes go back to school - how are they going to be met and facilitated? UNEB is seriously saying that they are going to register students, how do you expect parents, who are under lockdown, to meet registration requirements such as the charges?

Madam Speaker, I request that before schools reopen, let us first open up the entire public. This will help in not risking the lives of 1,000 students even if they are in boarding schools. 

There are so many schools with over 400 candidates in senior four and another 400 candidates in senior six and others with more than that number. How do you ensure social distancing in that situation? It means schools have to get more streams and more teachers, which is very difficult.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I propose that before reopening schools and institutions of higher learning, the President must extend the curfew hours because 7.00p.m - some schools have evening classes and some students travel long distance places to and from schools; curfew hours should be extended. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Education and Sports is here listening and I hope that when they come with their paper, we shall discuss those issues at length. Let us go on to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2: ADDENDUM 2A AND ADDENDUM 3 FOR FY 2019/2020

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the supplementary expenditure Schedule No. 2, Addendum 2 (A) and Addendum 3 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Introduction 
In the introduction we highlight the various schedules that have been laid on the Table by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I will not go into the details of that because they are well indicated there. 

Madam Speaker, this report is presented in two parts as follows: In part 1, we present the methodology, the legal framework, the status of compliance and preliminary observations. 

In part 2, we present the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No. 2 and we have picked an item on KCCA and Addenda 2 (A) and 3 for the Financial Year 2019/2020 with the corresponding observations and recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, I beg not to present the methodology and the legal framework because I believe members are quite familiar with these and they are well highlighted in the report. 

On page 4, I beg to present the preliminary committee observations: 
    1. The committee observed that the supplementary expenditure schedules were laid in accordance with Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

    2. The committee noted that the total budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020 is Shs 40.5 trillion, of which Shs 27.9 trillion was appropriated by Parliament while Shs 12.5 trillion was approved as statutory expenditure. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the committee notes, is taking advantage of the astronomical increase in the annual Budget ceiling that has provided them with more fiscal space for supplementary expenditure under the three per cent window provided by the current legal regime. 

    3. The committee is concerned about the growing number and frequency of supplementary requests as evidenced above. You saw the list in the introduction. This worsening trend undermines the credibility of annual planning and budgeting as entities appear to be avoiding detailed scrutiny during the normal Budget process in favour of supplementary budgeting, whose expenditure can be allowed to take effect prior to the approval of Parliament. 

It is a known fact that through supplementary spending, Government has suppressed the approved annual Budget in favour of funding supplementary expenditure. This practice needs to be discouraged by providing written guidelines to the Government. These guidelines are being developed by the committee for presentation to the House for approval in the near future. 

Madam Speaker, I now turn to part (B) on the proposed additional supplementary requests that require prior parliamentary approval under Schedule 2, as indicated above. 

The additional supplementary expenditure requests presented to the House for prior approval under Schedule No.2 consists of the following: 
a) Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Shs 3.9 billion;
(b) Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Shs 1.9 billion;
(c) Vote 122: KCCA - Shs 10 billion;
(d) Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute - Shs 10 billion;
(e) Local Governments – Shs 0.776 billion;
(f) Vote 501: Local Governments - Additional co-funding of Shs 9.062 billion;
(g) Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – Shs 2.408 billion.

In the section that follows, we present the justification for the proposed funding under each of those Vote items. 
    a)  Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Shs 3.9 billion 
The committee was informed that in the Financial Year 2019/2020, Shs 2.8 billion was appropriated for the Privatisation Unit. The amount included Shs 1.5 billion for wages and Shs 1.3 billion for non-wage to supplement the funding from the divestiture account. 

However, following the transfer of all divestiture funds to the Uganda Consolidated Fund Account, the appropriated amount of Shs 1.5 billion was not sufficient to cover salaries for the whole financial year.

The committee observed that the Privatisation Unit had outlived its usefulness as most of its activities can be adequately absorbed in other Government institutions. Its continued existence is an unnecessary liability to the Government of Uganda. 

The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 1.09 billion to cater for salaries for five months from February to June 2020 be approved. A plan for winding up the unit and repealing of the PERD Statute should be expedited and presented to Parliament for necessary action. No further request for funding should be approved for the unit by Parliament. 

    b) The committee was informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the request for a subsidy of Shs 1.9 billion to settle the outstanding energy bills for Fine Spinners and Nyanza Textile Mills was withdrawn from the supplementary schedule. Therefore, it is not available now under the request made by the ministry. 

    c) Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority – requesting for Shs 10 billion 
The committee was informed that KCCA was, in the Financial Year 2019/2020, given an indicative figure of Shs 30.5 billion for road maintenance but only received Shs 22.3 billion to carry on routine road maintenance in the city. The shortfall, together with the heavy rains, have resulted into severe damage to the city road network, which needs urgent intervention to keep it motorable.

The committee further learnt that KCCA engaged Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and were assured of funding through a supplementary expenditure. Basing on this assurance, the authority committed and undertook road maintenance works on the following roads: Upper Kololo Terrace, Queensway, pothole patching on affected roads like Wilson Road, Sikh Road, Channel Street, Johnson Road, Lubiri Ring Road, Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road, Naguru, Katalima, Kisasi Road, Bukoto-Ntinda, Ntinda-Kiwatule street lighting, draining maintenance and road marking. 

The authority will also undertake the much needed maintenance works on Mutungo Tank Hill Road, Cecilia Road, Naguru Close, Ggaba Bypass Road and also continue with road maintenance activities in all divisions. 

The committee recommends approval of the Shs 10 billion to KCCA to address payment for the road maintenance works. 
 d) Vote 110 Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI); the committee was informed that Shs 10 billion is required to operationalize the machining, manufacturing and industrial skills training centre at Namanve. 

The committee was informed that in 2014, UIRI secured a grant of $30 million from the Government of the People's Republic of China for the establishment of a Machining, Manufacturing and Industrial Skills Training Centre (MMISTC), at Kampala Industrial Business Park, Namanve. 

As part of the grant 17 building structures at the campus have been constructed, machines and equipment installed. The Chinese contractors handed over the centre to Government of Uganda in December 2019 well before the contract period of two years elapsed. 

The plant was commissioned by H.E the President in January 2020 without funding to operationalize the project. The project is expected to perform the following: 
    i. Enhance industrial skills by providing platforms for hands-on training and apprenticeship.
    ii.  Engage in modern methods of machining and manufacturing of metallic parts, accessories, and implements, as it progresses towards manufacturing of machines. 
    iii. Create capacity for development of indigenous technologies and reduce technology import bill. 
    iv.  Manufacture products and provide allied services for the market so that revenues generated can be used to sustain the project and contribute to Government coffers. 

The committee visited the centre on Friday 15 May 2020 and found that all the 17 buildings were completed and machines and equipment installed. The centre however, required the support in order to become operational. The breakdown of the expenditure request is as follows: the details are in table 1. In the interest of time, I will not go through those details.

The committee was further informed that UIRI had started procurement processes for acquisition of required goods and services this financial year. Therefore, the institution will be able to absorb all the funds within the month to end of the Financial Year 2019/2020 since all priority activities are ready for implementation.

The committee recommends that Shs 10 billion be provided to UIRI to operationalize the Machining, Manufacturing and Industrial Skills Training Centre at Namanve. 

Madam Speaker, on the Local Governments Supplementary to cater for additional Shs 0.776 billion local revenue collected by Luweero District (Shs 0.55billion), Mitooma District (Shs 0.08 billion), and Kyenjojo District (Shs 0.15 billion.) 

The committee recommends that the funds be approved as proposed.  Again, under other local governments, Vote 501 up to the end, additional co-funding of Shs 9.062 billion for Uganda Inter-governmental Fiscal Transfer (UGIFT) to Local Governments for respective Seed Secondary Schools and upgrade of Health Centres II to Health Centres III as a Government policy. 

In table 2, we present the distribution of the Shs 9,062,697, 577 supplementary estimates by vote seed secondary school and health centres. 

Madam speaker, the schedule covers various districts on pages 7, 8 with the corresponding allocations and on pages 9 and 10.

Vote 018: Shs 2,408,360,000 Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development: Parliament in Financial Year 2018/2019 authorized expenditure of Shs 3.4 billion on street children activities in a supplementary budget provision.

However, of this amount, only Shs 1 billion was released. Cabinet directed the Ministry of Finance to release the balance of Shs 2.4 billion in Financial Year 2019/2020 for implementation of the remaining street children activities (CABINET MINUTE 439/CT/2019). 

The amount is expected to finance priority interventions targeting 1,500 street children as follows: Table 3 gives us the details on the implementation of street children activities in the country:
    (i) Rescue and temporally settlement centres, which require Shs 900 million.
    (ii)  Improvement of facilities in transit centres Shs 158,197,000. 
    (iii) Vehicles for surveillance and tracing. 
    (iv)  Food and non-food items in permanent centres. 
    (v) Resettlement package. 
    (vi) Street surveillance. 
    (vii) Coordination, monitoring and support supervision.
That gives us a total of Shs 2,402,959,000.

The committee has considered the plight of street kids picked recently by the ministry and now housed at different permanent and temporary centres and the challenges associated with rehabilitating, feeding and resettling them as well as ensuring surveillance to limit new ones from getting into cities and other urban areas. 

The committee therefore recommends that Shs 2,402,960,000 be provided as requested to ameliorate the problem of street kids.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves a total supplementary request of Shs 33,332,550,832 of which Shs 9,172,713,255 is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 24,159,837,577 is for development expenditure. 

The details recommended for supply by vote are presented in table 4 below. In that table, we present the details by vote which I beg not to go through but I believe that when we are at the Committee of Supply, the details will be presented to the House. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the minutes and the report, and the original copy of the report of the committee on the subject. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have heard the report.

3.43
ALEX BYARUGABA, (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to seek a few clarifications and air out some concerns about this supplementary schedule. It is good you also saw it fit and cancelled (b) from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

My major concern is on two ministries. First, there is the Ministry of Local Government. Madam Speaker, for a long time, we have cried out regarding bicycles for Local Council I (LC I) chairpersons. Whereas some districts got these bicycles, we have constantly brought to the attention of Government that it is unfair to serve LC I officials from one part of the country and leave out a big part of the country without any service. 

I do not know whether these issues go to Cabinet and are discussed and decisions taken. Why don’t issues like this come up during such a situation when we are preparing ourselves to go back to these same people and solicit for their support? I do not know what exactly is happening to the issue of bicycles. Is it not an issue? Should we now tell our LC I chairpersons to forget about bicycles, that Government is no longer interested in serving them? That is something I thought I would get from this supplementary request.

I do not know why the Ministry of Local Government is not regarded seriously. This is where most of the activities take place. In my district, Isingiro, last financial year quite a number of LC I chairpersons did not get their annual honorarium of Shs 120,000. So, we still demand Shs 39 million from the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This year again, the same LC I chairpersons have not been paid. So, they have not been paid for two financial years. 

I was wondering whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Local Government do care about these people. If so, what am I supposed to tell the LC I chairpersons who never got their annual honorarium last financial year and who have not also been served this financial year? 

Finally, there is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Whereas some districts have been served with funds for the elderly, some districts still remain unserved. We were told that come this financial year, – which is ending in two weeks’ time – the whole country would be covered. I have not seen any elderly persons receiving funds in Isingiro District. 

May I know why some of these pertinent issues are not being catered for when we are ending the financial year and when we are also heading for an election? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We made a law here called the Public Finance Management Act and in it we provided for a section on supplementary expenditure. One, it must be for unforeseeable things. Secondly, we set a limit of four per cent of the budget passed. 

Madam Speaker, that is not even the issue. What is in issue now is that we have had Government activities held up for almost four months now. You are aware that no one has been travelling abroad because all countries are on lockdown. A supplementary request is supposed to be like an Oliver Twist request – “this one is done, please add us more”. 

The committee chairperson should have told us how much money we have saved from suspending foreign trips in all sectors, agencies and departments, including Parliament. How many days do we have to conclude the financial year? How much money is going back? Why should we give you power to get more supplementary budgets when you have more monies still saved with you?

Madam Speaker, we ask for your indulgence to prevail in this matter. Members, I think that we need to ask that tough question for the sake of this country: Where is that money from all activities, which have been suspended for all Government sectors, departments and agencies?

Finally, this is a particular concern that we would like to ask you to really prevail on; all district councils have been told that their budgets shall be approved by the chairpersons of the standing committee. A circular was written by the honourable Minister of Local Government to this effect. Whereas all civil servants in the local and central governments have been told “please sit home; you are going to receive your money”, district councillors whose councils were suspended cannot hold any council sitting and they have not received anything. They are only being called now to go and approve the budgets of the councils but they are receiving nothing. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is in good spirit and good will - those are leaders under devolution of power; they hold powers at the lower local government level. I was a district councillor and I know they are badly off. Those are the things I thought maybe the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should bring to us as an emergency. 

Before that, Madam Speaker, I think let us come out with a pronouncement that we are not giving you an additional supplementary budget until you tell us how much money has been saved under this happy quarantine moment. Thank you very much. 

3.50
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the first time, I will be against this supplementary request in good faith. Why? Honourable members, Kampala has benefited from very many things. Kampala got food and our people did not get. Kampala benefitted from Shs 10 billion as supplementary expenditure for roads. At least Kampala roads are fairly passable; I was in Kasese and the roads in Kasese are written off, those in Karamoja – Right now, if you want to move from Kamuli up to – (Interruption)

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Kampala Capital City was pronounced by this very Parliament as the capital city of Uganda. Kampala is the face of Uganda on the international scene. When the committee proposes Shs 10 billion to maintain the roads in Kampala, the capital city of Uganda, and a Member, who is actually a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure that oversees roads and is a resident of Kampala, stands up to shoot down the funding for the maintenance of roads in Kampala, is he in order to even continue debating?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is this House, which has been complaining about the state in which Kampala is – the state of the roads, the floods, etc. We have been urging Government to do something about it. So, you are out of order, honourable member. (Applause)

MR WALUSWAKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I have ruled you out of order; abandon that argument – unless you have something else.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I will not say anything on roads. Honourable members, we rather handle the people who have been displaced by the waters. Otherwise, if we only think about Kampala in this House, we will not be fair. People are crying and suffering out there. I request Members to rally behind me and ensure other villagers also benefit. I beg to submit.

3.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee has made the work of Parliament very difficult. In the introduction to the report, he explains how bad it is to even entertain a supplementary request of this nature yet at the end he says “anyway, you can pass it.”

Madam Speaker, at this time we have matters that are extremely urgent. Besides Ugandans who live outside Uganda, there are those who were travelling and are still in transit in Ethiopia, Dubai and South Africa. Someone reminded me that Kenzo is still in West Africa. They simply want to be returned home and be quarantined wherever Government wants them to be quarantined. They are in transit. These are the issues for which Government would be presenting a supplementary request. 

We have just dealt with about three or four supplementary requests – one addendum after another. What had happened to these ones? Did you just wake up two weeks to the end of the financial year and remember that these things also exist?

On this particular item of the industrial research centre you are talking about, Madam Speaker, I can share something with Parliament. I have a list of 16 employees who are being sent away without pay because the company has no capacity, during this COVID-19 pandemic, to continue paying salaries but now you want to open up a centre for learning. I do not know who will go there. You should be dealing with the survival of the industrial research institute.

Madam Speaker, the industrial research institute is also telling many other workers that they will not be able to renew their contracts because they have no money. I am under difficulty to entertain a supplementary request that is aimed at constructing a learning centre in an institution that is laying off workers because it cannot pay them.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to invite this august House to reject this particular supplementary request because none of the items listed here is of an emergency nature, especially two weeks to the end of the financial year. All these items can be dealt with in the next budget. Hon. Anywarach has told you that even the money that has been saved when all of us are under lockdown can be reallocated, within the law, to deal with these matters. 

I request Parliament to reject what the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has described as “indiscipline of the highest order” to begin tabling supplementary requests, one after another, including this particular one, which has come 14 days to the end of the financial year when all the accounts will be closed. (Applause) Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you need to learn to respect Parliament. You cannot just come and throw at the MPs any document you pick on your budget. Please, learn to respect Parliament. Two weeks to the end of a financial year and you are asking Parliament to approve money! Please!

3.59
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I am also here to reject the supplementary request. Yesterday, we had a discussion on the radio and even a common person could see that what the Government has saved during this quarter from conferences, seminars and travel abroad in various ministries can take care of their demands. It is a surprise, therefore, that at this moment the ministry can come up with another supplementary request. 
	
We have been abused more than ever before because of these supplementary requests. I do not know why the minister cannot clearly tell us the savings we have made from conferences and seminars that did not take place as well as from travel abroad and inland for this quarter. This would help us discuss this supplementary request from a point of clear knowledge about the balances. 

People from the islands are being submerged by water. They are suffering, yet they do not even appear in the supplementary. As we speak, Members of Parliament are the ones buying iron sheets –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Ssenyonga, for being kind. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to my colleague and the minister as well as the committee chairperson. First of all, the presentation of a supplementary budget is a true gesture that we still have money in the coffers and that there are needs that were unforeseen and were not funded but should have been funded.

The issue herein is: what is the category of needs that are desirable now? Are they the ones you have presented now? Even the ones that we told you nearly a year ago or months ago are not here; for example, the payment compensation for the people who lost their merchandise in South Sudan has been pending and the issue is lingering around. Now, all of them have been locked down. There is no trade between the countries and most of their businesses have collapsed. Everything seems to be wanting but the priorities of the Government seem not to be in tandem with what the population needs right now - recapitalisation of the people. 

Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come here and tell us that 14 days ago, this Parliament appropriated monies, yet some people have not been paid and there is no single answer to that. Thank you, hon. Muyanja.

MR MUYANJA: Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for that information. Madam Speaker, Ugandans out there would like to hear Parliament coming up with a supplementary budget to take care of the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) registration fees so that they can be saved from that burden.

I remember one of our colleagues was here last week with different figures. In some schools, they are demanding for Shs 380,000 for UNEB registration while others are demanding for Shs 400,000 or Shs 250,000. So, if the UNEB budget could be covered by Government, the parents would be saved from that burden because no school would again demand. Some are coming up with different figures and their personal interests. When we come up with a supplementary, which does not consider people’s concerns, people will laugh at us out there. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not support the motion.

4.03
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, the whole House and the country are aware that we are operating nearly everything scientifically right now. This supplementary appears to be scientific and therefore, our decisions must be scientific in nature. I am worried that these people might be asking for this money for the sake of “sanitising” it. They must have spent the money already; that is what I see.

I would like to agree with all my colleagues who have spoken before me. This supplementary must not pass if we are to be a real parliament. For the first time, let us show that we are the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

We know that we need roads in Kampala. We know that there are so many services that are needed out there. However, are they the most urgent right now? This is a question for everybody. My people in Kumi Municipality are suffering as they do not have food to eat. You said you cannot take food upcountry. Is this how you are going to handle supplementary requests, in such a scientific manner? No!

People are suffering; so many have failed to clear their rent. Those who come from Kampala know what is happening right now. Even when your shop is closed, landlords are still sending you messages to pay up. The water bills are becoming like a mountain. Electricity bills are unbearable. So many things, which touch people’s lives, are happening and they are really unbearable but you are not focusing on them. You are simply thinking of sanitising what you are going to eat today.

Madam Speaker, this is so unhealthy, insane, very unacceptable and uncouth and we cannot welcome it. It is immoral and morally reprehensible. I think this Parliament is beginning to wake up. If we are to sanitize what we are going to say here - Let us be a Parliament that thinks about the common person, a House that does not just think about people who budget behind the computer and sanitize what they are going to eat in the daytime.- (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, those who want to raise points of order do not know what they are raising. This is scientific and therefore, I say that I do not support this. This is the end of my debate. I do not support the motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The points of order that I am raising include whether the honourable member is in order to announce that Members of Parliament are sleeping and two, whether the honourable member is in order not to know the rules of supplementary expenditure. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a receiver of requests and therefore, it is incumbent on the particular ministries to feel the need and come up with a request. 

Finally, is the Member also in order, after reading the supplementary request, which process started in November last year, to insinuate and say that the supplementary request is being processed in the current period? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that sometime in the Ninth Parliament, we established parameters for supplementary expenditure. I do not know whether we are still following them because it should be unexpected, unavoidable – something like that.

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that in the Ninth Parliament and also in the Public Finance Management Act, we provided that for an item to qualify for supplementary expenditure, it must be unavoidable, unforeseen and it must be absorbable. The issue in this debate is whether the supplementary request and the figures that the chairman of the committee has just presented meet the test. 

Madam Speaker, I want to use one item under local government as an example - funding for seed schools and health centres III, which are under construction. Here is a situation where in March last financial year, Government of Uganda funded construction of schools and health centres. The financial year ended and the law requires that all monies, which have not been spent, be sent back to the ministry. What happened is that the works continued and we have a situation where local governments have got these monies but they need authority to spend it because Parliament has not appropriated these monies.

Madam Speaker, this is one of the requests we are presenting before Parliament for approval – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, our rules do not allow members of a committee to present a report and to debate it. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to have his report presented and to debate it in total disregard of our rules?

THE SPEAKER: He has left. However, seriously, honourable members, I want us to satisfy ourselves that this supplementary meets all the parameters.

4.11
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the benchmarks are still there, that a supplementary expenditure item must be unavoidable, unforeseen and must be absorbed. 

What I can see in this supplementary request, save for the request of Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI), is that the money is going to the districts. When I look through, I do not see Wakiso District, yet we also have gaps. There is money going to the districts, money going to Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) – As I was coming, I was stopped somewhere and I could not pass because KCCA is repairing some roads. Money is also going to health centres II. 

Given that a supplementary budget is a reorganisation of the annual resource - I do not know whether that is true, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In fact, we went ahead to amend the law because we had insisted that those benchmarks must be absolutely met. However, eventually, we learnt that as we earn money, there are some items for which we put a ceiling in all ministries and agencies. Where we find that we underbudgeted and we need more resources to finish projects, at least supplementary budgets should be allowed. 

My only worry, and that is the assurance we want from the minister, is whether within these two weeks, all this money will be absorbed, save for the money for UIRI. That assurance must be given to us because within two weeks, we shall be here closing the financial year and those records shall read as money that has been returned. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I beg that we do pass this supplementary budget very fast and then we do other things. Thank you.

4.13
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the supplementary request, especially in relation to schools. I particularly thank Government for identifying Amudat District for construction of Karita Girls Secondary School. 

Madam Speaker, we appreciate that there are districts in this country which have only one secondary school, and Amudat is one of them. If we have an opportunity for Government to plan and provide an additional secondary school for the district, I think that needs to be appreciated. For most of these secondary schools, and Karita Girls Secondary School in particular, construction is ongoing. If we say we do not pass this supplementary request, we shall have problems. 

I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and we have seen Government entities that had to incur the costs of litigation because they did not pay or delayed to pay contractors. I do not want us to go through that because in most of these secondary schools, construction is already going on.

On UIRI, I am a member of the Committee on Science and Technology and we toured that institute and saw that there is a lot they are doing. Some Members were asking what this training is all about and who the institute intends to train. We were informed, as a committee, by the institute, that they intend to pass on skills to senior 4 leavers and those who dropped out of school in between. We are talking about unemployment. This institute will go a long way to produce job creators and job seekers. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think we need to support that institute. I thank you. 

4.15
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the supplementary budget. There are very many young districts in this country with no seed secondary schools. Work has already started on a number of these schools. In places without secondary schools, the communities have started some kind of schools but our children keep dropping out. I ask that we support this supplementary budget so that construction of these schools continues and in the next academic year, our children find rooms where to study from.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to support the supplementary budget for Kampala roads. If you go to the outskirts of Kampala, you will see that many Ugandans have struggled to put up residential and commercial buildings but they do not have tenants in them because the roads are bad. You know very well that good roads attract investment and tenants. Therefore, I want to support the supplementary budget for the roads.

However, I would like to also say that Ugandans out there are waiting for Government to come up with a budget to support farmers who are going through difficult times now. Most of these farmers had saving groups and now they have used up their savings. The prices have gone up, the markets have not been opened, so they have nowhere to sell their produce and they cannot afford hoes, pangas and seeds. I would have loved that this supplementary budget had an allocation to cater for our farmers. I rest my case. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Mawanda, I want the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to confirm that all these unforeseen funds were unavoidable and absorbable. Let us hear from hon. Mawanda and then you can come in.

4.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but I have one serious concern. 

The committee, under vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - has come out properly to show how the Privatisation Unit has outlived its usefulness. There are very many Government agencies that have outlived their usefulness and the taxpayer is still meeting the expenses of running those institutions. These include the Privatisation Unit, Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) and also the custodian board. 

For the last four years, our Committee on Natural Resources has been making recommendations that the minister repeals the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture (PERD) Act. However, the moment they achieve what they want, they go home and sleep. Madam Speaker, I would like to put you on notice that next week, I will bring a motion to introduce a private Member’s Bill to repeal the PERD Act so that Government saves the taxpayer money that is being spent on these sectors. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, Members have been talking about whether the supplementary expenditure is unavoidable, unforeseeable and absorbable. This comes from regulation 18 (5), (6) and (7) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016. 

Regulation 18 (5) provides that “Parliament may approve a supplementary appropriation or the Minister may approve a supplementary budget, as the case may be, where the supplementary expenditure is unavoidable or unforeseeable.” Under this provision, the supplementary request is only required to satisfy one of those two conditions. Remember that this regulation was reviewed by the minister and the issue of whether the expenditure is unabsorbable was removed; so, we only have these two and it is either one or the other. 

Madam Speaker, most of these expenditures that we are talking about are unavoidable, and I can explain. Look, for example, at what hon. Mawanda talked about; we noted that the Government had committed itself to paying the salaries for the workers of the Privatisation Unit. Whereas we had recommended the repealing of the PERD statute, we are saying that we already have an existing commitment to pay the wages of those people who have been with the Privatisation Unit since February to June of this financial year. That is a commitment we cannot run away from.

Secondly, when you talk about KCCA, we did indicate that the indicative figures of the KCCA budget have ordinarily been Shs 30.5 billion for road maintenance. Instead of being given Shs 30.5 billion, they got Shs 22.3 billion, which was a huge shortfall. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying “let us bridge the gap” by providing for that shortfall. That is the Shs 10 billion that we are talking about. We must look at those roads that are currently being maintained - Queensway, Kitante Road and Yusuf Lule Road are all being rehabilitated -(Interjection) – Please, allow me to finish my submission.

On the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, Members need to visit the institute and appreciate what the Chinese Government has given to the Government of Uganda. In this country, we did not have a facility which can produce machines which other enterprises can use to produce other products. That is a machine centre. They also produce spare parts. Hitherto, we have been importing spare parts for various factories in this country. This plant here has come to solve that problem. You cannot have serious industrialisation without such a plant.

Madam Speaker, the Chinese granted to this Government $30 million, almost equivalent to Shs 110 billion. During our visit to UIRI, one of the Members from the Opposition commented that if this facility was to be put up using Ugandan funds, it would cost more than one trillion shillings. He actually appreciated what had been put up; it is a huge facility. The Chinese actually completed this in record time, before the contract period elapsed. 

Now, the institute does not have operational funds to start operating the plant. Everything is ready, including capacity to produce these masks of the quality that I am wearing. The plant is ready and all they need is Shs 10 billion to become operational. It is providing two units for this Government - a training institute with this technology and a facility to produce goods and services for this country.

I am not aware of the issue of laying off workers. We did not see this there. In fact, they want to recruit more people. I do not know where that information came from that they want to retire some workers because it is a Government entity and not a private one; they cannot just lay off workers like that.

Madam Speaker, on the seed schools and the upgrading of health centres II to health centres III, a number of districts are benefitting from this project that is funded by the World Bank and is underway in various districts. These are additional resources to complete this work at different levels in different districts.

Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that the expenditures we are talking about here are picked from a larger schedule and we felt that these could not be avoided. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

4.25
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairman of the committee should agree with us that we are not against what is being done in different facilities. However, we are only trying to teach them the right procedure. What is happening here is either poor planning or over planning.

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and about two weeks ago, we toured Kampala. We have loans before us. One is a loan of US$ 224 million from the African Development Bank and the other is a loan of US$ 51 million still from the African Development Bank. The purpose of the loans is to rehabilitate roads in Kampala.

We were driven around Kampala and its outskirts in the same bus with the Executive Director of KCCA and the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority. It was indicated that when they get money, they will do these roads, and they pointed them out to us. Now, while we are in the committee trying to work on this loan very fast so that we process it - because they told us it is urgent - we see a supplementary request here. 

Madam Speaker, this year, the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) was not able to distribute seeds in the different parts of the country. There is now a shortage of beans. Even the beans that the Office of the Prime Minister is distributing are from as far as Malawi because we have a shortage here. Therefore, we should be seeing supplementary budgets here for seeds, so that we help our people and contribute to the economy. 

Supplementary requests like these - for KCCA roads – and which come towards the end of the financial year is not the best practice. We shall not be too late if we can wait for one month so that they can utilise those same funds in the next financial year. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know whether that loan covers the same roads which are here - Upper Kololo Terrace, Queensway, Wilson Road, Speke Road, Channel Street, Lubiri Ring Road, Sir Apollo Kaggwa and Naguru. Does the loan cover the same roads?

4.29
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the Budget Committee for the report. 

I would like to say that indeed, the schedule had a number of items but they sieved out those that they thought could meet the standards of the law. 

The loan that hon. Migadde is talking about is for another set of roads in Kampala. It is also important to note that the Shs 10 billion is going towards emergency works in Kampala now. The Minister of Works and Transport can also complement this. Hon. Migadde should have also informed the House that before the Committee on National Economy, there are other resources we are mobilising to support the economy. 

Madam Speaker, as requested, we shall be coming here either tomorrow or Thursday to talk about the economic response to the situation we are in as you requested. Therefore, we should not mix the two things. This request was put to Parliament almost two months ago and we have been going through this process. 

You have asked about the issue of absorption. If we get take this money to the Privatisation Unit, can we spend the Shs 3 billion? People are waiting for their salaries; they have not been paid for the last three or four months. So, those salaries will be paid. There are certificates for health centres and schools; the people who have been constructing are waiting for payment.

Madam Speaker, as the chairperson has explained - (Mr Anywarach rose_) - Hon. Anywarach, it is important that you listen because I have not heard you support anything from Government for the last one year and I am not expecting you to do so. This is important; we should go ahead and support it.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the minister has made a statement that should be expunged from this Parliament record. We live in a world where you cannot have a unipolar world - where people think the same way. That is why when you clash thesis against antithesis you come out with synthesis. That is the reason why America is under capitalism and China is under communism. 

Madam Speaker, I have been on the Floor of this Parliament and participated in making laws for the benefit of this country. I do not know whether the country is run by another government. I have been participating in appropriation of budgets in this Parliament and to me, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the president in this respect. Actually, you are acting; what you are using is what we call “delegated power” in law. So, we have passed budgets here and the budget is the President’s property. 

Madam Speaker, is the minister in order, without even bringing authentication and evidence, to say that I have never supported anything from Government, as if I am under obligation to always support his nugatory expenditures and the loan requests he brings here? Is he in order to make such a statement and impute wrong motives on one of the best debaters in this Parliament? (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you substantiate what he has done for the last one year for which you are taking exception? 

MR BAHATI: Hon. Anywarach, I think for the last 12 months, every time we bring here an issue, including the budget - If you search the records of the House, you will see what he has been saying. So, I mean what I am saying. We can get the Hansard tomorrow and audit it and see whether hon. Anywarach has actually supported the House. The Hansard is there for the last one year and we can audit it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,090,845,255 be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,090,845,255 be provided for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 10,000,000,000 be provided for under vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,000,000,000 be provided for Uganda Industrial Research Institute. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120: Kampala Capital City Authority 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 10,000,000 be provided for under vote 120, Kampala Capital City Authority. 

I now put the question that Shs 10,000,000,000 be provided for Kampala Capital City Authority. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 2,402,960,000 be provided for under vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,402,960,000 be provided for under vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 532: Luweero District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 552,581,000 be provided for under vote 532, Luweero District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 552,581,000 be provided for Luweero District. 

Vote 601: Mitooma District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 77,580,000 be provided for under vote 601, Mitooma District. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 77,580,000 be provided for under vote 601, Mitooma District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 530: Kyenjojo District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that a total sum of Shs 145,887,000 be provided for under vote 530, Kyenjojo District. 

I put the question that the total sum of Shs 145,887,000 be provided for Kyenjojo District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 502: Apac District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that a total sum of Shs 385,000,000 be provided for under vote 502, Apac District. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 385,000,000 be provided for Apac District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 507: Busia District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 76,552,158 be provided for under vote 507, Busia District. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 76,552,158 be provided for Busia District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 519: Kanungu District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 1,032,597,963 be provided for under vote 519, Kanungu District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,032,597,963 be provided for Kanungu District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 522: Katakwi District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 28,906,128 be provided for under vote 522, Katakwi District. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 28,906,128 be provided for Katakwi District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 530: Kyenjojo District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 23,699,882 be provided for under vote 530, Kyenjojo District. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 23,699,882 be provided for Kyenjojo District.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 534: Masindi District 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 87,079,797 be provided for under vote 534, Masindi District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 87,079,797 be provided for Masindi District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 539 - Moyo District.
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 27,717,336 be provided for Moyo District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 27,717,336 be provided for Moyo District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 556 - Yumbe District.
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 511,502,906 be provided for Yumbe District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 511,502,906 be provided for Yumbe District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 568 - Mityana District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 4,735,075 be provided for Mityana District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,735,075 be provided for Mityana District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 572 - Oyam District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 724,371,745 be provided for Oyam District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 724,371,745 be provided for Oyam District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 581 - Amudat District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 426,700,000 be provided for Amudat District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 426,700,000 be provided for Amudat District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 584 - Kyegegwa District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 370,786,630 be provided for Kyegegwa District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 370,786,630 be provided for Kyegegwa District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 585 - Lamwo District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 803,314,400 be provided for Lamwo District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 803,314,400 be provided for Lamwo District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 586 - Otuke District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 262,000,000 be provided for Otuke District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 262,000,000 be provided for Otuke District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 588 - Alebtong District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 1,159,796,376 be provided for Alebtong District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,159,796,376 be provided for Alebtong District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 596 - Serere District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 132,252,147 be provided for Serere District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 132,252,147 be provided for Serere District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 598 - Kalungu District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 124,471,186 be provided for Kalungu District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 124,471,186 be provided for Kalungu District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 604 - Napak District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 215,381,065 be provided for Napak District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 215,381,065 be provided for Napak District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 605 - Kibuku District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 229,700,000 be provided for Kibuku District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 229,700,000 be provided for Kibuku District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 610 - Buhweju District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 723,337,228 be provided for Buhweju District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 723,337,228 be provided for Buhweju District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 613 - Kagadi District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 729,700,000 be provided for Kagadi District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 729,700,000 be provided for Kagadi District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 616 - Rubanda District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 718,871,031 be provided for Rubanda District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 718,871,031 be provided for Rubanda District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 625 - Kassanda District
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 65,400,000 be provided for Kassanda District. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 65,400,000 be provided for Kassanda District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 786 - Mubende Municipality
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the total sum of Shs 198,824,514 be provided for Mubende Municipality. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 198,824,514 be provided for Mubende Municipality.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 9,172,713,255 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 24,159,837,577 be provided for as Development Expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 33,332,550,832 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2, Addendum 2(a) and Addendum 3 for Financial Year 2019/2020 without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Where is the mover?

4.52
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. Can you give the justification?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to;
a. Regulate payment systems
b. Provide for the safety and efficiency of payment systems
c. Provide for the functions of the Central Bank in relation to payment systems
d. Prescribe the rules governing the oversight and protection of payment systems
e. Provide for financial collateral arrangements; and 
f. Regulate payment services providers in the country. 

Currently, there is no comprehensive payment system law by the Central Bank, which regulates things like the gross settlement systems, EFTs, mobile money transfers, among others. 

Therefore, this particular law comes in to bridge those gaps that have been in our laws and can regulate these emerging markets of payments like the mobile money, EFTs, the gross settlement systems, RTGs and also emerging digital payment systems in the country. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I know we had moved the second reading but I have here hon. Alyek who has an issue; that her school and health centre were left out of the supplementary, yet they had applied. That is Kole District Local Government, upgrade Ayer Health Centre II to health centre III and the construction of Okwerodot Seed Secondary School. They do not appear in your supplementary yet work has partially been done.  
I do not know how you can assist the people from Kole.   

4.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, we got an explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying that there was an earlier release within the 3 per cent limit, for certain districts. What I read here are the districts that are coming for prior approval of Parliament. So, it is possible that it is within that earlier list that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development already paid out. We need to verify that.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please assist the members of Parliament from Kole. Give the minister that document.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are going to work with the honourable Member from Kole and see that, that issue is resolved within our means. However, as the honourable chairperson said, there are some schools that we handled under the 3 per cent and this is coming for prior approval by Parliament. It is most likely that if that school had an issue, it was captured then but if it was not captured, we are going to see what to do and we shall inform your Office. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Can I now invite the chairperson to give us a report?  

4.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:
    (i) Currently, there is no comprehensive payment system law in Uganda. The Bank of Uganda relies on Article 162(1) of the Constitution, which provides that Bank of Uganda shall encourage and promote economic development through effective and efficient operations of the banking and credit system, to develop the payment and securities settlement systems. Such payment systems include the Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) for the interbank transfer, the Automated Clearing House (ACH) system for the clearance of cheques and the Electronic Fund Transfers (EFT). The securities settlement systems, including the Central Securities Depository (CSD) system operated by Uganda Securities Exchange have not been implemented.

(ii) Due to the absence of the National Payment Systems law, there is uncertainty in the market with regard to licensing of payment systems service providers who are not financial institutions. As such, there is limited regulation and oversight of payment systems and inadequate protection of payment and securities settlement systems.

(iii) Uganda’s economy is growing and developing steadily, which has seen a shift from traditional payment systems to the evolution of new systems such as electronic and mobile money. There exists a vacuum in certain aspects such as licensing, regulation and supervision of the providers of the emerging payment systems, thus posing a danger to users of the payment systems. There is need for a legal framework to regulate, govern and oversee these emerging payment systems.

(iv) Regulation of mobile money and other financial services, offered over communication platforms in the communications sector, is guided by the mobile money guidelines and select provisions under the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 on provision of value for money services. The current legal regime is, however, weak and does not sufficiently address all the issues regarding digital financial services. 
Furthermore, the broad legal framework for financial sector does not cover non-financial institutions like MTN, Airtel, Uganda Telecom, PayWay, SafeBoda and Uber that provide payment systems. This Bill will address the regulatory gaps that have affected users of these payment systems for some time.

(v) The Bill seeks to regulate the issuance of electronic money and electronic money transfer, including the requirement for establishment of a subsidiary legal entity for purposes of issuing electronic money, management of trust accounts for electronic money issuers, protection of the trust and special accounts, accrual of interest in the trust accounts directly to the consumers and provision for pecuniary and custodial sanctions for breach of the law. This will enhance protection of the consumers who use these services.

(vi) The interpretation clause defines a payment system as “a system used to effect a transaction through the transfer of money value and includes the institutions, payment instruments, person, rules, procedures, standards and technologies that make the transfer possible.” 

This definition is too wide as it attempts to define operators, users or those who interact with the payment system as payment system themselves. Some of these institutions are again separately defined in the Bill either as payment service providers, payment system operators and participants. This double definition is likely to create confusion in concisely defining what a payment system is. 

Under clause 6 of the Bill, the categories of payment systems are clearly stipulated. The definition of “payment systems” should be harmonised with clause 6 to facilitate ease of enforceability once the law is enacted.

(vii) The Bill in its current form does not cater for fair competition and does not provide for prohibition of anti-competitive behaviour. There is need for provisions that provide for promotion of fair competition in the sector. These will ensure that operators do not engage in activities, which have or are intended or are likely to have the effect of unfairly preventing or distorting competition in relation to any activity relating to payment systems. They will protect small players in the industry, especially financial technology companies which are mainly owned by the youth, against the dominant players in the market.

(viii) Under clause 13(1)(h) entry into insolvency proceedings is part of the circumstances under which the central bank may revoke or suspend a licence. “Insolvency proceedings” include those where a financially stressed company is permitted under the law to continue operating business and this should not lead to revocation of a licence. Under the Insolvency Act, 2011, insolvency proceedings include bankruptcy and arrangement for individuals, receivership, administration and liquidation for corporate entities. 

Administration, being a corporate rescue mechanism, means that the company still has a chance to survive the financial challenges and return to trading profitably. On the other hand, liquidation results in the company being dissolved and ceasing trading. Therefore, revocation of a licence should be limited to a participant who goes into liquidation.

(ix) The Bill provides that an electronic money issuer shall issue electronic money only after an equivalent is deposited in the trust account or special account opened in accordance with this Act. The money in the trust account is invested by the financial institutions and earns interest. The interest earned on the trust account or special account shall be credited to an interest account opened for that purpose in the financial institution in which the trust account or special account is held and shall be distributed to the benefit of consumers as determined by the central bank.

(x) Clause 68 of the Bill requires all payment service providers or a payment system operator to establish and maintain a primary data centre in relation to payment systems services in Uganda. However, the provision requires all payment service providers or a payment system operator to have a primary data centre in Uganda yet they do not hold consumer accounts. Only electronic money issuers hold accounts of customers and this data should be available to the central bank in case the companies go into liquidation. Therefore, only electronic money issuers should be required to establish and maintain primary data centres in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, with these observations, the committee recommends that the National Payment Systems Bill, 2019 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the original copy of the committee’s report together with other documents we used in scrutinising the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the report. It has been signed by the necessary minimum number. Are we in position to use the next 25 minutes to debate it? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Do we discuss it tomorrow? (Interjection) Okay.

Now, I do not know whether there are ministers who are ready to answer some questions – there are some questions which are outstanding. Minister of Works and Transport, I do not know whether you are ready. There are some three pending questions.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE STALLED COMMISSIONING OF THE SIGULU FERRY THAT REMAINS DOCKED AT MASESE IN JINJA DISTRICT YET IT IS CRITICALLY REQUIRED BY ITS INTENDED BENEFICIARIES IN NAMAYINGO DISTRICT

5.15
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is in response to a matter raised by hon. George Ouma, the Member of Parliament for Bukooli Islands County, on why MV Sigulu has not commenced operations. 
	
Madam Speaker, the ministry, through its agency, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), has been developing the ferry project in two components - each with a different contractor a and these are; 
    i) The ferry component. 
    ii) The landing sites component.

The ferry is planned to connect Namayingo mainland to Sigulu and Lolwe islands on Lake Victoria through the Watega–Bumalenge and Kandege, where the ferry landing sites are now under construction. The ferry is a 300-seater, equipped with standard ship operating systems, passenger amenities and certified to operate by the Maritime Administration.

The ministry would like to update the Parliament of Uganda that the actual completion of MV Sigulu was in May 2020 after the contractor addressed all the snags raised during inspections and the ferry has been handed over to UNRA. The implementation of the project for construction of the ferry landing site facilities and permanent ferry landings for MV Sigulu is ongoing and it is projected that this will be completed by June 2021. 

In order to have the ferry commence operations in the year 2020, we constructed temporary ferry landing sites of Watega and Buma lenge, which unfortunately have recently been affected by flooding and the rising levels of the water of Lake Victoria. Our plan was that once the ferry is handed over, it would be transferred to Namayingo, which is now not possible due to the flooding of the ferry landing sites. 

Construction of the temporary ferry landings on the furthest island of Lolwe at Kandege was also awaiting ferry handover to use the ferry to transport construction equipment and some materials from the mainland, since the island is located very far. 

Madam Speaker, I want to give assurance from the ministry that we are mobilising resources and operational funds for the ferry, part of which will come in Quarter I of the Financial Year 2020/2021, in order to have the temporary ferry landing sites completed within two to three months and then the ferry will commence operations next financial year. 

The ministry would like to assure the House that the ferry project is significantly realised and during its construction and testing, the district leaders have been invited on a number of occasions to visit the project. We have also given them time to closely monitor what was happening. So, for the remaining time and issues, we hope that if the water recedes, we should be able to start operations by September 2021.

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: 2021?

GEN. WAMALA: 2020; I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary, hon. Abbot?
	
5.14
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for that wonderful response. However, honourable minister, there are three landing sites and I am happy that Watega landing site is not affected by the floods or the water levels. It may only be Bumalenge.

Therefore, what would be needed is to move because I do not see the water seriously affecting all those landing sites. Just as you had previously promised, it is necessary for you to move and see because when we move up to – I was a little bit worried, Madam Speaker, when the minister mentioned 2021. I think that would have killed all the people of Sigulu Islands. (Laughter)

However, since he has now clarified that it is by September 2020, let me give him the benefit of doubt but I would need him to go and see for himself so that he makes a clear report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO ENFORCE ADHERENCE TO BUILDING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS ON THE NUMEROUS ACCIDENTS OCCURING AT BUILDING SITES, STATUS OF COMPENSATION OF AFFECTED FAMILIES AND STEPS TAKEN TO STEM THE REOCCURENCE OF SUCH ACCIDENTS 

5.15
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this statement is presented in response to matter of concern raised by hon. Margaret Rwabushaija, Workers’ Representative, concerning actions taken to enforce adherence to building standards and regulations on the numerous accidents occurring at the building sites, status of compensation of affected families and steps taken to stem the reoccurrence of such accidents in the country.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the Building Control Act, 20l3, hereto referred to as the Act, was enacted to
    1. Consolidate, harmonise and amend the law relating to the erection of buildings.
    2. Provide for building standards.
    3. Establish a National Building Review Board and building committees and 
    4. Promote and ensure planned, decent and safe building structures that are developed in harmony with the environment and for other related matters.

Following a lengthy process of developing the National Building Code, as required under Section 46 of the Act, the Act commenced in April 2018.

Madam Speaker, sections 4 and 9 of the Act established the National Building Review Board to monitor building developments to ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities, to which the public is to have access, cater for persons with disabilities; to oversee, inspect and monitor the operations of the building committees; to prepare and submit to the minister, reports relating to any matter under this Act, as the minister may require to hear and determine appeals from persons dissatisfied with the decisions of a building committee; and to also determine the fees to be charged by urban and district building committees for approval of plans and issue of building permits and occupation permits.

Madam Speaker, Section 28 and 29 of the Act established Building Committees for every district and urban authority to scrutinise and approve building plans, to issue building permits and occupation permits, to ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities to which the public is to have access cater for persons with disabilities, to review decisions on applications for permits for minor building works submitted to a building control officer under Section 39 and to ensure that the Act is complied with.

Section 32 and 33 of the Act establish the office of the Building Control Officer in every district and urban authority, to ensure that any instructions given by the building committee, in accordance with the Act, are complied with and to inspect the erection and demolition of any building, among others.

Madam Speaker, the National Building Review Board is a regulator, as spelt out in section 9 of the Act. On the other hand, the districts and urban authorities, to which the building committees and building control officer belong, are charged with the responsibility to ensure compliance with the Act in their respective jurisdictions. 

In order to ensure implementation of the Act, a circular to all districts and urban authorities was issued by the Ministry of Local Government in November 2019. An example of an urban authority exercising their control – I will be laying it on the Table – is an example from Entebbe Municipal Council, which has been supervising the construction of the buildings at Civil Aviation Authority and they have been very specific about that action.

Madam Speaker, following the increase in accidents, on 11 May  2020, I issued a circular instruction No. 1 of 2020, reminding all accounting officers at the districts and urban authorities of their roles under the Act. I will be laying a copy of this on the Table. 

The governing board of the National Building Review Board was inaugurated on 2 October 2018, after which the process of setting up the secretariat responsible for the day-to-day activities commenced in April 2019. 

However, the National Building Review Board is not fully functional due to the following reasons:
    1. The Board requirements were not budgeted for during the Financial Year 2019/2020 due to limitations in the budget ceiling received by my ministry. The budget ceilings could not accommodate the requirements of the Board, in view of the many budget pressures the ministry was faced with. I thank my colleagues for appropriating funds for the Board in the next financial year.

    2. Section 14 of the Act stipulates that the Board secretariat shall have the Executive Secretary and other staff. In accordance with section 17 of the Act, the Board, with the help of my ministry, developed an appropriate structure to ensure effective implementation of the Act. However, when we sought clearance of the same by the Ministry of Public Service, the approval was deferred, pending finalisation of the rationalisation process, which the ministry is undertaking. 

In the interim, the Board secretariat has only five members of staff seconded by my ministry, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, National Information Technology Authority (NITA) and the Uganda Police Force.

Madam Speaker, despite the above challenges, the Board has undertaken the following actions, since inauguration, to enforce adherence to the building standards: 

Investigation of Building Related Accidents
Madam Speaker, in accordance with Regulation 41(1)(e) of the Building Control Regulations, 2020, the Board constituted an investigation taskforce comprising of architects, engineers, lawyers and health and safety experts whose role is to investigate any failure or accidents at building sites and advise the Board on the best solution to avoid reoccurrence of similar accidents. Below is a summary of the findings arising out of the following accidents:

a) Collapse of excavation site at UK Mall, Plot 285, Block 254, Kansanga, Makindye Division under KCCA on 8 January 2020 that killed six people. 

Madam Speaker, the accident was caused by poor site excavation activities, which left almost vertical slopes. These slopes greatly exceeded the angle at which the soils are stable yet there was no sufficient shock protection provided. The report of the investigation is available and I beg to lay it on the Table. 

b) Collapse of a commercial building, Plot 53, Gokhale Street, Jinja Municipality on 15 January 2020 that injured eight people and killed five. The accident was caused by weak soils that were unable to support the weight of the building and the sheer failure of two crossbeams. The report is also here and I lay it on the Table. The report is entitled, “Investigation Report into the Collapse of a Commercial Building on Plot 53, Gokhale Street, Jinja Municipality”. I beg to lay.

c) Collapse of a semi-permanent building in Nakawonge Village, Nakasongola District on 16 November 2019, which injured three people and killed four. 

Madam Speaker, the accident was caused by a combination of run-off water and termite infestation of the building poles that led to the deterioration of the structure and weakening of the building poles. These two key causes, combined with the effect of strong winds experienced on that fateful day, resulted in total collapse of the building. I also hereby lay the report on the Table. 

Investigations into the causes of the most recent accidents at a guest house in Kitinda, Kitubulu, Katabi, Wakiso District and the collapsed structure along Soweto Road in Kansanga, Makindye Division in Kampala are ongoing and the reports will be issued in due course.

We encourage the public to provide us with information relating to building operations in their communities by way of whistling blowing. I am happy to report that a number of whistleblowers’ reports have been received, investigated and interventions made. Most notable among them is the commercial development of Plots 1A and 1B, Block 530, Ham Mukasa Road in Mukono that had developed cracks in the basement. Investigations revealed that the developer ignored the notice issued by the Town Clerk and proceeded to occupy the building. This led to the arrest of the developer and the project engineer. They have already appeared in court.

In order to encourage more whistleblowers, a call centre with a toll-free line is being set up. 

Prosecution of Offenders
Madam Speaker, following the conclusion of investigations and in line with section 45 of the Act and Regulation 42 of the Building Control Regulations, 2020, we are working with the Uganda Police Force and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions to ensure prosecution of the offenders. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Regulation 42(2) of the Building Control Regulations, affected family members are entitled to compensation upon successful prosecution of the culprits. We shall work with the police to identify the affected families in order to make a case for their compensation.

Madam Speaker, in order to mitigate similar occurrences, below are our measures:
a) We are strengthening the capacity of the National Building Review Board for efficient and effective service delivery. Effective implementation of the Building Control Act begins with the Board.

b) The Board, with the support of NITA-U, is in advanced stages of developing a computerised Building Industry Information System. This is envisaged to automate all building control activities countrywide to ease monitoring. On this, you will also be able to check the CVs of every architect and engineer who is involved in the building industry.

c) The Board will also be conducting regular building development monitoring and compliance audits of the building committees in the districts and urban centres to augment the capacity of the local authorities to exercise effective building control through, among others, induction and training workshops to be conducted regionally.

d) The Board will also carry out sensitisation and creation of public awareness. 

In conclusion, my ministry is committed to fully operationalise and enforce the Building Control Act, 2013 despite some challenges. In this regard, I shall require the support of my colleagues to disseminate the Act and educate the public on the requirements of the law.

Madam Speaker, I request for your support on these important measures to streamline the building industry. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is hon. Rwabushaija here because it was her question? Honourable minister, I do not know how much time you need for the Kalangala issue because we are approaching curfew time. 

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not have a written response on the Kalangala issue. It came in late. I promise that I will bring it tomorrow and be able to answer the queries raised. 

5.30
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised an issue of national concern about the state of Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe-Butaleja Road and I have never got a response. I thought that among the responses of the minister, my issue would be one of them. May I seek clarification from the minister since he is here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this has been a long-standing issue.

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have a comprehensive report on the effects of rains on the national road network and I am sure that that is one of them. However, I have also been made to understand that UNRA has already started on that particular road but we will have a comprehensive report on how much the rains have impacted on our roads.

The good news is that we had a meeting with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the minister has called us tomorrow morning to see whether they can mitigate the present situation. Otherwise, the report is comprehensive and looks at the entire country. However, Kasese in particular will require an emergency response. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Will Namutumba-Budumba Road come in your comprehensive answer?

GEN. KATUMBA: On that one; UNRA is already on site and it is being addressed.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, UNRA is on site according to the minister. Hon. Onek, I do not know how long your answer is for Kasese, Bundibugyo and the rest of the country because we are approaching curfew time. Should we give you tomorrow, it being a very topical issue?

5.32
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hillary Onek):  Madam Speaker, the report will be lengthy and curfew time is approaching. However, there were questions that were raised by some members of Parliament, which I thought I would mention; for instance, the case of the plight of the vulnerable school of students from Bududa and I answered that earlier.

The accident at Muyembe-Nakapiripirit-Kapchorwa Road has not been raised to us because it is the police who handles accidents on the roads. However, if there is need for our ministry to get involved, we are ready to look at it.

Finally, the displacement on Lake Albert during this lockdown; there is displacement all over Lakes Victoria, Kyoga and Albert and in some instances, rivers have also displaced so many people and lives lost. Those will be reported when I am presenting a comprehensive report on disaster. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, we have done quite a bit but we need to break because of the absence of public transport and the curfew. Therefore, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 May 2020 at 2.00p.m.)



