Friday, 29 May 2015

Parliament met at 12.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today’s Order Paper is fairly long; we should have started earlier. I apologise to the House that we were not able to start at 10.00 a.m. I was called for a reconsideration meeting in the Office of the Speaker about the outstanding matters in the Budget, which had come from the Budget Committee. They are due to come back to the House and we move to item 6 to supply; we need to supply today. But right now the resolutions are still ongoing and what I can report to the House is that everything is going on well. It is just a matter of time before they come here and we do the needful for the people of Uganda.
I will be making changes on the Order Paper. There are items that we will not be able to handle today like statements; we will deal with them later. For now let us go to item 8.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is our practice that when we sit on a Friday, we leave some minutes for Juma Prayers. So, I am requesting that since we have started a little bit late, we suspend a quarter to 1.00 p.m. and come back at 2.00 p.m.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us do one item and suspend at 12.55 p.m. for you to go for prayers and return after that. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon are pupils and teachers of Sunset Junior School in Kawempe represented by hon. Lafit Ssebagala and Ms Nabilah Sempala, Woman Representative for Kampala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW (EUR 42.9 Million) ($55,100,000) FROM THE FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (AFD) TO FINANCE THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION GRID EXTENSIONS PROJECT ASSOCIATED WITH THE ON-GOING HOIMA-NKENDA TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT AND PLANNED INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADE OF THE 220 KV MASAKA – MBARARA TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

12.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorize Government borrow (Eur 42.9 million), equivalent to $55,100,000, from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going Hoima-Nkenda transmission line project and planned infrastructure upgrade of the 220 KV Masaka-Mbarara transmission line project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Minister without Portfolio, the Government Chief Whip and Minister of State for Education. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this project seeks to request Parliament to allow Government borrow an equivalent of $55,100,000 to finance the construction of the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going Masaka–Mbarara and Hoima-Nkenda transmission line infrastructure upgrade –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I have heard the minister citing a figure of $55,100,000 as he presented the justification to the motion. I think there is a need for us to strengthen the record on this. When we talk about figures, we have to be exact because as far as I am concerned there is nothing like in the world of figures $55,100,000. I think the minister needs to be exact as he presents so that the records captured the correct figure.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the figure is $55,100,000 and that is the figure we are seeking to borrow from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going Hoima-Nkenda transmission line project and also the planned infrastructure upgrade of the 220 KV Masaka-Mbarara transmission lines.

There is need to make appropriate investments in these two areas covering the districts of Kiryandongo, Masindi, Hoima, Kibaale, Kyenjojo, Kabarole, Kasese, Rubirizi, Buhweju, Sheema, Mitooma, Bushenyi, Ntungamo, Kabale, Mbarara, Isingiro, Kiruhura, Rakai, Lyantonde, Lwengo, Sembabule, Bukomansimbi and parts of Masaka in order to match the upgraded transmission lines infrastructure in those areas.

We shall need additional investments in the distribution networks, which will provide for the proposed hydro plant Western Uganda and the Rwenzori Region. What is most important is we have the higher transmission lines, but we need to down grade this power for it to be distributed and accessed by the population in those areas.

Mr Speaker, this loan was presented to Parliament and it has been thoroughly discussed by the Committee on National Economy. The committee has generated a report for discussion and recommendations to this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that when this request was made to the House, it was referred to the Committee on National Economy. I am informed that the committee is now ready to report. Yes, chairman of the committee, please present the report but only in five minutes. 

12.28
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a Report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow € 42.9 million an equivalent to $55.1 million, from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going Hoima-Kenda transmission line project and planned infrastructure upgrade of the 220kv Masaka-Mbarara transmission line project.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the original report of the committee. Likewise, I have a brief by the Minister on the same loan request, the project appraisal documents and the feasibility study. Please allow me lay them too. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents.

MR KYOOMA: Also allow me lay at the Table the minutes of the committee meetings in regard to this loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow Euros 42.9 million from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going 220kv Hoima-Kenda, 220kv Masaka-Mbarara transmission lines at the Muzizi hydro power plant.

The request was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in March 2015 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. 

Mr Speaker, we have considered and scrutinised the request and now we beg to report. Considering the time you have given me, the methodology is given and the background and I request that Members read that for themselves.
 
The scope of the project

The project will be implemented in five years. The total financing of the project is estimated at Euros 55.5 million comprising of a loan, which is Euros 42.9 million from the French Development Agency and a grant from the European Union, through the Infrastructure Trust Fund of Euros 8.3 million and Government of Uganda contribution of Euros 4.3 million.

Mr Speaker, the project is in line with the country’s strategy as enshrined in the National Development Plan.

Objectives 

The objectives of the project are to contribute the economic growth and improve the living standards of the country by providing electricity supply and meeting the demand in North-Western Rwenzori, Western, Mid-Western, South and South-Western service territories through the construction of about 1555 km and 1362km of medium voltage and low voltage respectively, including financial support towards last-mile   customer connections.

Project component and cost

The project will cost a total of $71.3 million including 10 per cent contingence cost; the breakdown per component is shown in the table.
 
Mr Speaker, the report is posted into our emails and members can access it via their iPads. And from the report that table shows that medium and low voltage lines plus transformers will cost 69 per cent, which is an equivalent of $49.2 million of the project cost followed by the last-mile connection at 11.7 per cent, an equivalent of $8.3. 

A total of eight per cent of the project cost, which is equivalent to $5.75 million, will be spent on contingencies. 4.8 per cent an equivalent of $3.4 million on way-leave compensation including acquisition and consultancy services and 2.5 per cent, which is equivalent to $1.75 million on taxes. We also have 2.1 per cent, equivalent to $1.5 million, on capacity building and 0.5 per cent, which is equivalent to $0.35 million, on public awareness campaign and outreach.

The total Medium Voltage route length (33/11 kV) is about 1,556 km and the total  Low  Voltage (LV)  is  about	1,362  km  while  the  total  number  of transformers to serve the load centres is 716, which includes 127 units of 25kVA, 529 units of 50kVA, 58 units of 100kVA and two units of 200kVA. A total of 69,891 consumer connections are expected to be installed for both lot 5 and 6.

Loan terms and budgetary implications

Government of Uganda will obtain a loan of Euros - I have already mentioned that information - but important to mention is that while the loan amount is that the interest rate is 1.25 per cent per annum on each drawn down about or the disbursed amount. There is also a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent per annum on the available credit.

The level of concessionality is indicated in Table 2, which also shows that the present discountable value of the loan is Euros 23.62 million, which is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted of Euros 49.2 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR KYOOMA: This implies that the country's total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount.

Observation and recommendations

Inclusion of the project in the Public Investment Plan (PIP) for the financial year 2014/2015 - 2016/2017.

The committee observed that the Public Investment Plan sets out the planned investment decisions that the Government of Uganda plans to realise over the medium term under the energy and   mineral development sector. The committee however noted that this particular project was not included among those pipeline projects that were planned for those financial years.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should endeavour to include this project during review and also include other planned projects in the Public Investment Plan.

Procurement of permanent service providers for the remaining five service territories

The committee observed that the Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan (RESP) subdivided the entire country into 13 service territories, which were to be concessioned out to operators who were to manage the existing network therein as well as carry out network expansions and customer connections. 

According to appraisal mission aide memoire for this project of July 2014, out of the 13 service territories only eight are already concessioned out with the remaining five under interim operation of the UEDCL; they are yet to be concessioned out.

The committee recommends that procurement of the remaining service providers for the remaining five territories should be expedited, Mr Speaker. 

Progress by REA in achieving the national connection target

The committee observed that RESP 2013-2022 targets about 1.3 million on grid rural connections during the period 2013–2022. This requires an average of 130,000 connections per year. The current annual connections are estimated at 40,000. The committee was concerned about the strategy that would be used by REA to achieve the targeted 1.3 million on grid connections given the fact that there is still very low progress, two years into the Rural Electrification Strategy Plan implementation. 

The committee recommends that REA should put in place a strategy that will enable it to effectively achieve the set targets with the establishment of customer connection targets for households.

Long-term sustainability of the Rural Electrification Fund

According to the Rural Electrification Strategy Plan 2013-2022, REA was given a principal aim of employing a financing system that will over time allow the Rural Electrification Fund to acquire the character of a revolving fund in order to reduce the dependence on Government appropriations and donor agency support.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Rural Electrification Agency should put in place a financing strategy to ensure that the Rural Electrification Fund becomes less dependent on Government appropriations and donor agency support, Mr Speaker.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow Euros 42.9 million from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going 220 KV Hoima-Nkenda, 220KV Masaka-Mabarara transmission line and Muzizi Hydropower Plant be approved, subject to the recommendations herein. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Euros 42.9 million, equivalent to $55.1 million, from the French Development Agency to finance the Rural Electrification Grid Extensions Project associated with the on-going Hoima-Nkenda transmission line project and planned infrastructure upgrade of the 220 KV Masaka-Mbarara transmission line project. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. I will start with the Leader of the Opposition.

12.41
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We thank the committee for the report. We support the borrowing of the loan. (Applause)

However, we would like to say that we have approved many loans in this House for this electrification of rural areas. But when you look at figures, there is regional imbalance in the sector. We would like this agency to give us an audit or a report on what they have done so far throughout the country for us to see the distribution of this service or their work.

I hope it is Government policy that they try to extend electricity to all sub-counties. It is logical that we should have electricity at all sub-counties because we have offices there and we now have computers. Therefore, we need to run them. I guess it is also Government policy that we should have power in health centre IIIs, which are also at the sub-counties as well as health centres IVs.

But we would like to know how far they have gone in extending power to health centre IIIs and IVs and sub-counties, which is a policy of Government –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much, my boss – the Leader of the Opposition – for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that in some parts of the country, work done by Rural Electrification Agency and electricity transmission agency is an eyesore. I would like to give you the example of a line that runs from Mukongoro Sub-county Headquarters to Akadot – 11 kilometres.

During the election campaign in 2010, that line was erected. However, to date that line has not been powered. As a result, the electricity poles have collapsed. The wires have also been vandalised. The yellow transmitters have been removed. One wonders why such an investment of enormous quantity could be just left to waste. Today you are coming to ask for a loan. That is one piece of information I would like to give.

The second piece of information I would like to give, Mr Speaker, is the fact that –(Interjection)–Order for what? That is wrong procedure. The member should be taught something about procedures of the House.

Mr Speaker, the second piece of information I would like to give is that it takes a lot of effort by Members of Parliament, sitting in the corridors of the offices of Electricity Regulatory Authority to try and lobby for power to their constituencies! I have met many -I have been a victim of this circumstance. However, the rate at which implementation is being done is very low. I thank you very much, for accepting my information.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Patrick Amuriat. I have seen on two occasions - one time we had a by-election in Busia and Government began dropping electric poles two days before the election. Even on the election day they dropped poles. Definitely, that was not in good faith. It was not for development. It was for politics. I have also seen that happen in Bugiri. We had a by-election there. They were digging holes where to put poles on the day of election at a polling station. (Laughter) It was in a place called Namayemba. The President had previously got four votes at that polling –(Interjection)- the NRM candidate.

These examples plus what hon. Amuriat has given us show that extending power is for politics not development. It is wrong. If we want to take power for development, it should be planned. But you drop those poles for elections and after elections you do not return there. It is a waste of resources and bad governance –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving me way. The information I would like to give is that I read in a certain report that the programme for rural electrification in my district, Amuru, has been completed so well.

The electrification we have in Amuru runs straight from Gulu to the district headquarters. The programme did not reach the major areas like trading centres, hospitals and schools along the road sides. We tried to move and I came to the REA’s office requesting them to connect those areas. They promised to go but up to now they have not reached.

Therefore, it looks as if the government wanted to appear that they are connecting all the districts, yet the areas that are supposed to benefit from the electricity are not receiving it.
Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal that the schools and health centres are the major areas -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now making an appeal in information? 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to give the information. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Olanya was appealing to me to make the point for him. I think generally, we need clear policies on the electrification of our country. We need to know - instead of MPs wasting time at REA’s office lobbying and therefore extending power not because it is economic but because hon. Kiyonga is the Minister of Defence and he scares people so he gets more power than Wafula who is in the Opposition. I have given that as an example; he is my friend. (Laughter)

Therefore, we wish to support the loan and say we have no objection. However, Mr Speaker, I had raised this matter with you before that I feel very uncomfortable passing loans and Bills without quorum. I am extremely uncomfortable about passing loans which is committing the country and also passing Bills and the budget, which we are just going to supply now if it happens, without quorum.
Please, I would like to appeal to Government and to my Whip for this side that we should try to have quorum so that we are decent to avoid being taken to court. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to hear a response from the minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of regional balancing; whenever Government is implementing projects, we ensure that every region in the country is adequately covered. Whenever we do rural electrification, this has been taken into account. We can promise that the rural electrification agency can provide a grid map for the whole country and the members will be able to determine. If there is any programme that this Government has done, we have tried as much as possible to electrify the whole country. The Government strategy is to cover at least 26 per cent of rural access to electricity by the year 2022. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, what is the extent of the electricity penetration, particularly rural electrification, in the country? 

Secondly, we are looking at this loan and you are saying at its terminal stage, the country will be paying US$43.800 million and yet we are borrowing presently at US$23.6 million. Is this what you call a better concession?

Finally, the 13 territories: you are saying you have concessions from eight of the territories. Who are the people from whom you have concessions in these eight territories?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the member for emphasising the rural electricity penetration; that is what I was about to come to. Currently, we stand at 15 per cent in terms of access to electricity for the whole country compared to what we were at an average of about five per cent in the last 10 to 15 years. This is a great achievement for the country and it is only compared to 24 per cent electricity access in the sub-Saharan Africa. By all standards, we are still low. However, we are saying that Government has moved fromfive5 per cent in the last 10 to 12 years to now 15 per cent. We intend to move to 26 per cent by the year 2022 and 100 per cent by 2040.

Mr Speaker, the issue of some areas not being connected is true. So far, we have achieved connections of all the district headquarters in Uganda except two. By now, I think movement must be going towards covering those two. However, we also intend to cover all the sub-counties - as the Leader of the Opposition said - including all trading centres, schools, health centres and eventually the whole population. 

Mr Speaker, this is embedded in the Rural Electrification Strategic Plan, 2013 to 2022 and it is also in our National Development Plan that we move and cover the whole country. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I am being disturbed by my neighbours here but let me seek clarification. Sometimes members may think that when seeking clarification, you are fighting loans but this is very useful. One time I went to Arua and there is a Catholic Parish with a Radio FM called Pascis. In that area, I met the priest with some members who are trying to disturb me here. They have lots of solar energy generated with a lot of solar panels and the priest told us that they wanted to sell some power to the Government so that that whole area gets power but Government was not responding.

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is; have you taken any interest in these other sources we have other than running out for loans? For example, the priests are saying they have power which can serve more than two sub-counties but Government is not responding. That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good the Minister of Finance is on the Floor. We need to support this project but again it is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development frustrating these projects. In my constituency, I have two power lines but they have stalled for a whole year. The poles are there but they say the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to give REA money for VAT to pay URA. The project is there but it is being bogged down by the Ministry of Finance. 

Therefore, much as we support the project and approve the loan, we need to find a solution as Parliament. The Ministry of Finance should check itself so that these projects can move on because it affects us so much, politically. I thank you.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the issue of whether this loan is concessional or not is in the committee report. The present discounted value of this loan is €23.62 million, which is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted, which is €49.2 million. This implies that the country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount we borrowed in the present terms. 

Total repayment of the loan will amount to €43.8 million. That means the loan in essence is highly concessional since its grant element of 45 per cent is larger than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by the IMF and the World Bank.

Regarding harnessing other sources of energy, it is true we are not relying only on hydro energy. It is government policy to harness other sources of energy including solar. We have identified a number of geothermal sites which are due for development. This will help us to widen the base from which we can access energy and electrify the whole country.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank members who have supported this loan request. I want to implore the Members of Parliament to follow up this project through the areas where it is going to be implemented. This is so that it can be implemented in a timely manner to benefit the country. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The House is suspended to 3.00 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 1.00 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back to the continuation of this sitting. I am sure the Imam of Parliament is not upset with us now. We granted his request and that is good. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCREASE THE CAPITAL FOR BANK OF UGANDA

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure and section 143 of the Bank of Uganda Act.

“WHEREAS the capital of Bank of Uganda is currently Shs 30 billion, making conducting of monetary operations difficult;

AND WHEREAS Government is proposing to increase the capital of the bank from Shs 30 billion to Shs 1,100,000,000,000 over the medium term;

AND WHEREAS under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the minister may introduce into Parliament a motion; 

AND WHEREAS under section 14(3) of the Bank of Uganda Act, the authorised capital of the bank may be increased by a resolution of Parliament to ensure adequacy to the operations of the bank;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this honourable House authorises Government to increase the capital of Bank of Uganda from Shs 30 billion to Shs 1,100,000,000,000.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Lands, the member for Bunya, the member for Nyabushozi, the member for Budaka, the member for Kyamuswa in the Islands and the member for Kabarole District. Would like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, since the Bank of Uganda Act was enacted in 1993 and amended in 1995, the size of the economy has grown. The Bank of Uganda needs more finances to be able to intervene and sort out the inflation forces and smoothen the foreign exchange movement from time to time.

The motion is also in line with the East African Monetary Union Obligation that requires that the central banks of partner states need to be adequately capitalised to undertake conduct of monetary policy effectively to ensure price stability, sustainability and economic growth. In future, I will be presenting a motion to amend the Bank of Uganda Act, to align it with the East African Monetary Union obligation. As for today, we move that we increase the capital base of the bank to be able to cope with the forces and pressures of a growing economy. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure we appreciate where this motion is coming from. You will recall that the matter came from the Committee on Finance, from the report on the ministerial policy statement. In that report, there was a minority opinion that was raising those issues that Bank of Uganda did need cash and when they went to consult again, they found out that this would be the proper way to proceed rather than do it by appropriation through the Budget. That is why this motion is coming now to conclude that process.

Therefore, honourable members, that is the motion. If there is debate, it can start now. I propose the question for your debate and the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to increase the capital of Bank of Uganda. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Honourable minister, by how much was it? Was it from Shs 30 billion to one trillion?

MR BAHATI: Currently, it is at Shs 30 billion and we are increasing it from that figure to one trillion, one hundred billion shillings.

3.09
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. Honourable minister, you seem unprepared because according to the document of the policy instruments, the IMS review, the share capital for Bank of Uganda is Shs 40 billion. The section which you are quoting - Members can look at it on the website – is about when you want to increase the share capital. 

There are two sections of the law which are about increasing the share capital, or when the bank is impaired then you can redeem the bank by giving it cash - capitalisation. The motion therefore needs to be very clear under what section we are moving. Are you increasing the authorised share capital or are you capitalising? It must be clear.

MR BAHATI: Before hon. Ekanya came in, I had quoted a section but for purposes of progress, I can quote it again. It is under section 14(3) of the Bank of Uganda Act to authorise an increase of the capital of the bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the Act there? The red volumes, clerk?

MR BAHATI: I beg for two minutes to get the right volume.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Speak while they arrange for you the right volume.

MR BAHATI: The Bank of Uganda Act, section 14(3) says that the authorised capital of the bank may be increased by a resolution of Parliament to ensure adequacy to the operations of the bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the correct section? The Bank of Uganda Act is in volume 3, page 825.

3.12
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bank of Uganda is the central bank of the Republic of Uganda and it is a very critical financial institution in our economy. We have had these discussions before with the minister and we have pointed out to him that capital of Shs 30 billion is way too low to reflect the economic realities of the time. You cannot have a central bank with US$ 15 million as the share capital in a massive economy like the Ugandan economy today. The figures have to be uplifted to reflect the sheer size of the Ugandan economy. 

The central bank is responsible for monetary policies and for sometimes mopping up and stabilising the Ugandan shilling when it is losing against foreign currency. Therefore, we need to support the minister and support this resolution.

Yesterday, we had discussions with him in the Budget Committee and we committed that we would come to the House and support this position. I therefore rise to support the motion moved by the minister.

3.14
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I would like to support the motion and whereas it is important that we deal with the economic challenges that we face as a country that you are all aware of, I would need clear clarification from the minister. 

Regarding the figures, from Shs 30 billion to Shs 60 billion would mean a 100 per cent increment. From Shs 30 billion to Shs 90 billion would mean a 200 per cent increment, and to Shs 1.1 trillion would mean about 3000 per cent increment. I am trying to understand this. If we have been operating under difficult circumstances, would you need such a huge increment? If so, let us get the explanation so that we know what we are passing in specific terms.

3.15
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the minister, given the following under perception of banking and economies. When a bank increases its share capital, you will find that the shilling and the economy are stabilised. When the bank increases its share capital, it reduces inflationary tendencies. 

On another note, you will find that our ratings of economies in countries depend on the capital in its banks. As such, I would like to support the minister’s proposal because in such situations, when there is an inflationary tendency, banks can have money to ensure that they stabilise the economy.

In that regard, I highly support the motion and call upon Members to support this motion so that maybe in future, Uganda’s economic rating will be better as compared to other countries. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because first of all, things have been done properly. We are doing it properly. The best way to re-capitalise or capitalise the central bank is by doing it the way we are going to do it now rather than the way that had been argued earlier on, which had forced me to come up with a minority report.

This bank has been in existence for probably longer than some of us in this House and over that period, the economy has grown threefold, six-fold, 100-fold and as a result, the Shs 30 billion, which was the base, is too small to allow the bank to be able to carry out its monetary policies. How does it do that? When there is a lot of money floating around, the bank has to mop up and to be able to mop, as we call it, or to be able to get back that money, it needs to have a solid capital base. When they want to put back some money in the economy, they again use their capital account. 

Therefore, I support the motion and I would actually ask all of us to support it for the benefit of our country to be able to have a stable economy by controlling macroeconomic stability. Thank you very much.

3.18
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, you will recall that Bank of Uganda is the regulator of the sector and it directed commercial banks to increase their share capital from Shs 4 billion to Shs 20 billion. Therefore as a regulator, there is no way it can hold Shs 30 billion as its share capital when the commercial banks, which it is supposed to regulate, have almost the same amount of money.  

I stand to support the motion that we capitalise this bank to be able to manage the sector. You will also recall that Bank of Uganda regulates the sector through instruments. So, when there is need for mopping up to be able to maintain inflation, it has the necessary instruments to be able to stabilise the sector in terms of mopping up the extra money that is in circulation. 

I support the motion and I call upon colleagues that we support the motion so that Bank of Uganda can be able to be re- capitalised. I also think, as the honourable minister has said, this is an exercise that is not going to be done at a go. They are not going to capitalise it with Shs 1 trillion in one or two years. This is in the medium term, meaning that the re-capitalisation will take about five years. We hope that if it is successfully done, we shall have built a strong foundation for our regulating institution.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to imagine that the issues we are raising are largely directed to the minister but I do not see the Minister of Finance - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is holding the fort. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I feel that the minister should make some clarifications. In 2010, our public debt in terms of general government gross debt, as a percentage of GDP, was standing at 26.8 per cent. In 2011, it increased to 29.3 per cent and in 2012 it increased to 31.1 per cent. In 2013, it increased to 33.3 per cent and in 2014 it rose to 35.4 per cent. This is according to the IMF and World Bank economic outlook database as of October 2014.

I would like the minister to clarify as to why he would need more money to capitalise. He is talking of movement from Shs 30 billion to Shs 1 trillion now. Why would he need more money in the circumstance that our public debt, as a percentage of the gross GDP, is rising? There is a correlation.

The other clarification that I would like the minister to make is in respect of inflation. It would be fair that the minister explains to this House the trend of the inflation that we have had because it has a direct and indirect impact on the operations of Bank of Uganda. In 2013, the inflation rate was 5.0 per cent but as of 2014, it was 5.5 per cent. That is according to the IMF and World Bank economic outlook of October 2014. In the circumstance that inflation rose in 2013 from 5 per cent to 5.5 per cent in 2014, why would the minister need more money for Bank of Uganda?

3.24
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would support the motion subject to the clarifications we have sought and subject to what I am going to advance.

As a country, we need a stable economy - there is no doubt about that - because of many factors. However, I would like to dwell on one side - the inflation in this country. Much as we are trying to stabilise our economy by injecting in more money to the central bank, we would like Government to look squarely at the factors that contribute to a stabilised economy.

If we are talking about inflation in our country and we have been suffering from it, it would be nice to hear, in such a report, the efforts that Government is putting across to ensure that inflation comes down. It would not make an impact if we continued importing more than we export as that has a multiplier effect in regard to our foreign exchange earnings. However, we are not putting our minds to that as a factor that contributes to a stabilised economy.

Mr Speaker, this House passed the Money Laundering Bill but you find –(Interruption)– Mr Speaker, can I be protected from Dr Bitekyerezo? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is he doing?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, he has four eyes and he is intimidating me not to speak. What I am saying is that there is so much money being siphoned out of this country in terms of the partners we do business with. Rent being charged in foreign currency is one of the factors that disadvantage our citizens.

Lastly, I think that the central bank, which as a country we trust with our funds, should be independent, stable and free from the influence of political hands. We are perturbed when we hear a whole Governor of Bank of Uganda making a statement that, “this time, we are not going to fund elections”. Money is being removed from the central bank without going through this House. This disturbs us and makes us think that such requests have a hidden agenda. We would like to quantify the work of the central bank so that it works independently without an invisible political hand, which siphons money without passing through the right channels.

We trust that our monies will stabilise the whole country rather than benefitting a few who are authorised to go and get money from our central bank. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. 

First of all, if we denied the central bank that re-capitalisation fund, it would be tantamount to putting in place a football referee who can hardly run to superintend over a match of very fast players. I would like to convince my colleague, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, that the reason why there has been such a huge requirement is because over the years we have not been reviewing the base of the central bank yet this is required to be done at least every other year. 

We are now dealing with accumulation of backlog. I think it is only prudent that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes this up. Let it be done annually so that we do not get such huge backlog covered within a short time. We require a fairly strong central bank that is able to do the immense tasks that it has in regulating the various commercial banks. I stand to support the motion.

3.30
MS FRANCA	AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I support this motion, I would like to warn Government, especially the Executive, to stop behaving like teabags whose strength is only seen when dipped in hot water. (Laughter) I say this because yesterday I was in the Budget Committee meeting and had this matter not been raised there, this motion was not going to come before Parliament today.

The central bank is a reserve of this country. It is a very important institution that we cannot play around with. As long as we do not feed it with enough money, it will not have enough. It has our reserves as well. You can imagine the reserve of this country remaining at Shs 30 billion for such a long time –(Interruption) Okay, let the elephant give some information. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Akello, for giving way. Mr Speaker, yesterday the issue was whether Bank of Uganda can receive cash or use instruments. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development insisted that they wanted cash. However, members attending the meeting said this was not acceptable because the Bank of Uganda Act does not give leeway to them to have cash operations in the way in which they presented their request.

Mr Speaker, it is at that point that they turned around to say they now want to have it, not as cash but as a resolution of Parliament, so that they are given leeway to access the instrument. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, the minister is requesting this House to increase the amount we put as capital in Bank of Uganda, which I think is very low at Shs 30 or Shs 40 billion. I would like to support that request. 

However, also as hon. Epetait put it, we would like to request that at least every year, make sure you come up with reasonable amounts because we have to comply with how the economy is growing as well. If you leave it for a long time, it will be very difficult for the economy to be stabilised using Bank of Uganda.

As far as usage of cash, treasury bills or securities is concerned, I am sure this is not touching the law. I am sure Bank of Uganda will still continue using the law but also because it is our reserve, we have got to make sure it has enough money. Thank you very much.

3.34
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One thing, which has to come clearly to our minds, is that the central bank is a non-profit making institution. It is like we, the leaders. I have heard questions, which have been emerging, about why we need all this money. It is like asking you why you need a lot of sugar at your home when you do not know how many visitors you will have the next day. 

Actually, what you should do is that you should be prepared for whatever scenario comes up. Much as we can predict the economy, we cannot be so certain of what the economy will be like tomorrow. That is why we should not be debating about how much. Actually, we are only talking about how much and that depicts how poor this country is; we are seeing Shs 1 trillion as too much. When you look at the various central banks and their capital, Shs 1 trillion is actually very little money for a central bank.

Mr Speaker, because central banks are not profit making institutions, the only way they can remain afloat and mop up the economy is to have as much capital available to the central bank as possible. I strongly support the motion and I encourage my colleagues to do the same. Thank you very much.

3.36
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because we have investors who have brought in a lot of capital to this country. When we re-capitalise Bank of Uganda, we create investor confidence in the country. If they bring a lot of money and yet we have little money with Bank of Uganda, how will they be confident about the mass funds investment that they are bringing to the country?

Mr Speaker, Bank of Uganda will also be able to regulate the exchange rate. Currently, our shilling goes for Shs 3040 for a dollar. Why? It is because Bank of Uganda is a bit weak financially. Therefore, when we re-capitalise them, this bank will be strong and our economy will grow. In addition, when we re-capitalise the central bank, the bank’s capacity will also grow. Thank you very much. 

3.37
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to speak in support of this motion although I have some issues that I would like the minister to clarify. 

Mr Speaker, when you read the Bank of Uganda Act specifically section 14 that talks about authorisation, the authorised capital is Shs 30 billion but when you move to section 2, it says the authorised capital may be increased by a resolution of Parliament to ensure adequacy of operations of the bank. When you move to section 3, it says, “The issued and paid up capital of the bank shall be a minimum of Shs 20 billion.”

The issue I am seeking clarification on is: we are trying to adjust the required authorised capital for the bank to the figure the minister has presented - Shs 1 trillion - to which I also want an explanation because of the history of this motion. The history of this motion was that it was in the Budget Committee yesterday where a figure of Shs 200 billion presented in the Budget. When we objected and quoted the law, it is in the Budget Committee that we agreed that indeed it was required of the minister to present a resolution for approval and we thought it was about time. Shs 30 billion is too small but my question is: how has Shs 200 billion risen to Shs 1 trillion?

Secondly, in respect to section 3, which says the issued and paid up capital of the bank shall be a minimum of Shs 20 billion, when we pass the resolution is it not necessary -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Kyankwanzi is a member of the Budget Committee. For three days we have been debating this matter until we reached an agreement. Is the Member in order to raise the same matter that was raised in the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, we are not debating the report of the Budget Committee. That is the only challenge I have with that order.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are all trying to legislate for the betterment of this country. I am asking for clarification as to how we have risen to Shs 1 trillion. This House needs to be involved so that we appreciate this.

Secondly, section 3 says the issued and paid up capital of the bank shall be Shs 20 billion. How can Parliament help to make sure that as we adjust the capital, we do not tie up the paid up capital of the bank to only Shs 20 billion? What is the way forward?

3.41
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. No one would hate to have a bank, which is well capitalised, but it must be in tandem with how strong the economy is.  You cannot exceed what the economy of the country is. So what Bank of Uganda can hold in my opinion in terms of recapitalisation, we should look at the past. And, Mr Speaker as you know in the Seventh Parliament we did sit here in this Parliament- Therefore, I think the minister should tell us if we are in arrears for example, we could move from those arrears, add, and from the figures I know, surely recapitalisation should come to about Shs 800 billion not a trillion. I would like the minister to explain why we are jumping to a trillion instead of moving to about Shs 800 billion given the strength of the economy.

3.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion, but with strong caution to the Executive. Speaker after Speaker is decrying the fact that Bank of Uganda needs recapitalisation. Capitalisation of Bank of Uganda no doubt would not be opposed by anybody if only the money thereafter is put to proper use.

Mr Speaker, the issue that we need to address our minds to, is what has caused Bank of Uganda this time to be anaemic that it needs blood transfusion –(Interjections)– no, that is not the economy, and these are human factors. Unless we exercise maturity in management of this economy that we preside over, even if we put Shs 1 or 3 trillion there, you will come back to us.

There is a lot of financial impropriety and impunity on the part of the Executive; you have no respect for the laws that are in place to secure the independence of Bank of Uganda; that is the biggest problem we have in this country. If we are convinced that the Shs 1 or 3 trillion that we are going to put is going to be there to support this economy and be utilised in accordance with the existing laws, certainly nobody would oppose it.

However, I appeal to the Executive, this business of waking up and you say, “I want a cheque and therefore, I must go and touch the reserves in Bank of Uganda”, this business of coddling Bank of Uganda one, two or three nights - we all know these things; please let us show maturity in the manner in which we manage the resources that we have. If that is not going to be done, we will put in this money, but within the shortest time, the same ministers looking at me will come back to this House to ask for more money –(Interjections)– please my brother, you have just come in and I know you are in the honeymoon of the Executive –(Laughter)– but take this caution I am giving you because this is in good faith. We all need a vibrant economy and a strong central bank, but our lives are in your hands; please help this country. I thank you.

3.46
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, everybody in this House knows the role of the Bank of Uganda and we do not need a lecture on that. My concern which I have repeated many times over is that the administrators of the affairs of Finance do not bother to read the law; that is our biggest problem. 

As for the capitalisation of Bank of Uganda, definitely with the little knowledge of commerce, business or banking that I have –(Interjections)– I do not ignore because I had to push for capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank which I chaired.

It is very important that Bank of Uganda be recapitalised, nobody will even oppose that if you mean well for this country. My problem is that the Ministry of Finance has never come to this House and tell us the truth. Even for them to come today with this instrument, we had to demand it from them. To put things right, I must be clear on this because we were questioning the Shs 200 billion - is it cash or by instrument? The law that governors the operations of Bank of Uganda is there and you can download it from your iPad for free.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you help us and move on the way forward.

MRS OGWAL: Before we move forward they must understand why - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have to move forward now.

MRS OGWAL: They must assure us that they have understood –(Laughter)– Mr Speaker; I am aware and privileged to know that in the financial year 2012/13, there was a debt of Shs 410 billion which I understand was paid. I am also aware that Shs 250 was also paid to absorb the debts and this year they were demanding Shs 200 billion which we questioned and that is why we demanded for them to come and request Parliament for this instrument.

On my part, Mr Speaker, I will support this motion as long as they are going to strictly demand Shs 860 billion not Shs 1.1 trillion. If it is Shs 860 billion that will be acceptable because that would have absorbed the Shs 200 billion which we were questioning yesterday and I would be comfortable with that. Beyond that they will have to come back with a very clear explanation.

Mr Speaker, as a way forward, we allow capitalisation of Bank of Uganda, but as a House we should caution the administrators, especially the ministers responsible to make sure that their technocrats run them through the relevant laws before they come to the House to bog us down  on matters which sometimes do not even need debate. I beg to move that we move forward by passing Shs 860 billion not 1.1 trillion. (Applause)

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FIANANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Indeed anybody out there watching this Parliament knows that the Ninth Parliament is concerned about the economy of this country and from both sides of the House we all agree that we need to strengthen our economy.

I want to appreciate the contribution of all members from both sides of the House. I also want to confirm to our grandmother that yes we are very good students –(Laughter)–  [Mrs Ogwal: Atat] - Atat, we agreed –(Interjection)– ok I call you atat not the other one? (Laughter) 

That in indeed we can confirm that we understood your point and we are very good students, yesterday when you directed us, you can see the following day, we are here in the House to do what you directed us to do. So we are very good students.

We have had consultations with members from both sides of the House and agreed that while the law says that any time you can seek for recapitalisation of any amount as long as Parliament approves but it is appropriate that we stop at Shs 260 billion and if we want extra to put Shs1.1 trillion then we can also come back next year. Therefore I want to agree with the amendment of the Opposition Chief Whip of Shs 860 billion so that we can progress as a House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to this honourable member?

3.54
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Ministers of Finance hon. Matia Kasaija and hon. Bahati. Unfortunately, both of them are new. I really want to advise them that the Bank of Uganda Act is overdue for amendment. You would not be here for this situation. Cabinet needs to do its job. As we speak now, there is a crisis in the mobile money platform which is affecting what we are doing. 

So we want commitment from Government on when you are going to bring Bank of Uganda Act here to be amended so that we buttress the bank from interference. That is very important aspect; because Mr Speaker, what is happening is that the Bank of Uganda needs to be amended so that they have two different accounts which are clearly published; one for physical policy and the other for monitory policy. 

That is why I proposed yesterday that the technical staff of Parliament and the MPs need the capacity so that the report of Bank of Uganda is analysed by Parliament every three months. Because according to the money supply in our economy, for us if we are the ones in Government, Shs 1 trillion is not adequate. According to money supply and this information which we put in Bank of Uganda, you need Shs Five trillion to move forward at the level of the economy – we need to meet the East African convergence and COMESA status. So I really hope that in the budget speech, you take care of this fundamental issue.  It is important to give assurance to the investors about the level of the economy.

Mr Speaker, the issue of governance in Bank of Uganda for the last many years also needs to be sorted out. The Auditor-General has raised so many queries; PAC has a report. So as much as we have good will to give you all the money you have, you should also sort out the issue of management, governance and accountability. I beg to rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can I now put the question to this motion taking into account that the Bill is expected - I hear the support coming from the chairman of Finance, there seems to be concurrence from the House that an amendment to the Bank of Uganda Act is required. 

We will need this to be done so that we can move forward in more steady way. I put the question to the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to increase the capital for Bank of Uganda to Shs860 billion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members there were issues that we had referred to the budget committee. I wanted a confirmation from the chairman as to whether all those issues had been resolved and ready.

3.58
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Most of these issues have been amicably resolved. And one of them is the one that we have just looked at right now.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I move that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of: the Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2014/2015 and the Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the Fiscal Year 2015/2016. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Minister of Lands - Finance you cannot support your own motion-and the Minister for Tourism. Is there need to speak to this motion or we go to the next stage.

3.59
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Chairperson of the Budget Committee was very diplomatic and you are accountable to all of us here. You said all issues were resolved. The Speaker was very wise he asked you a clear question.

Mr Speaker, I want to request - the Minister of Finance makes a commitment here that all issues that members had recommended will be captured and has a first call on next year’s budget and that needs to be on record so that it is an assurance. We cannot just say it has been resolved. 

So can we have the right procedure before we move to the next item because that is very important? Each sectoral committee made recommendations on financing and the budget committee could not get enough resource but there is consensus that those will have the first call and because we are starting the next budget in August –(Interjection)– yeah, the next budget. Mr Speaker, we said that due to the transition, the next budget will start in August and all those issues in the budget call circular will appear and the Minister of Finance is supposed to make a commitment.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, we live in a world that is dynamic. I do not want to renegade on my own word but where I agree with hon. Ekanya is that the funds of the next financial year that is 2016/2017, the agreed positions should have a first call. This is a budget for all of us.

If priorities do not change, I make that commitment. In any case, we shall come back here and share. I agree these understandings should have a first call but- and please I want to be listened to carefully; should circumstances be such that it may not be possible, I will need to be guided by this House, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the situation is; do you undertake to make it the first call? Circumstances will always change.

MR KASAIJA: I do undertake to do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To do what?

MR KASAIJA: I do undertake that as we agreed in our committee-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the minister finish.

MR KASAIJA: Those items we agreed upon will have the first call on the budget of the financial year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: I am raising on a point of procedure. There are many promises made on this Floor, which are always ignored. The procedural point I am raising is, one, I want an assurance from the ministers of finance that Hepatitis B has been provided for as requested.
Two, Oxygen for-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, those items were not handled in this budget. All those matters you are raising have been harmonised by the Budget Committee; that is what is coming now; it is not an undertaking; it is not for the future. That one is for now – Clerk.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 001 – Vote 162: Central Vote 
Recurrent expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose a question that a total sum of Shs 4,400,647,665,000 under Vote 001-162: Central Vote, be provided as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, most members do not seem to have copies of what you are reading.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is on the iPads? Is it there?

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, we have it on the iPads.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, let the technical people help. They are saying it is there; it is uploaded. Can the technical people help the members whose iPads have not picked this?

Vote 163 - Vote 176: Referral Hospitals - Recurrent Expenditure

I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 68,552,290,000 under Vote 163-176: Referral Hospitals, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201 - Vote 236: Missions Abroad
Recurrent budget

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 106,828,646,000 under Vote 201-236: Missions Abroad, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501 - Vote 580 and Vote 751 - Vote 778: Local Government
Recurrent expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,898,921,675,000 under Vote 501-580 and 571-778: Local Government, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 6,474,950,275,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Provision

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 7,790,638,417,000 be provided for as Statutory Expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 001 – 162 - Central Votes 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 9,340,282,591,000 under Votes 001 – 162 - Central Votes, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

I now put the question that the total sums of Shs 9,340,282,591,000 under Votes 001 – 162 - Central Votes, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 163 – 176 - Referral Hospitals 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sums of Shs 13,936,886,000 under Votes 163 – 176 - Referral Hospitals, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

I now put the question that the total sums of Shs 13,936,886,000 under Votes 163 – 176 - Referral Hospitals, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201 – 236 - Missions Abroad 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 17,884,600,000 under Votes 201 – 236 - Missions Abroad, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,884,600,000 under Votes 201 – 236 - Missions Abroad, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501 - 580 and 751 – 778 - Local Government 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now propose the question that the total sums of Shs 9,706,662,356,000 under Votes 501 - 580 and 751 – 778 - Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

I now put the question that the total sums of Shs 9,706,662,356,000 under Votes 501 - 580 and 751 – 778 - Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there was a problem with the summation. The figure I just read is the overall total but not the total for Local Government Development Expenditure. There was a mistake in the figures; so, we have to correct it now. The total figure for development expenditure for local government is not Shs 9,706,662,356,000. That is overall development budget. Therefore, I want to call back local government so that we correct it.

Votes 501 - 580 and 751 – 778 - Local Government 
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sums of Shs 334,558,279,000 under Votes 501 - 580 and 751 - 778: Local Government, be provided as development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. I now put the question that the total sums of Shs 334,558,279,000 under Votes 501 - 580 and 751 – 778 - Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Total Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 9,706,662,356,000 be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,706,662,356,000 be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.23
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report to the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Budget for financial year 2015/2016 of Shs 23,972,251,048,545 and has supplied it without any amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I move that the House does adopt the report from the Committee of Supply. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we are almost there and I congratulate you. (Applause)  We just have one last step remaining. The figures supplied now have to be captured in the Appropriation Bill. These figures that we have just supplied will have to be rushed to Entebbe and printed into the Appropriation Bill. I have the undertaking that it will be done by 7.00 p.m. today. 

In that case, honourable members, we shall finish so that we take this very short recess that we must take. This is because we are resuming on Thursday next week at the State of the Nation Address to start the last session of this Parliament. 

I propose that we rise now, go and take a break. We will come back tomorrow at 10 O’clock and finish with this Appropriation Bill. Do we all agree? Will we all be there? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.27 p.m. and adjourned until Saturday, 30 May 2015 at 10.00 a.m.) 

