Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 21 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and we have matters that we need to complete. So, let us start with that. There are two Members - Member for Kioga County and Member for Ngora County - who have urgent matters to raise. 

2.10 
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my constituency, close to 60 per cent of the population are fishermen. A week ago, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) mounted an operation to curb illegal fishing in the district. However, during that exercise more than 50,000 people got displaced from their source of livelihood. The information we have is that it has been ordered that for the next two months or so, nobody should go into the waters.

Mr Speaker, 50,000 people displaced from their source of livelihood and most of them being children, is a big number, which you cannot underestimate. 
Therefore, I want to know from Government whether there is any contingency plan it has to address the plight of these people who are starving and do not have any other source of food because their livelihood has always been in the lake.

In the long run, Government should let us know the contingency plan they have to make available, affordable fishing gears so that these people can pick on with practising good methods of fishing.

The method of operation that was applied and still being applied is uncouth. It is forceful and also abuses human rights because in one landing site of Kayago, a lot of force was used. People are forced to collect rubbish and rotten materials, including human faeces with their bare hands. 

Mr Speaker, this spreads disease to the already vulnerable members of the society. How I wish these people could apply a method that is implemented with a human face, it would be good for our citizens.

Lastly, in Amolatar District, over 50 landing sites are residents, ranging from Lake Kyoga to Lake Kwania. The district tenders out these landing sites as a source of local revenue but now, with this intervention, local revenue has greatly been affected. I do not know whether Government intends to bridge the gap of deficiency on local revenue that will arise from this operation. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to raise this matter, which is very urgent in my constituency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, can we hear from the line minister.

2.13
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vicent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that what the honourable member is quoting is happening. Allow me time to go and investigate it. I will then come back to brief Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the minister investigates and settles this matter, would he have to come to the House and report to us? Would that be necessary? If the member is satisfied, maybe he could come back to say it has been sorted.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, it has always been a practice by Government ministers to ask for time. However, like I indicated, this is a very urgent matter. We have children who are currently –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have already stated that but I am saying, once the minister has visited the place, taken decisions and taken some corrective measures, would it still be necessary for him to come back here? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I would be obliged by his interventions because he is my friend. I know he will come to support my people. So, he does not need to come back to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, let friendship go to work.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged, Sir. 

2.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a very important matter. When one reads the Bible properly, Proverbs 14: 23, reads: “All hard work brings profit but mere talk leads to poverty.” 
I am reading this Bible verse in relation to the non-payment of salaries for the civil servants in Ngora District Local Government. For the last two months, civil servants in Ngora District have not been paid. They are yawning, complaining and struggling but I am told this is not only happening in Ngora. There are many other districts including Butaleja and others. 

Secondly, the pensioners in Ngora have also not been paid. Some of them have not been paid gratuity. Some of them have not received payment for the last five or six or ten years or since they retired. 

Mr Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. I would like the minister to tell the House why the civil servants in Ngora District Local Government and other districts have not received their salaries; and
    2. I also would like the Government to tell the House why the pensioners of Ngora District Local Government and other districts have not been paid. They worked and served this country with diligence but unfortunately, they have not been paid. 
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The last time on Labour Day, I think someone cited a verse in the Quran that says that anybody who gives labour must be paid before the sweat dries. It is in both the Holy Quran and the Bible.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we will follow up this afternoon Ngora’s issue and any other districts, whose civil servants have not received salaries and ensure that this issue is sorted. I know, like all of us know, that the payment to civil servants –(Interruption)

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for giving way. I would like to give information that I have a list of 78 districts where civil servants have not been paid. From the Eastern Region, we have eight districts - Iganga, Mayuge, Namutumba, Bugiri. In the Teso sub-region, we have 16 districts and in the Eastern Region there are 29 Districts including Bulambuli, Butaleja, Budaka, Mbale Main, Mbale Municipal; then; we have others in southern region like Masaka, Ssembabule, Bukomasiimbi, Lwengo and Nakaseke.

In Karamoja region, we have Moroto Municipality, Nakapiripirit and Amudat. We have Gulu, Lamwo, Dokolo and Alebtong. In the interest of time, I have not read all but there are 78 districts where public servants and the teachers have not received their April salary. I thank you. 

2.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, salaries and wages of the Government workers have the first call on the Budget. We can suspend payment of anything else but I must pay the salary and wages of public servants.

I would like to assure this House that when we released money of the last quarter, which was done in April, wages and salaries were disbursed to the various districts. If in the districts, people have not been paid, the problem is not at the centre but at the district level.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the document that I have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What document is that?

MS RWABUSHIJA: The districts that have not been paid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the document? What document is that?

MS RWABUSHIJA: The list of the districts that have not been paid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the list from?

MS RWABUSHAIJA: From the workers’ representative. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We have listened and it might not be limited to those ones but a bigger problem than that. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON STREAMLINING OF WATER FOR PRODUCTION AND VALUE ADDITION IN THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

2.21
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL, INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Streamlining of water for production and value addition in the budget for Financial Year 2019-2020  

Water for production

The national irrigation policy clearly guides on the roles of the Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as far as public sector mandates for provision of water for agriculture production is concerned and we are all aware that Ministry of Water and Environment is generally responsible for bulk water supply and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is responsible for on-farm water provision. 

The key definitions of the roles of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Water and Environment in the National Irrigation Policy; 

i) 	Off-farm refers to development of hydraulic infrastructure and associated engineering works comprising of water abstraction and conveyance of water to farm gates. 
  
ii)	On-farm refers to the development of hydraulic infrastructure, associated engineering works and irrigation accessories comprising of conveyance from farm gates to farmers’ fields and water use management.  

The national irrigation policy, 2018 further breaks down the mandate, roles and responsibilities of both ministries in line with the above cabinet decisions and water policy.

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is responsible for Planning and development of micro and small scale irrigation systems up to 100 hectares. The policy provides a shared responsibility between the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Water and Environment for planning and development of medium and large scale. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is responsible for on-farm infrastructure development, operation and maintenance, water utilisation and sustainable irrigation scheme management; while Ministry of Water and Environment is responsible for off-farm infrastructure development and bulk water transfer.
  
The detailed roles and responsibilities of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its agencies under the National Irrigation Policy, 2018 are shown below:

    1. To undertake the planning and development of micro and small scale irrigation systems.  
    2. To undertake the planning and development of on-farm irrigation infrastructure and implementation of on-farm activities for medium and large scale schemes to ensure effective utilisation of water for irrigation and best agronomic practices.  
    3. To support the operation and maintenance of on-farm irrigation infrastructures.  
    4. To provide agricultural technical guidance, education and training of extension workers, artisans, irrigation agronomists, irrigation engineers and farmers, backstopping to districts and other stakeholders.  
    5. To support the establishment and guide farmer groups and producer associations in value chains and agribusiness through PPPs. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will also work with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to support cooperative societies in the management of their resources especially in the disposal and acquisition of fixed assets.  
    6. To promote marketing, trade, value addition of products and cooperatives’ principles in irrigated agriculture.  
    7. To coordinate actors involved in agricultural production, agricultural water management, value chain and marketing.
    8.  To spearhead research and development for irrigation systems.
    9. To demonstrate and promote irrigation technologies that are efficient, cost effective and affordable systems. 
    10. To build the capacity of stakeholders involved in irrigation project implementation in the field of project study, designs, construction and operation and management of irrigation systems.  
    11. To carry out environmental social impact assessment and resettlement action planning for all areas planned for irrigation development.  
    12. To oversee implementation of national irrigation policy including access to strategic inputs and demonstration materials, monitoring, evaluation and compliance to standards. 
    13. To develop national guidelines for farmers and agricultural water users associations. 
    14. In consultation with district local governments and Ministry of Water and Environment shall institute performance and management contracts with the appropriate institutions or farmer organisations at local or scheme level for sustainable management of irrigation schemes.  

All the above functions can only be successful if Ministry of Water and Environment adequately provides bulk water supply to the jointly identified and agreed on farming communities. 

Funding and capacity building of the two institutions  

Mr Speaker, it is a fact that for the last 10 years, the budget for water for agricultural production in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been far below that of the Ministry of Water and Environment. The big difference in resource allocation for water has had a direct effect on the human capacity development of engineers, staff retention and key achievements of the two ministries.

The institution with much more financial resources definitely attracts and retains better competent staff and undertakes more projects - compared to the one with meagre financial resources. But that does not remove the mandate of MAAIF and also creates a gap in the service delivery because irrigation technologies are supposed to be delivered and adopted by farmers through the national agricultural extension system, which is a mandate of MAAIF. So, the roles and mandates of the two ministries are complementary.

Building the human capacity in irrigation 

Since the approval of the national irrigation policy, which we - and I would like to inform you that when we took office, the Minister of Water and Environment and I found out that it had taken 10 years for the two ministries to agree on the irrigation policy. We sat down and agreed, went to Cabinet and we now have this policy.

Since the approval of the National Irrigation Policy, the ministry has fast-tracked the recruitment of technical engineering staff; we have 39 engineering staff at MAAIF headquarters and in addition, 12 engineers have been recruited on contract under the various ministry projects.

The ministry has also recruited 46 engineers in local governments to support agricultural extension services and the recruitment process is still on-going.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has, therefore, built the capacity to undertake our mandate of provision of water for agricultural production and we shall continue if we are given more financial resources.

The major planned activities for the Financial Year 2019/20 

In the next financial year, MAAIF has two main activities under water for agricultural production. 
The ministry shall continue with the construction and the de-silting of valley tanks among our identified model and nucleus farmers, mainly, in the cattle corridor districts and this activity is roughly Shs 19 billion, which is not enough. Recently, we agreed that the cattle corridor is almost the whole of Uganda.

The ministry will construct solar-powered irrigation schemes with a capacity to cover at least five hectares, which will be part of our extension systems, focusing on the nucleus farmers, particularly engaged in coffee and horticulture and other important value chains in accordance with the agricultural zoning strategy.

The schemes will be used for demonstration and the farmers will be required to sign memoranda of understanding with MAAIF to ensure that irrigation schemes are accessible to other farmers and will also undertake to work with the extension workers to train farmers in good agronomy.

The ministry has a budget of Shs 34 billion for this activity, which is still very low. Without these funds, all our engineers and extension officers will be deemed redundant as far as promoting irrigation is concerned.

Recent ministry achievements in the area of water for irrigation 

Despite the meagre resources in the area of irrigation, MAAIF has been able to achieve the following; completed feasibility studies and engineering designs for three irrigations schemes of Sironko, Acuma Irrigation Scheme in Bukedea and Bulambuli, Atali Irrigation Scheme in Kween and Bulambuli, Namatala Irrigation Scheme in Budaka, Mbale and Butaleja districts with support from JICA.

The ministry completed construction of 50 small scale irrigation demonstrations and water harvesting sites in selected districts under the nine Zonal Agricultural Research Centres (ZARDIs).

We have constructed and rehabilitated 238 valley tanks as of December, 2018 on the cattle corridor districts countrywide. And cumulatively we have constructed over 1,200 on-farm valley talks in the last four years.

We have a problem of de-silted valley tanks but it is going to be addressed. The ministry jointly with Ministry of Water and Environment are undertaking construction of six irrigation schemes of Doho II, Mobuku II, Wadalai, Tochi, Ngenge and Rwengajo.

Implementation of the irrigation policy 

MAAIF is formulating the irrigation master plan in conjunction with the Ministry of Water and Environment. However, there have been some delays in this process but it is being fast-tracked.

The master plan will provide the implementation framework for the national irrigation policy. We promise that by December, this master plan will be in place.

MAAIF has a good working relationship at technical and policy level with the Ministry of Water and Environment because we recognise the different but complementary special skills of technical staff for both ministries. We also recognise that we are providing irrigation services to only less than five per cent of Uganda’s total irrigatable area.

Mr Speaker, both our efforts, Ministry of Water pushing bulk water and MAAIF doing micro-irrigation, are providing only five per cent of the total irrigatable area. 
Therefore, the combined efforts of the two institutions are required to improve this situation, which will take decades to achieve.

Agro-industrialisation 

The ministry embraced the budget strategy of promoting agro-industrialisation and this is depicted in prioritisation of this in the allocation of the sector resources across the seven votes that constitute the agricultural sector. 

However, we should note that most of the agro-processing industrialisation activities in the sector are undertaken by the various semi-autonomous agencies namely; NAADS, NARO, UCDA, DDA and CDO.

The mainstream ministry only plays a coordination role. The ministry also works with the Uganda Development Corporation to finance key value additional projects by the private sector. In addition, most issues on industrialisation at policy level are undertaken by the Ministry of Trade and Industry.

The summary of the funds for agro-industrialisation in 2019/2020 is shown below;

i)	Provision of appropriate household irrigation systems, tractors and mulching implements for agricultural mechanisation; 

ii) 	Provision of value addition for fruit processing equipment for mangoes, citrus and pineapples for establishment of food processing facilities;

iii)	Provision of value addition in small scale to medium grain milling, value addition large scale grain milling equipment to manage post-harvest losses; iv)Provision of value addition milk coolers, matching grants, establishment of community grain stores, technical design inspection, verification and other related software activities. 

The total is Shs 51.22 billion.

MAAIF recognises the fact that in order to effectively achieve agro-industrialisation, the farmers should be able to produce adequate volumes and quality products and it is not a function of this ministry alone. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in his letter of 6 May 2019 guided that the interventions identified in PIMA cut across various sectors, including Agriculture, Water and Environment, Tourism, Industry and Local Governments. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development guided that in order to avoid duplication and ensure effectiveness, the activities of this PIMA should be integrated into the strategic plans and budgets of these sectors and funded within the respective sector ceilings. We would then have a coordinating forum to ensure that the different Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) do not deviate from the PIMA agenda. This is what we are pursuing in the implementation of the budget of the Financial Year 2019/2020. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you suggesting that all these things you are stating are already included in the budget?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are included, why have you brought the statement?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, we sat with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and completed this paper. I also wondered why I was called, but I could not ask you why you put me on the agenda. That is why I obediently came, Sir. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we are the ones who called you. Do these arise from the question of a Member or is it a standalone issue? It is a question from a Member under Rule 46, is that correct?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I needed this guidance.

Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of senior staff from the Department of Hansard of Zambia National Assembly. They are;

    1. Mr Ackim Musonde – Chief Hansard Editor 
    2. Ms Doris Choongo
    3. Ms Jere Maluba Kaindu
    4. Ms Sheila Manase
    5. Mr Edwin Banda.

They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, if this matter is already in the budget, are we going to debate it? It is a question under Rule 46. Who asked the question? – (Mr Luttamaguzi rose) - Honourable member, are you the one who asked this question?

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, if I had understood it earlier that the Member who raised the question was not in the House, the answer would not have been given because there is nobody to ask a supplementary question. There is no clarification; the issue is that under Rule 46, a Member raises a question - once it is answered, only that Member is entitled to a supplementary question. Since that Member is not here, we will leave it at that. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE:

REPORT ON THE COMMONWEALTH WOMEN’S FORUM, “AN EMPOWERED FUTURE FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS”: 14 – 21 APRIL 2018, LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Member for Rubabo county? Next item.

SUBMISSION OF THE CORRIGENDA TO THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you have already submitted it to the Committee on Budget before it came here.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to submit and lay on the Table the Corrigenda to the draft Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I am hoping that the Committee on Budget has already had access to this document because if it is coming out for the first time, honourable minister, you know what you have done to us.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Budget has an advance copy although they have not considered it because it had to be laid first. (Mr Kivumbi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure.

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, it is a few hours or days for Parliament to debate and pass - it is true I am a member of the Committee on Budget and we have had an advance copy but some of the matters raised are very fundamental to be parachuted straight to the Committee on Budget. For instance, they are talking about an increment to the budget of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) for digital stamps by Shs 100 billion.  

An issue of this magnitude needs a sector to look at because it is the sector that has deep knowledge about that sector. On our side, we deal with aggregate figures. When you give us a huge amount of money for us to consider in just one week, it complicates our work. An item of that nature needs to be looked at by the sectoral committee. However, if you are to push it there, we cannot beat the deadline.

Mr Speaker, we will also ask your good office to advise the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It speaks volumes about their level of planning whether they are set for the budget process quite often. You could advise them that this distorts the work we do and we look shabby.

The procedural issue I am raising is that when an item of that nature comes to the Committee on Budget, we do not have the requisite knowledge and skills to investigate that item and get findings. Therefore, you would have advised accordingly but there is no time. We are constrained.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be constrained going forward from laying this kind of addenda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point is sustained. Honourable minister, I do not think you would be acting fairly to this House on this date of 21 May – these are documents that should have come to Parliament on or by 01 April. Today is 21 May; it is not fair to Parliament.

You have exhausted all the Latin phrases we use in these things; Corrigenda, Addenda –(Laughter)- Now you have started Corrigenda 1, Corrigenda 2 until you reach the a 100th Corrigenda. You are about to be guilty of financial indiscipline.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, we are here to serve the country. The sectors will come with something that is extremely urgent –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a bit constrained to put the honourable minister to order but we all know that all of us are here to serve this country. (Applause) Whatever we are doing is in the best interest of the country. 

Is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in order to say, “Some of us are here to serve the country” as if there are some hypocrites sitting in this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, some of us may be here to serve the country but there are a lot more people - and these members are part of them - who are determined	to serve the country. Therefore, yours is a wish and a desire that you have but for us, we want to serve this country. We are committed and determined that this country should be served. However, by your methods of work, you do not seem to portray what you seem to believe in. (Applause)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, honourable minister.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While we are busy with the Budget process, are we proceeding well when teachers are threatening to go on strike? This touches the lives of our children and yet, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not coming out to tell us what plans he has for the teachers. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about salaries? What are you talking about? Honourable member, you are completely out of order. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for protecting me. We are talking about the Budget now. I am sorry, some sectors may get pressures, which they did not present to us in time. Maybe I will need guidance from this House; if there is something extremely urgent but it was not done during the budgeting process, what do we do?

I will mention the case of my colleague who raised the Shs 100 billion for digital-stamps. This idea of digital-stamps came to us barely three months ago and it had to go through various processes. Let me explain this briefly to ensure that Parliament understands it well. Digital-stamps are being put in factories in order to capture their production because we have audits and evidence that there are some companies who under declare their production and therefore, their tax.

Wanting to have as much tax as possible to meet the obligations of this country, we thought that was something we should pursue. That is why we are coming with that amount of money, at this material time, because the companies said, yes, we do not mind you installing these things but you will pay the initial costs and when we calculated, it came to Shs 100 billion.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is not our intention to delay Parliament because we want you to do this as timely as you want but at times, we are faced with emergency situations of that nature. However, we promise that next time, we should be able to do better and tell the sectors that if they do not put forward their needs in time, they will have to wait for the next financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a law in place and there are timelines. An agency that does not follow that timeline should not mess everybody else up. This should have been a candidate either for a supplementary for next financial year or for the Budget for the next financial year, not this one.

There are eight days to the passage of the Budget, including weekends when we do not sit. That means we have roughly four to six sittings left but you are still amending the Budget, which has already been processed. Really, are you being fair, even to yourself? Maybe you do not care but we care. We really care, because now, what do we do with it? It is going to the Budget Committee, yes and the Budget Committee was supposed to report today but they cannot because some animals have just walked in from the shadows and been presented. No, it is not fair really.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, on behalf of our ministry, we would like to apologise to this House for this corrigenda. However, I would like to beg that we give the Budget Committee a chance to see the items that are inside the corrigenda and then the House can be informed accordingly. There are some decisions that we had to take at the very last minute that needed us to scratch our heads on where to get these resources -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the sign that you have been scratching your head? There are no wounds; we should have seen them. (Laughter) 

MR BAHATI: I wish you could –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. Honourable, when you use the microphone in advance, you do not make the Speaker very happy.  

MS OGWAL: I apologise, Mr Speaker. I feel very uncomfortable to raise this point of order. However, you will recall that last year and the year before that, the senior Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development apologised on the Floor of Parliament for the confusion that the ministry caused this House in managing the Budget process. It was a very serious apology and they said they would never do it again. 

This time, hon. David Bahati, from the same ministry, is again apologising for not following the law and mismanaging the Budget process. How many apologies must we receive from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for them to stop mismanaging the Budget process?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order -

MS OGWAL: The point of order I am raising is, how many apologies should we receive from the ministers of finance? Is the minister therefore in order to continuously apologise - Committing the same mistakes and engaging the House when we have so much to do? Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Holy Book that I read says, you apologise and forgive 70 times seven a day. I do not know whether that applies in this situation. However, I can see that, that is why the senior minister was not offering an apology; because his expired. Now they are coming with a new one from the minister of state, which is not valid anymore because it has no premise.

However, honourable members, we have stated this before. Let me refer this matter to the Budget Committee and let them see what they can do with it and come and advise us on what to do. However, it has already delayed the process of the Budget.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is under rule 11(5), which states, “The constitution of the Commission under this rule shall be done during the First Session of a new Parliament and the tenure of service of the four backbench members shall be two and a half years, subject to re-designation.” 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the commissioners to stay in their offices, when their term of office expired? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a procedural matter but an administrative issue. We will deal with it that way. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have ruled and I am not challenging your ruling but I rise on a procedural issue. No other than the Speaker of this Parliament has said and quoted widely that there are mafias, particularly in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government in general. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether we should continue processing money steered by a group that has already been classified as “mafias” because apologies and amendments that are coming - (Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my colleague, hon. Ssemujju, attentively. He has quoted the Speaker of this Parliament that she referred to some people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as mafias. He continues to use that word, which I do not think befits parliamentary language without substantiated it though he is quoting the Speaker of this House. 

Therefore, is he in order to continue quoting the Speaker of this House without laying on Table any evidence showing that the Speaker actually said what hon. Ssemujju is saying? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, the mafia I read about are Italians; it is a criminal gang in Italy. If there is any indication and reference made to Members of this House as belonging to criminal gangs, that insinuation would be a violation of our Rules of Procedure. (Applause)
Therefore, honourable member, please, please take out that word from our records and proceed the way you usually do. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am only reporting. I do not know if there are mafias in the finance ministry. I am only expressing fear that the Speaker has been widely quoted in the media saying that there are mafias in the finance ministry yet we are processing –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order on something you ruled on. I presume that the honourable member would first withdraw the statement before making any explanation to this House. 
Therefore, aware of the rules of this House, Mr Speaker, is hon. Ssemujju Nganda, my very good friend, in order to continue addressing the House without adhering to the ruling of the Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kira Municipality, if there was such a statement by the Rt. Hon. Speaker and you have records of that, you would be proceeding properly because you would have records to prove that what you are saying was said by somebody else but you are only quoting. 

However, if you do not have it now and here, you cannot use it.  If you have it, lay it on Table and we will allow you to speak the whole afternoon about it but if you do not have it, please withdraw it for now and then wait for another day.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have ruled now and I do not want to defy you. I am only asking to be given time to bring the record except there are even colleagues who want to learn how to debate by heckling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, honourable members, any reference to mafia on the record of Parliament is expunged. Proceed.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. As I said, when I am properly closed with the record, I will come back – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now proceed? 

MR SSEMUJJU: The point was related to the way we are handling the budget. Now that that particular matter cannot be raised at this stage, when I bring the record, Mr Speaker, I will request you to bring back the matter and see whether we can hand over the budget to a mafia group.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of 10 traders from the Joint South Sudan Trader Claimants, Kampala District. They are represented by hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 

We also have a delegation of 40 constituents from Kassanda County South, Mubende District. They are represented by hon. Simeo Nsubuga and hon. Benny Namugwanya Bugembe. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. I think they are particularly interested in item number 8 on our Order Paper. Since they have travelled all the way, we might have to find a way of dealing with that matter so that they can know what the House has said about it. 

Can we proceed, honourable members? That matter stands referred to the Budget committee to handle immediately and come back to us to advise on how to deal with these matters. Thank you. 

VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORTS ON SELECTED URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED BY THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (USMID) PARTICIPATING MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

3.06
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Value-for-Money Audit Report on selected urban infrastructure projects implemented by the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Program Participating Municipal Councils in the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to our Committee on Local Government Accounts to handle and advise us on how to proceed.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 1 AND 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had processed this debate and in the process of concluding this debate, there were issues that needed to be harmonised and I sent back to the committee. There is a minority and majority reports of the committee and the minister’s perspective; they were supposed to come together. Can they report whether this has been done so that we proceed with this matter quickly? Has this been done? Where is the Chairperson of the Budget Committee? Are we ready to proceed with supplementary expenditure Schedule 1 and 2 for the financial year 2018/2019?

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugolobi): Mr Speaker, we are ready to proceed. You will recall a few days ago, addendum No. 5 and 6 were laid on this Table. We have been able to handle those two and we are going to present an addendum to the report that we presented because these two addendums No. 5 and 6 are addenda to Schedule No. 2, which we considered in that report.

Regarding the pending issues which we had between the majority and minority reports, we have been able to discuss with the movers of that report and we agreed on certain issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you agreed also on the next addendum No. 4 and 5?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, they were in the meeting and they have not notified me of a minority report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I get confirmation because if it has been agreed then we can go to the Committee of Supply and iron out those things.

3.10
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, a meeting was held this morning to consider addendum reports to the supplementary budget. By and large, we agreed except for one item, for which we think we shall carry that debate for Parliament to pronounce itself. The meeting that is considering the addendum and signing of the final report, I think it is simply taking place right now. I think hon. Cecilia Ogwal is in the committee to serve the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget with the letter that we have a report on one item of which you are aware of where we have not fully agreed.

However, the rest a 100 per cent –(Interjection)– I cannot serve you from here. I know your vice is there. Mr Speaker, apart from one issue, we agreed on the rest. Concerning that issue, we think that Parliament must pronounce itself on it. On the rest of the other issues, there is a list of a greed positions which shall come here at the right time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we do it in this way? Should we still go into debate or should we deal with the figures? Have the figures been harmonised?

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we act on behalf of many other people. Some of the positions that we have agreed on, requires the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to commit itself to this Parliament. It is not just a question of figures. Some of them are working completely outside the law and we do not want this impunity to continue. We need to go through those six or seven issues where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to commit itself, it commits itself and then we go to the figures.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready with those seven issues so that the minister can make a statement on them so that we find a way of proceeding?

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we are ready with those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, are you okay and we receive this so that we deal with the figures?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yeah, we did agree in principle on the issues and unfortunately, it is not in writing. We had a very short meeting within which we agreed on the issues. I believe he has a presentation which he will make on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are in very difficult times. Let us try to make adjustments that can make us move as long as Members can move together. Can we hear the seven issues from hon. Muwanga Kivumbi?

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the first issue is on reallocation or suppression. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development intends to reallocate Shs 275,890,000. As it is required by law, the ministry did not receive consent from the various agencies for which they were supposed to suppress their budget. It is a requirement of the law. By extension that value becomes illegal. However, we are fully aware and I would like to explain to Members, that the money that requires prior approval of Parliament is Shs 446 billion. If we are to stick to the letter of the law, we would knock off Shs 275 billion that would greatly compromise the functioning of Government. (Injection) I am giving you facts as they are. 

Mr Speaker, you were in this very chair when the minister in charge of finance, apologised that no more reallocation and suppression would take place without approval of the consenting agencies. However, this has continued in this financial year and that is why together with the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, we agreed that moving forward, Parliament needs to pronounce itself and minister to commit itself. However, going forward, we need to put a marker that never again should we entertain a supplementary that suppresses. With me here, Mr Speaker, I have a list of the agencies whose budget have been suppressed and money stayed at the centre. They are at the core of service delivery for example, local government, education and health; things that touch the common man and their money have remained at the centre and it is the same money that they allocate and give to the incentives.

As Parliament, we cannot go forward with this kind of behaviour by the minister. First, it is illegal and second, it is breaching impunity. Therefore, the ministry needs to pronounce itself that they are not going to continue. Failure to do so, we should discipline them today by not giving them the money.

The other issue concerns domestic arrears in State House and it is very simple. There was an item that required Shs 6 billion which was termed “classified” but only one was classified. We have agreed with the chairperson of the committee that the five that are not classified should be treated like so and it is very easy to handle. The other one is on Atiak. Mr Speaker, we agreed that there is need to support Atiak. However, as we speak right now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has only Shs 19.8 billion worth of certificates of our stake. A pending Shs 64 billion that should have been converted to shareholding is outstanding. We, therefore, want to do the following:

    1. To ask the ministry to give Uganda Development Corporation UDC a vote of its own so that UDC can follow our stake in Atiak. Failure to do so – it cannot survive because of the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and you know what it normally does. Once its money is with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have issues. We are passing this money on condition that they give a vote to UDC so that it can be an agency of Government that follows up on this item. Failure to do so, we are not approving. 

On petroleum, there were issues but we agreed that being a critical agency, we need to support our petroleum products. We shall carry forward with it. But again, these issues are normally foreseeable and avoidable and should not be repeated.

Vaccine for foot and mouth disease; we have said Shs 3 billion is a lot of money and it should be postponed to the next budget.

On the Presidential Initiative on Bananas, we are deferring approval of the expenditure of the Shs 3.5 billion, until the sectoral committee of Parliament concerned is satisfied on whether there is value for money and Parliament should continue to fund that agency.

We agreed on Steel and Tube which was queried; that Shs 1.5 billion be given to Steel and Tube for drainage because it affects a number of factories.

On unauthorised expenditures to support supplementary budget, we only need a question, Mr Speaker. Part of this money went to fund the NRM Caucus meeting in Kyankwanzi. We are strongly advising that the Fountain of Honour should separate his chairmanship of NRM and his being the President of the Republic of Uganda. If he wants to fund his NRM activities, they should be divorced from our budget. He is entitled as the chairman of NRM to caucus and to pass all manner of resolutions; we do not care. 

However, our strong opinion is that it should be separated from the Office of the President. And, therefore, these expenditures like funding Kyankwanzi NRM Caucus meetings should not feature in our Budget because those are partisan events that he is entitled to as a chairman of NRM. But as President of the Republic of Uganda – and you were hesitant, Mr Speaker, to bring the presidency into this kind of debate.

The Office of the President should not be brought into these matters. It is so honourable an office yet it continues to be a subject of petitions, of supplementary – you are making the Head of State look extremely ugly. 

Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in one go should estimate the money that the Office of the President would require and put it in the Budget. It looks bad to come asking for supplementary for State House and the Head of State.

Those were the issues we agreed upon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were seven issues. I see that you have not written any. (Laughter) I, however, know your brain is sharp and you have all the seven issues. Please deal with them, honourable minister.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I will basically concentrate on one. (Interjection) No, I heard all of them. I will focus on the one about Atiak Sugar Works.

Mr Speaker, this is an entrepreneur who started a very noble project and somewhere she got stuck. This project is aimed at helping our people in the Acholi Sub-region – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister I need you to help me. There were issues that they raised that require your undertaking so that it can pave way for our handling of this supplementary. Let me read them for you again;

    1. The issue of re-allocation and suppression without consent of the agencies that held the money or to whom that money had initially been appropriated by Parliament.
    2. Issues of domestic arrears amounting to Shs 6 billion. 
    3. The issue of Atiak. They are only saying that the shareholding of UDC should correspond to its contribution and that you create a vote for UDC to be able to oversee this instead of always taking money from finance. 
    4. The petroleum issues.
    5. Foot and mouth disease and expenditures associated with it.
    6. The Presidential Initiative on Bananas. That that should be stayed until the sectoral committee has looked at it first and advised Parliament whether to approve it or not. 
    7. Unauthorised expenditures for the activities that the honourable member talked about.

We need your explanation to some of them and we need your undertaking in some of them that this will not happen again. Like you did last time, and apologised, but apparently the passage of time has changed a lot of things. So, you might want to deal with these things and see if Members will now be able to agree for us to move to the next step.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question of suppression of budgets in order to provide money for emerging priorities. This, Mr Speaker, is a normal practice. It has not been done for the first time. 

In budgeting, you might get somebody who has money and as we run through the budget implementation, you see that that sector or vote may not be able to absorb all the money – (Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the issues that have been raised are very specific and require very specific answers. I actually thought that you had schooled the finance minister properly. He has now abandoned the first issue he was addressing. Does the law allow you to suppress a budget without the consent of the agencies that are losing the money? That is what Parliament wants to hear, not to be taught how economics works.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is whether this Parliament is proceeding well to allow the minister read the theories he studied in economics classes when the issues that have been raised are issues that require specific legal answers for this Parliament to proceed with appropriation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when you use too many words, you open up too many things. Can you deal with the specific issues in a short time and we see how we move forward?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, my education taught me that before you answer a question, give a preamble so that people understand you. I am unable to stand here and simply say, “This is this”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, for now, that is what we want. (Laughter) So leave your traditional ways of handling things and deal with what Parliament wants now. Please.

MR KASAIJA: I will go with your ruling, Mr Speaker. You do not suppress, for sure, without consulting the vote. That is question number one. 

On question number two –(Interjections)- I will go according to my list, not yours, Mr Speaker -(Laughter) –


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, there has not been any violation of any order for now. Please, let us proceed. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: The second question was about foot and mouth disease. That is a very deadly disease for cattle and it is a priority.

The other question was on the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). PIBID is a research which is going on and it cannot wait.

On the Vote for Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), if we create a Vote for a parastatal - that is one way of promoting inefficiency because it will not be able to spend the money in accordance with the priorities.

On the Petroleum issues, Mr Speaker, I have taken note.

The last issue was about Atiak Sugar Factory. As I said, if you give them a Vote, you would be restricting their area of operation. Therefore, we prefer that we give them money through their parent ministries and the money would then be sent by the ministry to them. We can even ring-fence that money for them. They may wish to buy shares as we did in the case of Atiak Sugar Factory, but they may also wish to use some of that money for other budgetary expenses within their Vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, are you again going to reallocate and suppress without authorisation from the sectors that you are taking money from?

MR KASAIJA: We should not do that, Mr Speaker.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are in a country where a very big population is actually swimming in abject poverty. Therefore, when we do our work we have to try our best to do it well. On the issue of reallocation and suppression, the minister never gave those letters of consent to the Budget Committee to make them know that it is true that those agencies and ministries accepted. 

It is important for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to know that it is not the first time we are expressing disappointment and frustration. The ministry makes all of us in Parliament look ugly before Ugandans. 

When it comes to domestic arrears, there are certain things that the ministry can do more smartly than making those who studied commerce and accounting to look as us as very problematic to the people of Uganda. Look at this presidential initiative –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, what I am asking is, if you are dissatisfied with the minister’s response, can you deal with the arears of disagreements straight so that we finish this matter?

MS BETTY AOL: Yes, I have already raised the issue of reallocation and suppression. There is no evidence that these agencies and ministries consented. Can the minister give us the evidence?

Even for Atiak issue which he has agreed, it is important that we follow public resources and make sure that these resources go to do the right things and they also account to Government. If it is about shares, let it be put as shares to Government so that the Government will also be able to get some dividends to run the country. 

For all the seven areas raised by hon. Kivumbi, the minister has not satisfied some of us. We will go and sit but we will be looking ugly before the nation. We are all here to work on behalf of those people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were specific issues. Some of them went against the law, they were pointed out and the minister responded to them. Some of them were excesses - foreseeable things and they could not fall in that category but they have showed up this way. We asked Members who raised the minority view and the committee to have a meeting with the minister to see if they could harmonise them. 

For some of them, they had said, they wanted to remove them so that there has to be another way of looking at those figures later through another process. However, for the ones they have agreed upon – and I have confirmation from both sides that they have agreed on figures that can be supplied in this supplementary – can we move to that stage and confirm that the figures are okay and we supply them and we leave the others out?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have looked at the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I think if Parliament continues like this, it will breed impunity. For instance, we are tracking the stakes of Ugandans. We have so far invested Shs 122.7 billion in Atiak Sugar Factory, and that is taxpayers’ money. We are asking the minister to do small things like giving UDC a Vote because once it has a Vote as a fundamental factor, it will be able to do its own work and follow our stakes step by step. They still want to control UDC from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Once they do that, they will continue to give it money when they want and suppress it when they want. That huge investment arm of Government will never take off. That also includes our stakes in Uganda Airlines and others where we are investing billions of shillings. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has come here and said he will not. If Parliament follows that, we will be getting it wrong and setting a bad precedent. If the minister proves arrogant and does not want to do what we have asked him to do, Mr Speaker, we should hold on the money.

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I used to study prophecy. They say: “Future events cast their shadows before them.” You see what is going to happen from the shadows of what is happening now. If the minister is able to see the shadows, then he should be able to see that eventually something is going to happen in this House, one way or the other. I am not going to sit here and continue like this when we have other things to do.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The second issue that you should be clear on is the question of - (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you very much, my brother. We passed the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) Act, which empowers UDC to be the investment vehicle to handle investments that Government has interests in. In that Act, we suggested that UDC should be capitalised - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did we suggest or we passed a law?

MR OKOT OGONG: We passed it. That Act empowers Government to capitalise UDC as the development arm of Government by providing Shs 500 billion so that where Government has interests in any investment, Government will use that money. UDC will be taking care of the interests of Government and will second people in those investments. That is the information I wanted to provide to you. 

I agree with you that the investment in Atiak should be handed over to UDC so that UDC takes care of the interests of Government. As such, that Shs 127 billion should become part of the capitalisation of UDC. This is very simple mathematics.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the second issue, which the minister has already conceded - Honourable minister, when you take hard positions that are illegal, you force Parliament to take a very strong stand. We cannot continue passing budgets here and then the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development turns itself into another organ to appropriate. The way you are answering is driving us to that hard-line stance. Mr Speaker, that is encroaching on the cardinal powers of Parliament to appropriate. (Applause) We are actually being very kind to you to say we consent; we are just being civil. The naked reality is, you want to assume the powers of appropriation of this Parliament, which is a constitutional preserve of this House.

Mr Speaker, for us to fund agencies to come here through our sector budget, debate, spend days scrutinising and give agencies money and after two months, you come to Parliament and change everything - You are making this Parliament look stupid. 

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as you have guided before in this House, we work by building a common ground on how to handle difficult issues in the House. Last time when you adjourned, you directed that we have a meeting with the chairperson of the committee and the mover of the minority report. We actually had a meeting and agreed on a few issues.

As the minister has said regarding the issue of suppression, we agree that a few things have been happening. As you will recall, chairperson, we have been coming to the committee – As a requirement of the law, we had agreed, as the Executive, that when we meet in Cabinet and agree on something, we have agreed on behalf of the accounting officers but the committee had a different view. 

I think the position, which the minister has articulated, is that moving forward, we agree with the committee’s recommendation that if we are to suppress a Vote, we must have consent from that Vote. That is how we are going to move forward on this matter. I think it is not very difficult; that is something that we can do. 

Mr Speaker, I think we have moved many miles and it is not right that we go back to the hard-line, which hon. Kivumbi suggested.  We shall move forward and we are looking at those few issues, including the Vote of UDC, from a different perspective.

At the moment, the money for Atiak is managed by UDC. We have shares - (Interjections) What the committee is proposing is, instead of passing money through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we should have a separate Vote for UDC and send this money directly to UDC to be handled, which we are agreeable to now. Therefore, I think those two issues have been resolved. We can now move forward to the Committee Stage and handle this supplementary budget, which is very urgent. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we proceed? That is a commitment recorded. Chairperson of the committee, do you have a matter to raise?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes. Mr Speaker, we may need to adjust the figures because according to this, we have to remove money that we had originally included for supply on foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) and banana - Therefore, we have to remove that from supply and we need to be given a few minutes to adjust those figures.

Secondly, I mentioned that we sat this morning and we have generated a report on Addendum 5 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, we have already handled that debate.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I do not need to present that report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, we have handled that debate.

MR LUGOLOOBI: But there are figures, which we need to include in the supply, which figures were not there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those figures not in the figures you are going to supply? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: They are not there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when are you going to supply? Are you going to supply twice?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, you will recall that these schedules; addendums 5 and 6 came late, after the committee had considered what we had already. Therefore, we are presenting this report to add to what we already have so they are supplied separately. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this addendum had to be considered by the Committee on Budget. We sat this morning and agreed on a position. We have a minority report to present on addendums 5 and 6. That is the procedural matter that I would like to bring before the Floor of Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If my advice is anything to go by, we would have supplied once; we would have harmonised the figures and supplied once. It only makes sense to do that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I welcome your advice. We can proceed along those lines; I have no objection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give a summary of the report before we listen to the minority report? Various issues have already been accommodated and we can see what to alter.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, we received these two submissions on the 13th and 16th. The first one, Addendum 5, has a supplementary request of Shs 217,198,517,529. Addendum 6 has Shs 15 billion. 

In Addendum 5, the breakdown is as follows:

Addendum No. 5 has the following:

    1. State House Vote 002 

This vote is proposed to receive Shs 33,282,235,000. This figure is broken down as follows:
    i. Shs 15.7 billion for classified expenditure; and
    ii. Shs 17,582,235,000 for His Excellency, the President’s field operations including accommodation and feeding of the teams that are accompany him, fuel and other logistical expenditure by the President during the countrywide tours.
The committee recommends that the House approves the supplementary request of the Shs 33.2 billion to Vote 002 - State House and for classified expenditure, as indicated above.

    2.  Various Local Governments

A supplementary request of Shs 182,870,000,000 for various local governments was made. The committee was informed that the source of these funds is off-budget external finances from various donors. 

In addition, the committee was informed that these funds will facilitate tracking of the support to local governments to access the funding through the Integrated Financial Management System. The committee was further informed by the ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that these off-budget external resources are not part and parcel of the Consolidated Fund.

In this regard, Mr Speaker, this expenditure being off-budget, the House is requested to take note of it. However, this figure will not be included in the supplementary appropriation for financial year 2018/2019 because it is outside the Consolidated Fund.

    3. Muni University

The university is proposed to receive Shs 1,048,200,000. The committee recommends that the House approves this supplementary expenditure.

In Addendum No. 6, we have Mulago Hospital and the proposal is to allocate Shs 15 billion. They require this money to fund the ongoing rehabilitation works at the hospital. The committee recommends that the House approves this request for the ongoing rehabilitation works.

Mr Speaker, I was served with a copy of a minority report while I was seated here. It is signed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad and hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to briefly speak on this minority report?

3.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, we have quickly looked through. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid supplementary budgets in Addendum No. 5 and 6 of the Financial Year 2018/2019, for which Parliament’s approval is being sought. 

Pursuant to Rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby present a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Budget. The dissenting opinion was informed by:

    a) The legal frameworks of Uganda, particularly the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Public Finance Management Act; and
    b) The interaction with the two ministers responsible for finance. 

Areas of dissent are as follows:

The President’s countrywide delegates’ consultations
Approval is being sought, under State House, of Shs 17.6 billion for accommodation and feeding of the team that accompanies the President, fuel and other logistical expenditure on delegates to be met by the President during countrywide consultations.

The following issues should be noted:

    a) Whereas the President is the Fountain of Honour, as provided under Article 98 of the Constitution, the countrywide consultation of delegates with all intent and purpose is a representational or political activity. 

This is premised on the fact that a delegate is chosen to vote or make decisions on behalf of a group of other people. Hence, the expenditure is an attempt to circumvent scrutiny, in disguise of a noble national duty of promoting the wealth creation agenda. 

It should be noted that on all the recent visits undertaken by the President in Tooro, Bunyoro, West Nile and Lango, they concluded with the endorsement of sole candidature of the person of the President, which has nothing to do with other political parties –(Applause)– hence the consultation ought to be regulated and financed through the Political Parties and Organisations Act. We are happy to note that Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) is addressing this issue;

    b) Failure for State House to ensure that the President operates within the approved budget sets a bad precedence and image for our President. This is an indication that the veil of the Fountain of Honour is being removed. A Fountain of Honour ought to be characterised by good financial discipline that ought to be emulated; and 
    c) The intents are foreseeable and avoidable; hence they violate the Public Finance Management Regulations.

Mr Speaker, the minority report objects to the approval of Shs 17.6 billion. We advised that Government does not have to be shy. It is the responsibility of the President to move around and mobilise the population. I do not think the party would hesitate to facilitate the President on matters to do with party mobilisation and the country would facilitate the President on matters to do with national mobilisation.

Mr Speaker, I beg to inform you that on the source of funding, a question was posed to the minister on the last paragraph but he failed to answer those questions, hence we object to the approval of that one because Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has no explanation whatsoever in addition to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failing to provide an explanation for the request.

We beg to move, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will have this - you see, there are no principles to debate here. The principle is an expenditure already incurred. We are categorising them. If they fall within the three per cent, we pass them as supplementary. If they go beyond that, they need prior parliamentary approval. Anything beyond that will be held as lost and the people concerned will be held accountable under the law. That is the categorisation. 

We have been advised by the committee on these Addenda No. 5 and 6 and we have had objection from the committee. So, my initial advice was let us deal with the numbers together in one supply and finish with those. For now, let us have some consultation on the two brief reports. If the minister’s response is satisfactory, we might be able to proceed. Honourable minister?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Barbara Ogwal for the minority report. We had a discussion on this, Mr Speaker and we agreed, in principle, with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we had no difference as far as funding the field operations of the President is concerned. The only difference which the honourable member is bringing on the Floor is activities which are being funded.

His Excellency the President has organised regional meetings and activities on wealth creation. (Applause) That is the purpose for this expenditure. Now, when he goes into a region, he holds meetings with all Members of Parliament from all parties. He also meets ministers from that region. He meets the LC V Chairpersons of that region and the district councillors from the districts within that region. He also meets sub-county councillors from that region and the LC III Chairpersons. 

Now, the point of departure from the majority report by the minority report, which is raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is that during the meetings, there have been party members who come out and say, “Given that you are here, Mr President, we are asking you to stand in 2021”. The question is; how should we handle that? Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was saying, the President should be courageous and say, “Do not say that to me because I am on a national programme”. That is what we discussed in the committee. It is, however, very difficult for the President to control that.

Nevertheless, the point I am making is that this expenditure is supposed to finance and support all Members and leaders in that region irrespective of political parties. We want to invite the members of FDC, UPC and Jeema to come and attend those wealth creation meetings. In the meetings, you can choose to say, “Mr President, do not accept when you are called upon to be -” So, that is the expenditure we are talking about. I would like Members on both sides to support this expenditure because it is helping us mobilise our population, especially the 68.9 per cent who live in subsistence economy to get out of this trouble.

On the issue of the source of funding, it is going to come from – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily when reports are presented from the committee, as two reports have been presented, this House gives us an opportunity to raise issues that are later answered by the respective ministry. We now have a minister aggressively attacking one of the reports before the report has even been debated. The procedural issue I am raising is whether it would not be proper for us to first debate this report, either raise issues for the minister to answer or aggressively attack it when we are giving our views on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, that is what I said. I said let the minister respond to some of the issues. Maybe, it will help us not go into a deep debate but I had already opened the debate; the report had been presented and the minority opinion, too, had been presented. Those are the clarification points from the minister. Can we now deal with a brief debate on this matter? Honourable minister, had you concluded? 

MR BAHATI: The last point of departure was on the source of funding. It is not true that we failed to demonstrate where we are going to get the money to fund this supplementary expenditure. Mr Speaker, we are glad to inform you that the performance of URA for this financial year has been very good. As we speak now, we have a surplus of Shs 400 billion. It is through this surplus that we will support the supplementary expenditure. This is clear and it should be known to hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we have a short debate on this matter? 

4.04
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am hesitant to believe what the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) is saying. I hope he will take no offence because I know him as a born again Christian. I look at his face; one of my specialties is non-verbal communication - (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have seen the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities bedeck in bisanja (dry banana leaves) at his tours for which this country must pay Shs 17 billion. We can pretend but the sole candidate is campaigning and he wants to use public resources to go and campaign. Really, this would be a monkey deciding the fate of a forest because I can see people who sat and resolved that there should be a sole candidate in the country – (Interruption) – Now, which order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can now see the First Deputy Prime Minister of the Opposition side as well. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are discussing one report, which has a minority report on issues of figures. Is hon. Ssemujju in order to say that the sole candidate is campaigning when other parties - even the one they are going to launch tomorrow; they said they are going to campaign also for the presidency - yet we do not have any sole candidate? Is he in order to discuss that here? Is he in order to say sole candidate? From where? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have just said that there is a sole candidate. You have also said that there are other candidates going to campaign tomorrow. Therefore, what is out of order?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with very serious matters and colleagues have a reason to - In this Budget that this Parliament is about to pass, presidential donations are moving from Shs 80 billion to Shs 200 billion. The heart institute in Mulago wants Shs 256 billion - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Ssemujju, for allowing me to give him this information. For the last two weeks, His Excellency, the President has been in West Nile. He was first in Koboko to commission the interconnectivity for Internet services and a water source for –(Interjection)- yes. That was the official invitation we received as Members of Parliament from that sub-region.

When we went there, the information I would like to share with you is that there were more than 32 yellow buses which usually park in the next building, which were ferrying people right from Pakwach up to Adjumani. Yellow colour was everywhere; the function ceased to be a national function and it became an NRM function.

Last Saturday, His Excellency was again in Nebbi meeting all the LC III chairpersons and councillors and they were given a minimum of Shs 200,000 each. On Sunday, His Excellency again was in Arua Municipality; again Lorries were sent with buses to ferry people. Were those resources used not from the Government coffers? Is that the way we are going to abuse this institution and appropriate money for abuse? That is the information I wanted to give you, hon. Ssemujju.

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you very much, my colleague for that information. Mr Speaker, presidential donations are from Shs 80 billion to Shs 200 billion; that money is not enough. We are now providing money for tours. State House Budget alone, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter in regards to the addendums that have been presented to this House in relation to the Budget. These particular two issues were referred here after debate. 

I would like to seek your guidance in regards to our proceedings here in the House. We are debating about the wealth creation addendum that was presented and well intentioned. There have been justifications on both sides. I would like to ask whether we are procedurally moving well if we are, instead of debating what has been presented in terms of whether we okay it in our 2019/2020 financial year or we defer it or remove it from our budgetary allocation.

Mr Speaker, are we procedurally moving well to focus a debate of this House on the President of the country not knowing that the same President is also a chairman of a ruling party, which is guiding the mandate and the running of this country? Are we procedurally moving well to focus on the President, knowing that this Operation Wealth Creation programme is for all the people despite the President’s being the chairperson of the ruling party and he can be welcomed by anybody in any region while he is doing Government work?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why to some of the points of orders and procedural matters, I am doing my best not to hear some of them. A report has been presented to Parliament on addendum five and six. There have been objections from the minority report on two items of the presidency countrywide campaign on wealth creation of Shs 17.6 billion and the money going to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) which is about Shs 100 billion. These were the objections.

Therefore, if you come to ask the Speaker whether we are proceeding properly to debate these matters, are you, yourself proceeding properly to ask me? (Laughter) That is the matter before us, what else can we debate except the matter before us?

Honourable members, please, I am here and I observe violations of order and procedural irregularities. I am the master for now. Therefore, if you have your procedural matter or any point of order, please keep it to yourself for now; let us listen to this debate.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I was articulating before - maybe we may even need to consider changing our rules because I have seen here a colleague who is hitting the seat but let me not be diverted - Shs 80 billion to Shs 200 billion donation. The President is becoming the most expensive leader not only in the region but in the world, of a poor country.

Our debt now is nearly about $ 14 billion including domestic. We are a country that is borrowing to do everything including very simple things. Then from where you go to borrow money, they hear you have a President who has donations worth Shs 200 billion as money to go and tour yet you have a cancer institute in Mulago now - Uganda Heart Institute is accommodated in Uganda Cancer Institute.

You have teachers striking and you have a President donating Shs 200 billion and tours worth Shs 17 billion. State House budget in the last three to four years has moved from about Shs 80 billion to now Shs 400 billion. What does it do? And colleagues are clapping that the President is handing out envelopes without medicine in the hospitals but there are envelopes at every function of the President.

We went, as a Committee on National Economy, to Soroti; we arrived when a mother had just died because the hospital did not have Switchers and I am told they are gloves that will cost Shs 20,000. The regional referral hospital cannot operate.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I concur with the minority view expressed-maybe there are people who do not like the President because if he was the chairman of my party I would not allow him to be painted this way but maybe there are people who do not like him.

I have told professional colleagues who work with the President to tell him to be aware of fortune hunters because they do not care. You have a President masked in all these billions.

Mr Speaker, I would like to invite colleagues to support the minority view on this matter-the whole idea of supplementary is being abused; ordinarily, a supplementary was supposed to deal with unforeseen-but now we are funding “bisanja” trips and NRM yellow buses to carry people and that is the reason that we must pass a supplementary. Thank you, very much.

4.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for having brought out her views-I have been thinking about the incumbent syndrome. 

We see incumbent leaders holding different portfolios like members of Parliament, LCV Chairpersons who are interested in contesting again, but continue using their offices willingly or unwillingly. 

You see a former commissioner of Parliament, hon. Cecilia Ogwal visiting her constituents in a Commission car because she is entitled. Whether she would like to contest again or not she is a Commissioner who is supposed to enjoy the office. 

You see ministers who are holding constituencies playing double roles. You are a minister, a Member of Parliament; the time for campaign is not yet on but your campaigners are always alert. Whenever they see you, they say continue but you are driving in a Government car. 

There is a problem of incumbent syndrome what can the head of state who is the chairman of the ruling party; implementing the manifesto do if he chooses to tour the country and he meets leaders demanding for what he promised in the manifesto.

I have received reminders from both the Opposition, who are represented in their constituencies, minding very well that in their constituencies, there are those who support NRM and those who do not support it; however, their role is to remind the ruling party to fulfil what they promised.

This is a problem, which we must find solution for - incumbents still holding offices but at the same time vying to contest again.

I would not like to pretend that I the Government Chief Whip, will park the Government car and go to Kiboga in my own car because if I go there, then people might say, “continue serving”; if they urge me to contest and I agree, then I would campaign using a Government car.

If I happen to give water or transport to the constituents who attend my meetings, then it will be said that I am bribing them.

You are talking about the President, but you are also indicating it to yourselves because you do it, I would like to call upon colleagues-we should sit down and find a way of curbing unnecessary expenses; but to say that the President will not tour - if there are supporters who have seen him for the first time ever since they voted for him, they will definitely remind him of what he promised them; if we think otherwise, then we will be deceiving ourselves.

I call upon you colleagues to throw out the minority report and support the majority report so that we can support the President to fulfil what he promised this country - (Interjections)- I do not need information, I would like to end by thanking the honourable Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, yes, Leader of the Opposition.

4.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About two weeks ago, the population of Gulu District wanted to beat some of us their leaders for not caring about them. Right now, our focus is mainly on our egoism. 

If we stand here and continue to ignore them and give money to the President, and he goes with 30-40 vehicles plus a plane to a very poor population –(Interjections)- yes, he is the President, but I wish he was President of people who are able to meet three meals a day. Instead, he is President to the people of Uganda who sometimes take one meal a day. They cannot even afford paying for their medical bills; instead of prioritising health and education - I am a teacher, today teachers are on strike about their salaries.

There is need for all of us to reflect, the Shs 17 billion is not in order. Why should we give it for allowances for His Excellency to tour the country when we have always given State House and the Presidency a budget which is higher than agriculture. 

I feel pain that a poor country like Uganda - of course Uganda is not poor, but we have very selfish people who think about themselves only. Let us think about the people who sent us here to work. If we think about the people who sent us here, then we are not going to support that Shs 17 billion to the President.

Somebody said that other people are also campaigning, who of them has come here to ask for a campaign budget? Even for those people who are going on their own, there is still a lot of challenges to them. Is this how we should promote peace in our country, we have just been launching the International Association of Parliamentarians for Peace in Uganda. I do not think that the people who are – When they are campaigning, they never send budgets here. Why should we budget for our President? If he is there as the Chairperson of National Resistance Movement (NRM), he should get his budget from there and not from Parliament. We are saying, “No” to that.

However, because we are a minority and this is a minority report, you may win but we know that we will be winning in God because we are doing so for the poor. You are winning for yourselves; for rich selfish people. Thank you. 

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Mr Speaker, can the Leader of the Opposition stop quarrelling? Mr Speaker, can I be protected from a quarrelsome Leader of the Opposition? (Interjections)

Mr Speaker, I was with the President in Toro and Bunyoro regions and I witnessed what happens during these tours. First of all, like hon. Bahati outlined, the President has invited several leaders, including civil servants, heads of departments, district health officers, chief administrative officers and education officers so it is a meeting of about 2000 people. 

After the meeting, the President commissions some of the projects, which have been undertaken by Government. Particularly, he commissions work done under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development namely, commissioning of municipality roads, which have been constructed because these meetings are mainly held in municipalities. He also holds a rally in one of the districts and addresses the population through a radio programme. 

His message is very clear. Because he is concerned about the welfare of Ugandans, he focuses on how to lift the population out of poverty. That is his major message to the population and it is well received.

Therefore, it is not true that the President has gone on a campaign tour. In any case, technically speaking, there is no candidate because the Electoral Commission has not nominated anybody to stand for any office. Therefore, anybody saying that there is a candidate campaigning is not correct.

We should also weigh; do we need a president who sits in State House all the time or one who has been given the mandate by the people to traverse the countryside, appreciate the challenges and explain Government programmes? More so, in this case, he is educating the population on how they can get out of poverty. His major message is, he calls leaders and says, “You are the priests who should go on the ground to educate the masses on what kind of intervention they can engage in, in order to get out poverty.” That is his major message and I am sure you know that if President Museveni is going to the countryside as the Chairman of NRM, he puts on a yellow shirt. However, when he is there as President, he does not.

Therefore, it is not an activity of the party of NRM but that of Government and leaders of other political parties have been attending. I was in Fort Portal and Bunyoro and there were leaders who represent the Opposition and the Independents.

Mr Speaker, it is true that when we were in Fort Portal and the meeting had ended, some enthusiastic supporters expressed confidence in the President, which they do to all of us. On Sunday, I attended a wedding in Kirima sub-county, Kanungu and when I arrived, there was a huge chorus that they want me to continue being their Member of Parliament. I just said, “Thank you very much for expressing the confidence.” 

The same happened to hon. Wadri when we were in Arua recently with the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali. We were commissioning a road in his municipality and when he was invited to speak, he got a rousing welcome from his supporters cheering that he should continue being their Member of Parliament. Therefore, I am sure it is common to all of us who have elected positions that our supporters are happy when we are in the countryside. I just wanted to clarify that the President is not touring as chairperson of the party or as a candidate. He is going on his mandate as a President and his message is on wealth creation. He outlines the several ways that Ugandans can engage in production in order to lift themselves out of poverty.

Therefore, I would like to urge Parliament to leave our partisan politics aside – (Interruption) – No, I am very well informed. Hold on and allow me to make my point.

My plea is, I know that we could be ideologically divided in terms of our political party affiliation but we should look at each case on its own merit. The President is mobilising Ugandans for wealth creation, irrespective of the political parties that Ugandans belong to. Therefore - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Dr Baryomunsi. We accept that His Excellency the President should go out to mobilise but he must be aware of the state of economy of this country. How I wish that he could borrow a leaf from His Excellency Pombe Magufuli of Tanzania who travels to meet people with simple means of transport but still reaches the people.

Therefore, the issue is not that His Excellency the President should not move but that when he does so, he must exercise some thriftiness on the usage of resources. That is our cry. It is not that he should always remain in State House but he should be conscious of the fact that this is a poor country and therefore not be extravagant. That is what we are saying. (Applause)

DR BARYOMUNSI: If I knew that was the information you wanted to give, I would have declined it because Tanzania is not Uganda. The President of Uganda understands the conditions Ugandans live in very well. That is why he goes into the trenches to speak about wealth creation; how Ugandans can get out of poverty and all of them become wealthy. He advises people on how to manage land and so on.

Therefore, the President’s message is right and the population appreciates his messages wherever he goes. I would like to urge my colleagues; members of Parliament, that let us leave partisan politics aside and support this noble cause of a President going to mobilise the population, more so with a message, which all of us are giving as members of Parliament that we should work together and work very hard for the population to be uplifted out of poverty. It is a correct message, which all of us should support.

We shall handle campaigns and politicking later but let us not put it in this debate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I am listening to the debate and I am asking myself, how did we get here? (Laughter) Even the minority report did not say this. They only said, they have no objection to the money being given to the President but the activities seem to be fused. They asked, can the activities be separated? I thought that was what the minority said. Therefore, why are we doing the things we are doing? Why do we like side roads when there are main roads?  Maybe hon. Cecilia Ogwal should explain what she meant.

4.36
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I feel just like you - I do not know how we have arrived here. (Laughter) However, I have been forced to learn things, which I was not interested learning.

Anyhow, our concern, Mr Speaker, is that while the President is outside there, he should be mindful of the fact that he has carried the status of the President of the Republic of Uganda that embraces all parties equally. Therefore, on that, we have a budget and nobody contests that budget.

However, what I am pleading with those that design the President’s programme outside there about is that they should try to demarcate and/or differentiate the programme that is specifically for NRM and the programme for the country. I think that is what we are concerned about.

I would like to advise - last year when I personally attended the Women Day celebration in Mityana, I pleaded with the Minister in Charge of the Presidency and the Members of Parliament that I would want to attend but that for heaven’s sake, I would feel very sick to hear the enchantments. I told them that I would want instead to hear nationalistic spirit that praises a woman; the gains of the women. I was very happy with the programme - I wish the woman member was here - I was very nationalistic. They focused on women issues and I would want to attend women celebrations when celebrated in that spirit.

Likewise, when the President comes to Dokolo or goes to Tooro, as it has been disclosed to us, let him focus on national issues. It is up to the President to say, as he told us in State House, that when people are here on national matters or to pray to God, please do not bring this enchantment of the President, the sole candidate; he said it himself. 

Therefore, I would like to re-echo the President’s voice although he is not here, that while he is in Oyam, Dokolo or Tooro, please do not bring in issues of sole candidature; they are not relevant. (Laughter) Talk about road construction, the suffering of the women, the youth programmes; that is what we want to hear but not the issue of sole candidature. 

In addition, some people want to take advantage of the President being in their areas to sneak in their local issues. This is what we should try to protect the President from.

Therefore, really, when we say the President is the Fountain of Honour, it is both my and your responsibility to protect his image and not to make the President look very dirty, which is a fact. 

Therefore, I am trying to advise you especially my sister, the Government Chief Whip to try to help the President to clean his image so that wherever he is, he focuses on national matters and leaves this issue of sole candidature to the NRM to handle. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think being a President is very difficult. First, you have the burden of the office and then you have the people to deal with. I remember as a young boy, they would bring us to dance bwoola as children bapece. Each time the President got up to speak, he would do - Ah! Ah! – in gesture to follow the bwoola dance tune. So, it is so difficult to differentiate these things. (Laughter) I am telling you, honestly. 

And when he did that, the whole audience - it couldn’t matter whether it was Dr Mulozi or Zachary Olum, they would just start and the whole place just turns – so, I think being a President is every tricky thing. Therefore, we might need to abandon that line because sometime it might not even be the President but people just break out.

Therefore, let us streamline the issues. There is no objection to this expenditure - yes, at least from the minority report; the one I have heard being read to the House. 
The issue is that the Members who are not part of the NRM get very offended when this happens yet they have also been invited. Therefore, maybe it is the management issue of how you manage the event, the masters of ceremonies and how they manage rather than expenditure. 

I am saying this because that was not part of hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s objection points; that the money should not be spent. Her objection was that the activities are fused. People who are not NRM do not feel comfortable yet this is - please, I listened to the minority report. If you did not listen, read it. What you are saying is not what the minority report says. Therefore, read it first, then you qualify to speak on this matter.

Therefore, how do we manage these events so that people do not get offended after being invited? That is the issue. The money is for all of us, now you call us for food, only to begin to serve the people wearing a certain colour of dress. That is what is offensive according to the minority report. (Laughter) That means all the other issues are not part of the debate. 
Therefore, can we move ahead with this, honourable members? With the issues of meeting management, the masters of ceremonies - just out of courtesy you do not invite guests and be rude to them; it is bad manners. (Laughter)

4.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker. I will work with the organizers of these tours and make sure that written invitations are forwarded to all the Members of Parliament. I know that they have been sending messages but I have heard that some colleagues have not been receiving invitations. That is one.

Secondly, where we have the Member of Parliament, whether Opposition or not, they should be recognised and offered a seat in a proper position next to the President - (Interjection) - because this is the top most recognition when you are ushered in the yellow tent of the President. As to whether - (Interjection) - may I be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am speaking on behalf of Government and I will make sure that I carry the concerns from this Parliament - you called upon us to make sure we harmonise to reduce on the discomfort of our colleagues. I think this one can be worked on. I only request colleagues that when they are invited, they please turn up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Clerk, can you call the item on Committee of Supply?

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, from here, we will proceed to Committee of Supply but the figures - the minority and the majority report writers are still being working on them. Once the figures come, we will proceed to supply. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INQUIRE INTO LAND WRANGLES IN BUKOBA VILLAGE, NALUTUNTU PARISH, NALUTUNTU SUB COUNTY, KASSANDA SOUTH CONSTITUENCY

4.46
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to inquire into land wrangles in Bukoba Village, Nalutuntu Parish, Nalutuntu Sub County in Kassanda South Constituency. It is moved under Rule 855 and Rule 186 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

WHEREAS Article 237 (1) of the 1995 Constitution provides that land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure system of either customary, freehold, mailo or leasehold; 

WHEREAS by a letter dated 1 September, 1956, Captain Church Hill, acting on behalf of the then colonial Government gave land situated at Bukoba Village, Nalutuntu Parish, Nalutuntu Sub County in Kassanda District (measuring approximately 12 square miles) to the war veterans of the first and second world war, who took possession of the said land that same year and occupied it until 2006; 

AND WHEREAS in the year 1996, Hajji Abbas Kajoba Mawanda took the veterans to Mityana Magistrate Court challenging their ownership of the said land and in the year 2000, the court ruled in favour of the ex-servicemen, one year after court judgements, the said Hajji Abbas Kajoba Mawanda sold and transferred his interests to one Abid Alam of Lake Wamala Farm and later Mityana Farm Enterprise Limited; 

AND WHEREAS in the year 2006, the veterans were evicted by one Abid Alam purporting to be the owner of the said land; 
AWARE that on 15 March 2010, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda instituted a commission of inquiry headed by hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa referred to as the “Muruli Mukasa Commission” to inquire into the issues surrounding this land; 

FURTHER AWARE that on 3 November 2015, His Excellency the President issued a Presidential Directive directing all persons, who had been evicted by Mr Abid Alam, to be reinstated on the said land at Bukoba Village until the President forms a commission of inquiry to investigate this matter; 

FURTHER AWARE that on 8 December 2016, by Legal Notice No. 2 of 2017, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda set up a commission of inquiry into the effectiveness of laws, policies and process of land acquisition, administration, management and registration in Uganda as amended; 

SADDENED BY THE FACT that when Mr Abid Alam obtained possession of the said land, he embarked on expansion of his land using fraudulent, brutal and violence means, leading to massive eviction of about six villages, outside the said land, without adequate compensation and in some cases no compensation at all; 

FURTHER SADDENED BY THE FACT that this matter had been litigated upon and was resolved in favour of the applicants, who are the descendants of the First and Second World War veterans, however to date, the applicants are not in possession of their land; 

CONCERNED that several land transactions have taken place on this land, where individuals have sold their interests to different persons and at the same time, the Mubende District Land Board has allocated the same pieces of land to different individuals without ascertaining the ownership of these pieces of land. This has resulted into several people claiming ownership to the same piece of land; 

FURTHER CONCERNED that the issue surrounding the land has been brought to the attention of the Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness of law, policies and processes of land acquisition, administration, management and registration in Uganda established under Legal Notice No. 2 of 2017 as amended; however the guidance and orders given by the commission of inquiry have not been adhered to by Mr Abid Alam and as such, the massive evictions have continued and in addition, the report to the Commission of hon. Wilson Muruli-Mukasa has not been published to date; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that:
 
    1. A select committee be instituted by Parliament to inquire into the land issues in Bukoba Village, Nalutuntu Parish, Nalutuntu Sub County in Kassanda South Constituency. 
    2. The report of the Commission of Inquiry headed by hon. Muruli Mukasa be published. 
    3. The orders of the Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness of law, policies and process of land acquisition, administration, management and registration in Uganda established under Legal Notice No. 2 of 2017, as amended, be adhered to by all parties concerned in this matter. 
    4. The Government of Uganda orders the settlement of the people who were evicted recently by Abid Alam and his agents and gives relief aid to the victims. 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by members from Lugazi Municipality, Nakaseke South, Busia Municipality, Kiboga East, Gomba East and Tororo. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion? It is a very long motion and you need to give members time to debate it so summarise your intervention. 

MR NSUBUGA: Yes. Thank you, Sir, once again for this opportunity. As I have already indicated, this matter has been going on almost for the last 20 years. We are very grateful for this opportunity that even the affected victims are just up there in the gallery to witness me presenting their motion in this House. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would like to summarise this issue in terms of periods. Between 1956 up to 1980, people were peacefully settled in that area. Between 1980 and 1986 due to the war insurgency which was going on in that area, as you aware we are part of Luweero Triangle. These ex–servicemen left the place due to the insurgency. Between 1987 and 1996, after the war, the Government embarked on the programme to bring them back to their land. This programme was spearheaded by the then Resident District Commissioner, the late Zerida Rwabusagara. All the ex-servicemen were picked from different parts of the country, especially in greater Mubende; Mityana, Kiboga, Mubende and Kassanda districts and they people were taken back to their land.

Around 1996, Abbas Kajoba Mawanda came up and claimed the ownership of the land. He said: “This land belongs to me.” He further went ahead and took these people to court. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to lay at the Table these court documents; that in 1996 under civil suit NO. 2 of 1996 in Mityana Magistrate Court, Abbas Kajoba Mawanda took these ex-servicemen to court. The case went on for three years without him appearing before court or his lawyers and the case was dismissed. I have all the records with me here and I would like to lay at the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those court records.

MR SIMEO: Between 2000 and 2010, after the case had been dismissed, Mr Abid Alam surfaced and claimed the ownership of the land. He embarked on what we call violent eviction exercise, where some people lost their lives. It was very violent to the extent that one of the local leaders of Bukoba village who was the vice chairman by names of Davis Ssenyama was allegedly killed by the agents of Abid Alam. Among the people who are in the gallery there, are some of the relatives of the late Ssenyama. In that same period, the late Mwanje and his wife were also killed during the eviction process.

The matter went on until 2010 when some of the leaders in that area, petitioned the President and explained to him what was happening in that area. Due to that petition, I wish to lay at the Table the copy of the petition marked C. Mr Speaker, due to that petition, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, on 15 March 2010, visited the locus and addressed the rally at Kyanamugera Primary School near this contested area. He listened to people’s grievances and he constituted what we refer to as hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa Commission. It was a presidential commission led by hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa with its membership like Frola Kiconco who is the legal officer in State house. There was one called Muwonge and Willy Odongoping who was a Police Commissioner.
 
The Commission of Inquiry was given five terms of reference to carry out:

    1. To verify whether the complainants really had land/bibanja in Bukoba and surrounding villages.
    2. To verify the acreage and lost property during evictions.
    3. To verify whether they were forcefully or violently evicted.
    4. To verify whether the evidence of torture, abuse, murder, rape and theft was applied in the process of forceful evictions.
    5. To estimate the value of loss incurred and then report back to the President within three weeks.           

Mr Speaker, the commission went on for four months and completed its work but up-to-date, the victims have not known the findings of the report. Between 2010 and 2019, the following events have happened on that land. The bibanja holders were not satisfied with the report of Muruli Mukasa Commission and actions of the commission on the ground, they again petitioned the President. As a result of that, on 3 November 2015, the President sent his former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya to Bukoba village. He delivered the message to the people and it was very clear. He told them that the President has sent me here to address you in four categories:

    1. Those bibanja holders who were evicted and were not paid any money.

    2. Those bibanja who were paid less than Shs 1 million. Mr Speaker, this matter was very interesting. Among those people seated up there, one had 20 acres of Kibanja but in 2007, he was compensated with Shs 100,000. The evidence is there and if you give us an opportunity, we shall present it.

    3. Those who had more than one Kibanja. He either had two or three of them but he was compensated for only one Kibanja and the three were taken away at no cost.

    4. The land which belonged to the religious institutions like the Catholic Church, Church of Uganda, born again churches and the mosques should be returned back immediately. As I have mentioned all the four categories, Prof. Bukenya told them that: “On behalf of the President, the President has told me to tell you to go back on your land. We are approaching the general elections in 2016 and after the elections, the President has assured me that he is going to form Commission of Inquiry to investigate this matter and report back to him.” This was in 2015.

On 8 December 2016, His Excellency fulfilled what Prof. Bukenya had promised the people of Bukoba by forming a Commission of Inquiry into the effectiveness of land, policies and process of land acquisition, administration, management and registration under Uganda Legal Notice No. 2 of 2017. After the establishment of the commission of inquiry commonly known as Bamugemereire Commission, on 11 September 2017, the commission visited Bukoba and they spent the whole day listening to people’s grievances.

When the commission came back, they conducted several public hearings where Mr Abid Alam who is a key factor in this matter, appeared four times before the commission to explain this issue. During those appearances, the commission issued guidelines to both parties; Mr Abid Alam and bibanja holders to maintain the status quo dated as 19 March 2018. This was the order which the commission issued telling the parties to maintain the statues quo until the matter is resolved by the commission. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to lay this at the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SIMEO: During the hearing process, the Commission advised these people to go into negotiations process. Negotiations went on for some time and several meetings were held. The commission advised Mr Abid Alam that what he called “compensation” legally was not compensation. They told him that he never compensated these people and should accept that out of the 12 square miles, he should give them two square miles so that they can settle in one place and then utilise the remaining 10 square miles.

As the area MP, I was advised to be a go-between for both parties, to bring them on board and in commission and to be there when the mediation meetings were going on. The bibanja holders accepted two square miles and they put everything in writing. A copy of that letter is here. I wish to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR NSUBUGA: We moved one step further. The commissioner advised both parties to bring their surveyors to go on ground to open boundaries for the 12 square miles and after doing that, to identify where the two square miles for these people will be. 

A letter was written by the commission instructing both parties to select their surveyors and a day was set to go on ground. The commission went ahead to even provide the cost of surveying. I have a copy of the letter here. The day was set and we went on ground. The commission sent its surveyors, the bibanja holders sent their surveyor but on that day, Mr Abid Alam never produced a surveyor. At that moment, the mediation process stopped. 

On Tuesday, 30 April 2017, Mr Abid Alam and one of his agents, Mr Hussein Kavuma with other agents numbering about 100, with two graders, without a court order, raided Bukoba Village and  demolished about 100 houses. The whole village was destroyed completely. Within the 100 houses, were churches, a catholic church was destroyed, Church of Uganda was destroyed, a Pentecostal church was destroyed, and SDA church and a mosque were demolished.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I have the pictures of the churches that were destroyed here. I wish to lay them on Table. These are the graders demolishing the church. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: what is the registration number on the grader?

MR NSUBUGA: The number plate is not very clear, but there is the word CAT. This is another grader. They are yellow in colour (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were the number plates removed or they are there but not visible?

MR NSUBUGA: If you look at the angle from which the picture was taken, you cannot see the number plate but you can see that this is a grader.

As I am winding up, these are some of the pictures. I personally went to the venue to see the destruction that these people had caused. 

Further to that, on the same day, 30 April 2019, the commission had issued a directive ordering the RDC and the DPC of the area to stop any demolition by Mr Abid Alam and Hussein Kavuma, but this demolition continued. In other words, they never complied with the directive. I have a copy of that order here marked “g”. I wish to lay it on Table.

In summary, Mr Speaker, some of the people you see in that gallery are victims of what has been going on. Some have been beaten. For example this is a photograph of a gentleman that was beaten last evening when he attempted to pass through Bukoba village. There are roads that go through the village where people were evicted. You can move from Kakungube Kyanamugera Kisaana through Bukoba to Kyabayima. 

This one was tortured last evening. These ones were tortured during the demolition. I wish to lay on Table all these pictures. All these pictures are evidence to prove that torture has been going on. Those people have wounds. This is a picture of the Pentecostal church before it was destroyed. The pastor who has been running the church is up there in the gallery.

This matter has been going on. Those people have been in every government office apart from this House. That is why as their representative, I decided to come before this House to request for a select committee on this matter so that the Parliament can pronounce itself and direct Government on what to do.

Mr Speaker, you have to appreciate that Kassanda South is a very unique constituency as far as land eviction is concerned. From 2001 up to 2015, people were evicted from 17 villages. I can take you around and we count from one to 17. These people told me when they were sending me to Parliament to ensure that there is no more eviction in their constituency.

I remember, Mr Speaker, you were in that Chair in February this year, when I introduced a motion on this Floor to make an amendment in the land act to ensure that ground rent or busuulu should paid to the sub county because the landlords have refused the money. That is why they continue evicting people. 

On the same note, in the three years I have been in this House, I have intervened and caused cancellation with the support of the minister – I have to thank her, she and her technical people have supported me – of five land titles in my constituency that were issued fraudulently. In terms of square miles, there are about 30 square miles. They have been cancelled and the ministry has told people to go ahead and apply for the land because it belongs to them. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Simeo Nsubuga. You used up all the time for Members to debate. I will take secondment from hon. Luttamaguzi and hon. Kasozi of Lugazi Municipality.

MR NSUBUGA: I have been advised by the Clerk that I didn’t lay on Table a letter marked “f”. I request that you permit me to do the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed. 

MR NSUBUGA: I wish to lay at Table a letter marked “f”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Speaker, I will try to be as brief as possible because hon. Nsubuga said everything I wanted to say. I rise to second the motion moved by my colleague, hon. Simeo of Kassanda South. 

The incidents in Kassanda are among the many that are happening in this country, especially in the cattle corridor where Kassanda also lies. They are the same incidents happening in Nakaseke, Kiboga and Kyankwanzi. Therefore, Kassanda should be an eye-opener to ensure that affected villages are attended to.

Mr Speaker, the land question needs to be fully tackled across the nation lest it creates a crisis. There is an aspect of impunity, especially among land grabbers as well as delay or absence of justice in the courts of law. The Government should act fast and see how to handle these challenges because many people are suffering.

Mr Speaker, I add my voice not only to those in Kassanda but also in Apaa and elsewhere in this country. If the Government does not sit down quickly and resolve these matters, the country is going into a crisis. I thank you.

5.17
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Simeo Nsubuga for bringing up this matter. I stand to second the motion that a committee of Parliament looks into this because we already have a commission of inquiry headed by Justice Catherine Bamugemereire but it will only report its findings. We have had previous commissions that did this kind of work and to date, we do not know their findings. It is therefore imperative that Parliament comes up and investigates this and maybe directs on what can be done. It is not only happening in Kassanda South, as hon. Luttamaguzi has mentioned.

My additional request is that we widen the scope of the committee’s work to cover the entire country, including Lugazi Municipality as we have been hearing these cases in other places as well. As I speak, out of the 125 villages in Lugazi Municipality, nine are already affected by similar wrangles. 

In addition, as I speak, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Buikwe District is chairing a meeting on land wrangles in the villages of Nakanya, Kasokoso, Namaliga, Maada and Buyenje where actually, one Member of Parliament, whose name I will not mention, has land. Over 100 families in Buyenje village, Kiteeza ward, Lugazi municipality face eviction. I therefore strongly support the motion that a committee of Parliament be instituted to investigate this and direct on the way forward as it is becoming too much.

Actually, recently when I was watching the video of the incident that happened on Kassanda, I observed one member saying, “In 2021, I will not vote any other member in NRM apart from the area MP.” Therefore, the matter has gone beyond and they are now looking at my party as being the problem and not those who are claiming to own the land. We need to act very fast. 

When you look at Article 17 of our Constitution, it clearly stipulates that every citizen has a duty to protect the rights and freedoms of others. However, we have Ugandans who think they are above the law. We need to come in and act as Parliament. I submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to inquire into land wrangles in Bukoba Village, Kassanda South be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now, with each Member taking two minutes.

5.20
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I stand in support of this motion. I request that we do not just look at the land wrangles in hon. Nsubuga’s area because this is now a national problem. I have land wrangles in Gomba District. In fact, these wrangles have involved some deaths. As such, we should not just look at this issue on the surface as it seems that some people are taking advantage of land wrangles to discredit the Government. 

In my area, people are accusing the NRM government of failing to take action. People are not respecting the laws. They just wake up one morning, come and start destroying people’s houses under the guise of being the owners of the land. Even where the commission led by Justice Catherine Bamugemereire sends out directives, these people do not listen but just go ahead. They have their own armies, which go out and terrorise people.

Mr Speaker, I think something urgent has to be done. What hon. Nsubuga has been telling us is happening everywhere.

5.23
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, it is important that I am listening to these complaints coming from other regions of the country because I thought the problem was in Apaa and majorly in Acholi sub-region. If now members can come on the Floor of Parliament over this issue then we are going to solve it.

I support the idea that if we are going to come out with a select committee to do this work, it should not be restricted to one constituency only. As I speak, we have a committee, which is working on my constituency but as they are going ahead with their work, they are not respected. The people who are doing this are big people in this Government and they do it with impunity. We need to come together to speak the truth for the poor; Ugandans who do not have resources. Those who have money can even manipulate the courts of law. 

I wish to say that if we are forming a select committee, they must not be compromised but they should do work for this country. Thank you very much.

5.24
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion but disagree on the principle of creation of a select committee. 

Mr Speaker, the reason why I disagree is because whatever resolutions we make as a Parliament are never mandatory to the Executive. My appeal would be to challenge Government. It has gone to the extent where people are maimed and houses destroyed and yet Government institutions are in place and nothing happens. Who are these people who go around evicting and torturing people and torching churches yet they are left to walk free? Where is the police as an institution? Where is the army? Where is the chairman, security committee? Where is the Resident District Commander of the area? If everyone is looking and fearing to take action against those land grabbers - who are they? Where do they get their backing from? Those are the questions that we must ask ourselves.

Mr Speaker, unless we realistically get to know who these people are – who are those who are more powerful than the Government? Is there a Government in this country? If there is Government in this country, how come Government cannot swing into action to arrest and prosecute the few who are causing mayhem to the public?

Mr Speaker, these must be special groups of people who are well connected. If they are well connected, can those with whom they are connected, who are there for us as a country, distance themselves from them? Otherwise, I do not think these are people who come from the mars –(Member timed out.)

2.26
MR BOAZ NINSIIMA KASIRABO (NMR, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as presented by the Member for Kassanda. I would like to say that this issue is crosscutting; it is everywhere in this country, especially in the central region, or call it Buganda Region.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the committee has many districts including Rakai. People in Kooki Constituency in Byakabanda Sub-county, Kyandaza and Kateerero villages are going to be evicted tomorrow. People have opted to using their own pangas and spears to fight for their land.

It is very painful that people face such challenges and as leaders, we do not come out to help them. What these land fraudsters do first is to acquire documents for ownership of the same land and then after, they compromise security before they come to occupy the land.

Mr Speaker, I know Parliament talks but when it comes to action, we wait for either the Executive or someone that will not even act on the interests of Parliament. My prayer is that a select committee be constituted but they should traverse the whole country especially Buganda and Rakai regions because – (Member timed out.)

5.29
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by hon. Simeo Nsubuga. However, I wish to support it by disagreeing with my senior brother, the Member for Arua Municipality.

The fact that Government does not sometimes respect recommendations of Parliament, does not stop Parliament from executing its mandate. I want to state that whether Government will be ready to take up our recommendation or not, the records will judge.

Secondly, the issue of arrogance, especially in land matters has become too much, not limited to the citizens only. In 2007, there was a settlement process in Kasese, where some cattle keepers were being resettled but the violet manner in which Government executed this process mandates the other citizens to do so.   Seventeen people died during that process. The suspects were arrested but nobody was arraigned before court.

When people see Government doing this, it becomes easy for them do the same thing, much as I do not support it. This is happening everywhere in the country. 

I, therefore, support the proposals moved by hon. Nusbuga that a select committee of Parliament be put in place to investigate this matter since recommendations from bodies like the Bamugemereire Commission and the others that have been involved have been ignoring. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when citizens of this country are in distress, we should not adopt procedures that extend their suffering because it makes the process of handling things become too long, unpredictable and uncertain; then we would not have helped them. We would have only given them some kind of panadol; a pain relief but they remain in pain.

I would, therefore, like to propose that we do not conclude the debate on this motion. Let us give it up to Tuesday next week and by then, I request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to do preliminary investigations on this matter    and come and state the facts for us to help us see how to proceed. Otherwise, right now, the people are in the gallery – they are affected. If we say a select committee be formed, you know what happens. A select committee has 45 days and they might ask for extension yet I am hearing Members saying the committee should extent it to all the regions, which might be up to the next Parliament before the select committee finishes.

The specific issue was brought by the Member for Kassanda South County and we should find a solution to this particular problem. 

In the circumstances, I suggest that the honourable minister will speak now and see how she can make consultations this week; probably, go on the ground and then come back next week on Tuesday to make a statement before we conclude the motion. Would that be better?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

5.32
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for bringing this matter. 

I would like to also inform the House that this matter has been long standing like the honourable member has stated. Before it was brought to the commission of inquiry, we had attempted to handle it as a ministry but that action made our hands as the ministry got tied up. Otherwise, as a ministry, we had got mechanism within which we wanted to handle the matter.

The contentious issue is compensation. The affected community stated that Mr Abid Alam compensated only them between Shs 500,000 to Shs 1,500,000. That was the major issue. The issue went up to the President and then it came to us. 

There is also another issue surrounding the extension of his boundary outside what was original. They are thinking that the 12 square miles might be more than its original size. We had proposed boundary opening and reassessment based on the Muruli Mukasa Report, accessing those who had gone. It has taken time and most of these people had gone for a long time but the matter also went to court.

When Mr Abid Alam went to the commission of inquiry, it issued an arrest warrant arising from the issue of alleged murder and forceful evictions. He challenged the commission’s order that he should negotiate. He even insisted that he had compensated the people and the people had left the land and that it was the commission of inquiry that made people return back to the land.

Mr Abid Alam asked for a permanent injunction stopping Government from acts of unlawful deprivation of property and order of redress, granting him and his company use of his land, asking damages to his business and also the powers of the Commission of Inquiry; in which he indicated that court should rule that the Commission of Inquiry was usurping judicial powers of the courts of law and unlawful deprivation of property.

As you are aware, court has already ruled on the powers of the Commission of Inquiry and most of the orders that the commission instituted cannot work because of the ruling of court. Now, on the eviction, this issue was also ordered for investigation. Police made a statement and took it to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP).

However, on November 12 2018, the DPP dropped the case, on the premise that many complainants and witnesses that had written their statements were contradicting each other and yet they had stated that they were all at the same site. The Police witness statement was not consistent and the DPP dropped the case.

So, I am really in a very difficult circumstance where DPP and Police investigated but the case was dropped and where the Commission of Inquiry issue went to court, which ruled on the powers of the commission. I am really in a difficult situation. The only issues I can comment on are the general issues raised by Members on the eviction. Evictions always arise out of a court order.

Because of the concern that not only Cabinet and this Parliament has already raised, His Excellency the President met the Chief Justice on the issue of court orders. His Excellency and the Chief Justice agreed on how judicial officers should handle issues to do with land. A practice directive has been issued by the Chief Justice that before a ruling is made on all land matters; there should be a locus visit. That has now been issued. 

The only difficulty is the Judiciary is now saying that they need money to buy vehicles to support the judicial officers to visit the locus before making judgment. The second issue is that arising out of that, my ministry has agreed with the Judiciary to come up with eviction guidelines because there are many instances where – on our side – we feel that the way eviction orders were being issued and implemented was outside the law.

For example, the Land Act as amended in 2014 stipulates that a judicial officer who issues an order must give a six-month notice before eviction is carried out. However, you find somebody gets a court order today and the next one or two weeks, eviction is conducted and yet the law says six months. 

Therefore, we have also issued guidelines to all Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) to the effect that they should not honour an eviction order which has not given the six-month notice, as per the law and also where there has not been a visit to the locus. 

We are now in the last stages of developing the eviction guidelines, which Cabinet is supposed to approve and will probably bring before this House because the matter seems to be very important.

I propose that we bring those eviction guidelines. We have finished at ministry level but we have sent it to the Judiciary, which requested that they wanted to make an input. On this matter, I would like to request that as you have proposed, let me go and sit with the Attorney-General and DPP so that on the matter that the Member has raised on the Floor and with all the legal aspects that I have articulated, we are able to report here - with the advice of Attorney-General - on how we can proceed in resolving the matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that will be a good way to go so that when we come back on Tuesday next week, honourable minister, we see how to assist the people who are affected by these evictions or these other activities. We will then see if the guidelines you are talking about and all related matters can be used as a template for the rest of the country to deal with all kind of evictions that are taking place. Thank you.

Can we go back to Committee of Supply?

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were debating these eviction orders, the honourable member raised a pertinent issue that tomorrow, there will be an eviction in his area and people are waiting with pangas and bows and arrows. I feel it has been mentioned in this House. If - in any case - death occurs in that area or people are killed, then it will be an alarming case and bad for us.

We just heard from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development talking about procedures and that evictions are as a result of court orders and other issues. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for this House - most especially your Chair, Mr Speaker - to make a statement on that eviction taking place tomorrow, so that they first stay it and wait for what will happen? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, the challenge with these things that just come like this is you cannot know the details. For example, you may not know whether they have acted within the law or whether the evictions are happening after six months from a court order. You cannot tell from now. That is why I am always reluctant to make these off-the-cuff and knee-jerk orders from the Chair here. I need to understand the issues before I can give guidance.

However, the minister has heard that there are likely to be some issues happening maybe from tomorrow. So, take heed and see what can be done to deal with these matters. Thank you.

Can we go back to Committee of Supply?

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 1 AND 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

SUMMARY OF SUMS TO BE SUPPLIED FOR SCHEDULE 1 SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, following the discussion we just had moments ago, we have amended the respective schedules accordingly. If you go through the report, we had a table labeled, “Table 2 Supplementary Estimates under schedule 1 Financial Year 2018/2019, recommended for approval”. 

That table has been amended and I would like to lay the amended version on the Table.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the records capture that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: We have also accordingly amended Table 6 titled, “Estimates recommended for supply under schedule 2 Financial Year 2018/2019, already authorised”. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the records capture that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: In the same vein, we have amended Table 8 of the main report titled, “Estimates recommended for supply under schedule 2 Financial Year 2018/2019 (Addenda)”.

Mr Chairperson, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the records capture that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: In the conclusion, we had a summary table capturing data on recurrent, development and grand total of schedule 1, schedule 2, Schedule 2 prior, Schedule 2 addenda and then the respective totals. I beg to lay that amended schedule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the record capture that. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Finally, we have the supply schedule, which you are about to supply. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the record capture that. Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 132,963,629,395 be provided for Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 132,963,629,395 be provided for Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 260,676,952,589 be provided for Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 260,676,952,589 be provided for the Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Summary of sums to be supplied for Schedule 2 combined

Recurrent Expenditure and Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is now Schedule 2. The first one was Schedule 1. Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 276,123,921,240 be provided for Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question the total sum of Shs 276,123,921,240 be provided for Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 621,470,625,629 be provided for Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 621,470,625,629 be provided for Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Grand Total for Supplementary Schedules 1 and 2 combined

Recurrent and Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t these the figures we have already passed? 

THE CLERK: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then why are we going to – Isn’t that a repetition? Do we again have to go to the total again? We have supplied them already.

Supplementary Schedule 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019 
Addendum 5 – Vote 002 – State House
Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of shs 33,282,235,000 under Vote 002 – State House be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that the total sum of shs 33,282,235,000 under Vote 002 – State House be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Schedule 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019
Vote 127 – Muni University 
Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,048,200,000 under Vote 127 – Muni University be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,048,200,000 under Vote 127 – Muni University be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.


Supplementary Schedule 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019
Vote 014 – Ministry of Health
Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 15,000,000,000 under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health be provided for as Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 15,000,000,000 under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health be provided for as Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved the Supplementary Schedules 1 and 2 of the Financial Year 2018/2019 without amendments –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With amendments –

MR BAHATI: With amendments – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is hardly the time to try.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Thank you very much, honourable members. This is done. Chairperson of the Budget Committee, would you like to brief us on the progress with the budget. 

5.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had promised to deliver the committee report on the budget on Wednesday but unfortunately or fortunately, whatever the case it might be, the finance ministry has laid corrigenda to the budget. In the circumstances, I am seeking an extension of the deadline to Friday. If you allow, I would like to propose that I present the report on Friday because we now have to incorporate the new numbers and to also have some discussion on them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, we do not have any deadline to extend. The deadline was supposed to be on 20 May and today is already 21 May 2019. By the appearance of things, you have just received some of those documents. This is where we get into problems.

Honourable members, the request from the Budget Committee is that - we have already extended by one day by the operation of things, because the siting day automatically fell after the 20th which is the 21st - the request from the Budget Committee is that we give them time up to Friday to do this. Can we do Thursday? Chairman, can we do Thursday? Today is Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; we give you one full day and half a day on Thursday and we make an attempt on Thursday afternoon. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Okay, we shall do our best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your best is good enough for us.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, and deliver the report on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. As for the Budget, the law says we should have finished by today because the next sitting day of Parliament was on the 21 May 2019. Therefore, the honourable chairman has sought this extension and we grant it to him up to Thursday, so that we can handle the Budget on Thursday.

As you are aware, we have not done badly so far and I would like to thank you, the Chairman of the Budget Committee and Members and all the chairmen and leaders of the sectoral committees; you are part of the Budget Committee, for doing what ordinarily would have been impossible. The timelines had completely been rearranged by the operational things but we trust and know that you have the abilities to manage these things well.

Therefore, we are counting on you chairman and the committee to help us to deliver this within time. When we do that on Thursday, I am hoping that we will also be able to deal with the appropriation Bill and if it is done, then I can guarantee you we take a break and wait for the - that is the gift I would like to give Members who have worked so hard. You have worked very hard honourable members. 

Hon. David Bahati must be put on notice that this time round, there must be serious messages of congratulations to Members of Parliament for doing what they have done so well. Therefore, we wait for the Budget day and you will tell us where you are taking us -

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(House rose at 5.58 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday 22 May 2019 at 2 p.m.) 





