

Tuesday, 23 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming students from the Child Development Centre, Businywali in Busia District, represented by the hon. Gideon Onyango and hon. Jane Nabulindo. Can you stand up pupils?  You are very welcome. (Applause)

I would also like to recognise the officers from the Nigerian National Defence College. They are here to learn about the role of the armed forces in democracy, as you are all aware our Parliament is unique in that capacity. So, they are here to learn from us. We welcome them. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I once again welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We have of course heard about the terror attack in the City of Manchester where 22 people died and many others injured. 

We would like, on your behalf, to send our condolences to the Speaker of the House of Commons and the people of the United Kingdom. I now invite Members to stand up for a minute of silence in their respect.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the 9th day of May I directed the sectoral committees to submit policy statements for amalgamation to the Budget Committee and report back. This was because we are under very serious pressure of time. However, I am also aware that the members and committees exerted themselves in considering these statements. Also having regard to the Public Finance Management Act, sections 12 and 13 and rules 161 and 177 of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to create an opportunity for a limited presentation of the policy statements. 

We will be requesting the respective chairpersons, starting tomorrow, to make a brief presentation of the major policy issues, which need us to address, followed by brief debates. Considering that Cabinet normally sits on Wednesdays, this process will start tomorrow afternoon in the following order: 

    1. Tomorrow afternoon, we shall have presentations from the following committees: foreign affairs, presidential affairs, defence and internal affairs, and that on information and communication technology and national guidance. We therefore, require that the ministers in charge of those sectors should be present tomorrow afternoon. I am proposing that we also sit on Thursday morning as well as Friday so that all the sectors can report. 

    2. Therefore, on Thursday morning we shall have presentations from the following committees: national resources, physical infrastructure, tourism, trade and industry, gender labour and social development, legal and parliamentary affairs, East African community, public service and local governments, and the Committee on Education and Sports. The others to present that day will be: the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Committee on Health. 

Please bear with us. We will only inconvenience you for this week hopefully so that we can close the budget process as per the Public Finance Management Act. After that the Budget Committee will present the proportions for appropriation of the funds. 

Therefore, I would like to thank you for the work done and I hope that we shall be able to finish it and go for a short recess before we start the new session. We also hope that by 31st May, we would have closed the process by passing the budget.

Honourable members, I received reports that some Members’ iPads were deactivated. But I have asked our ICT department to consider the situation and ensure that Members have got access to the network and be able to do their work because we have a corporate account and I hope it is not affected by the deactivation of the sim cards. However, if there are Members who have complaints, please contact our ICT department so that they can assist you.

I would further like to add that every Member has got certain amount of internet data per month, which they should primarily use for parliamentary work. However, if you use a lot of Facebook and Youtube, it will deplete your allocation before the end of the month. Therefore, use it carefully and when you are here you can use the Wi-Fi and it will be on this other side which requires a lot of bandwidth.

Honourable members, I am delighted that His Excellency, the President, listened to the concerns of the people of Uganda and extended the period for sim card registration and verification. I would like to advise the Executive to read the mood of the public and Parliament and act in the interest of our people. If they had listened, I think that the destructions of this weekend would not have occurred. People have lost money, telecommunication companies have lost money, Uganda Revenue Authority too has lost money. Ordinary people have suffered; people have been out of touch and all that is because of being inflexible and rigid.

I would, therefore, like to ask you to work together with us because the people whom we are working for gave all of us the mandate and we are here to work in their interests –(Applause)– and that is the oath that we took as Members of Parliament. Thank you very much.

2.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, last week this Parliament passed a resolution to extend the sim card registration exercise, but later the minister in charge of the sector disregarded our resolution. 

On Friday, you guided and directed on what should happen to the minister. Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the words the minister is quoted to have said that this Parliament’s decisions are just advisory and that they can be disregarded. 

Madam Speaker, we get petitions from the public. We do a lot of work and we have Appointments Committee that deals with the ministers. We do a lot of work on the Budget but the minister says that Parliament’s role is just advisory. 

Madam Speaker, just yesterday, while appearing in an interview with NBS television, the minister was asked why he does not come to Parliament regularly and he said the Speaker should go and consult the Hansard to know how many times he has attended Parliament and contributed. In my opinion, that was belittling the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, Rule 76 of our Rules of Procedure about general behaviour - see page 71 – reads thus: “In all other matters, the behaviour of Members shall be guided by the Code of Conduct of Members prescribed in Appendix F.” Appendix F at page 214 is about the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament and Sub Rule 5 is about public trust and it reads thus: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner which will maintain and strengthen the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never undertake any action which may bring the House or its Members generally, into disrepute.” 

Madam Speaker, I would like to be advised on how we should proceed; if we are going to take decisions and make resolutions which the minister regards as just advisory and that we have no authority and we cannot influence anything. 

2.59
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I am perturbed at the way this institution of Parliament is being held not only by Members - in this particular incident - of the frontbench but also how it is being perceived. 

Fortunately most members on the Frontbench were primarily backbenchers. Indeed, we have other back benchers in this House who sometime back were on the frontbench. It, therefore, follows that the frontbench is not the last and final destination. You can always come back to the backbench. 

Ideally, once one wants to put this House in disrepute, it raises serious concerns, Madam Speaker, and it does not matter whether we have friendships, belong to the same party or come from the same region. The moment you want to trample down the pride, stature and the authority of this House, I can never tolerate you and this House should not tolerate such a conduct. 

The moment you water down Parliament, what are we here for? It is good H.E, the President has stepped in but also that is not the best way to make the President jump on each and every matter. There are procedures and our Rules of Procedures are very clear. If the minister or the Executive were dissatisfied, there is a way they could have moved this House to reconsider and revisit its decision. I think it is not proper procedure for the minister to wait and say that His Excellency has intervened from elsewhere because there are procedures of revisiting decisions of this House. 

Short of that, Madam Speaker, this Parliament will cease to be relevant if decisions are taken elsewhere and then they have to inform the Speaker about what they have decided. I find there is a mistake and we are running down this institution. Therefore, I want to appeal to the Executive and Members of this House to protect this House. Do not allow it to go down like that the way –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when I had just come to the Ninth Parliament and while in a meeting of the Committee of Education - by then it was called the Committee on Social Services - we had refused to pass the budget; the Prime Minister then, the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi, invited us to his office. We went there in a big number from the committee. 

The information I want to give is that during our introduction, the Rt Hon. Prime minister, said he was a life Member of Parliament. I answered him, “You are telling lies because you will never be a life Member of Parliament.” But all the members had got scared. The hon. Alice Alaso said to me, “Ssewungu, sincerely how would you say that?” But right now he is not here. (Laughter) 

What I am saying is that, Madam Speaker, when we are campaigning for these votes to become Members of Parliament, we promise people heaven on earth. We make a lot of promises. We tell them that we will be very smart; we will listen to everybody; we will talk in Parliament; and that we will protect the institution. What happens when we come here and given an extra duty? 

The last information I would like to give to the House is about President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. When we were with him in a PAC meeting on the Basajjabalaba issue, we asked him about the Shs 15 billion and he wondered why the Attorney-General hadn’t advised him. 

Therefore, when a minister comes here to belittle Parliament and the Speaker - the minister is irregular in the House but wants to play with the Speaker and our institution. My dear friends, we might get more woes out of that. Anyhow, I know that the President of Uganda because I have seen him – while some of you working with him have not learnt him - measures whatever you do. He might save you in this particular incident but you will face him later on. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, the information that I want to give this House is that some Members in here have made it a habit to disrespect fellow leaders. The first incident happened three years ago, while I was a councillor at Kampala Capital City Authority. The same minister, who is now the Minister for ICT, defied the orders of the court. If someone can defy orders of a High Court and later Parliament, then such a member does not belong here. He cannot stand in front of us and, therefore, we cannot address him as a minister because ministers are bound to respect fellow leaders like Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I thought that your orders in this House must be respected and so if they get not to be respected, there is need for something to be done. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Finally, Madam Speaker, I know how Members need this House and how relevant this House is to the country. Bearing in mind that the issues that were being discussed and resolved before this House were matters of very great public importance, one would understand if an ex-officio member would be the one to disparage Parliament. An ex-officio can be here on the powers of the appointing authority but, a Member of Parliament, who is here for the people and on people’s votes, cannot turn around to disparage this very House; I find that unacceptable, Madam Speaker and Members. 

Therefore, I think it would be in order, if with your magnanimity, you allowed the matter to rest at least for this Parliament to express displeasure at the conduct of that irresponsible minister, hon. Frank Tumwebaze. We demand that at an appropriate time, he comes out to say he is sorry for the remarks he made. And now that he is around, this would be his opportune moment to redeem his image and be at par with this House. Otherwise, we shall find it very difficult to continue to accord him the authority and respect if he, himself does not owe it to this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member is here. I think he needs to tell us what he said and what he did not say. 

3.11
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to make a few points. I would like to make three comments: The first point, I would like to take exception to the blatant falsehoods of hon. Mwijukye’s, which suggest that I belittled your authority, Madam Speaker, when I was confronted by the members of the press. 

I was asked in particular - attendance to the House is personal - that the Speaker made a comment that I am irregular in the House. My response, which is recorded, was that the Speaker has a right to rebuke her members if she is demanding for performance from them. I also said that I can account – (Interjections) - I need your protection, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let him speaker.

MR TUMWEBAZE: It is on record, Madam Speaker, that I said that for the times I have not been in the House, I have taken it up upon myself to write to the Speaker and that she has, on many occasions, permitted my being away. I left it at that. 

Therefore, it is not true – and I would like to be on record - that I, Frank Tumwebaze, a Member of Parliament for Kibale East County, a former active Member of the Finance Committee can belittle the Speaker. I advise my colleagues that you can hold me accountable for roles I perform in public offices; we all can take responsibility, but to insinuate that in my personal capacity, I belittled the authority of the Speaker, Madam Speaker, I did not do that and I beg to be on record.

My second point is: I seek guidance from the Speaker as the head of Parliament. I also seek guidance from the Leader of Government Business. The announcement I made was not a personal decision. It was a position of Cabinet after a meeting with the Prime Minister. So, I would like to make this clear (Interjections) – Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Allow him to make his case.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The registration of sim cards started as a requirement from the security agencies to mitigate crime and the Uganda Communication Commission was called upon to intervene. It is a multi-sectoral activity between Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Security and the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology (ICT), which came in because we regulate platforms.

So, as I have explained, when we met in Cabinet, chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two points were brought forward. These were coming from the concerns of Parliament. There was fear that if we switch off, mobile money operators would experience a loss. So, Cabinet agreed to protect mobile money operators.
 
The second point was that we must ease registration. In the wisdom of Cabinet, it was agreed that losses be mitigated but maintain the deadline. The person tasked to communicate was me. I take the responsibility for communicating a Government position because that is the work that I was given. If that angered this House, I take the responsibility and I apologise for that.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, last week Parliament passed a resolution that sim card registration be extended for one year. That was the decision for Parliament –(Interjection)– okay, not more than a year. But now in the wisdom of the President, he has extended it for three months. What happens to the resolution of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has complied with the resolution in that he has provided a period less than a year and that is what we had said. (Applause) 

However, Honourable members, I think that it is incumbent on Government to set an action programme for that period. How do you explain that people who registered were actually switched off? They are off even now. How are you going to resolve that? How will people that did not get their national IDs going to get them? How will you deal with the children that are 12-16 years that have phones but with no national IDs? We need answers, Attorney-General. 

Unfortunately, I was reading the regulations on the Interception of Communication Act – it has four ministers: the Minister for Security, the Minister for Internal Affairs, the Minister for Defense and the Minister for Information, Communication and Technology. I don’t know who takes the lead. I thought someone would have come early enough to this House and tell us what was happening and the reasons for the course of action. However, we are just hearing things concerning sim card registration being said at the Media Centre. 

Anyway, I am happy that the President has complied with the resolution of this House - (Applause) - because we said, “Not more than one year” and so, it could have been a month, two months, three months, but we want an action programme.

3.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would like to thank the President for complying with the parliamentary resolution, by now setting the framework within which the telephone users can have access to their telephones and use them before they are switched off. However, like you were saying, it is true that even those that were already registered have been deregistered but even after the President made the pronouncement, the telephones are off. 

I feel that as a Parliament, we are at a loss. On many occasions, ministers have not been coming to this House. In their absence, the Government Chief Whip has taken over the roles of such absentee ministers.

On that fateful day, my sister, the Government Chief Whip took it upon herself to be the Prime Minster of the Republic of Uganda and she was actually speaking on behalf of Government. When we moved out of Parliament, if Government sat and disassociated itself from the resolution of Parliament and mandated the Minister of ICT to go and communicate its position, I felt the leadership of the Government Chief Whip was also at a test. When you come here to represent Government, and the same Government disowns you - we shall have problems in trusting the Government Chief Whip, to come in as a representative of Government –(Interruption)
 
MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the problem in our Government is like having very many rats that cannot dig a hole. Many times, you have seen this in the House that our Chief Whip is really over worked. Many times, you have seen that when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes on the Floor of Parliament to clarify on questions they have asked him, he gives foolery answers. Why is this so? The reason behind this is because the ministers are too many for Government, to an extent that they cannot sit and concentrate on their dockets; they are running left and right.

Therefore, I would like to inform the House that what the Leader of Opposition is saying is true - we have a problem. Ministers must concentrate on their dockets. That is why you see ministers are denying on all radios. When one says the issue falls under their docket, the other will say, no. I do not know whether they know their roles or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As we close, Minister for ICT, whether you are communicating a Government position, you are obliged to come and inform us before you go to the Media Centre. The Office of the Speaker is very near here; we share a building but you were able to walk from Prime Minister’s Office straight to Media Centre to say, “We are going to switch off.”

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and that is the position we find ourselves in as Parliament. To what extent should we continue trusting the Government Chief Whip when she comes in to represent ministers and at what level should we doubt her representation? 

Secondly, my brother, the minister for information misguided the public when he said that resolutions of Parliament are merely advisory. That means many time when we pass budgets here, we are just advising. They are at liberty to do whatever they want to do.

Madam Speaker, switching off sim cards for Ugandans has caused death of a responsible citizen of Uganda in Gulu, the deputy town clerk. He was hit by iron bar men when he tried to call a telephone of a person he thought was closer to him for rescue, it had been switched off and the man died.

This happened at a time when Parliament had just passed a resolution for the extension. Maybe this resolution could have saved his life. I would like to call upon the House to agree to a position that the minister comes with a public apology for irresponsibly rebuking the powers of Parliament and for taking Parliament for granted so that in future, we know that we are people’s representative and a House that takes decisions on behalf of Ugandans.

Otherwise, it will come to a point where every other person will think that even if parliamentarians make decisions, those are just advisory. It happened here during the Temangalo issue - and this was to do with the then Prime Minister Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. He came up with the same argument like the one the hon. Frank Tumwebaze is coming up with; parliamentary resolutions are advisory. So, until we begin to task these arrogant citizens, they will never know that this is a Chamber, which they must respect. 

Therefore, we strongly ask hon. Frank Tumwebaze to come up with a public apology for disrespecting the resolution of Parliament and for not even taking an extra mile to consult the Chair of this House to restore the glory that Ugandans have in this House. It will also let Ugandans know that Government institutions such as the Judiciary, Executive, Legislature and possibly our fourth estate, the media will equally be respected. I beg to request, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to ask the Rules Committee to listen to the recordings, read what was said and advise us so that we know how to move on the issue of hon. Frank Tumwebaze. However, hon. Tumwebaze, the phones are still off.

3.20
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byagabambi): Madam Speaker, at least some of us have been here for long. These are two powerful institutions of Government - the Cabinet and the Parliament of Uganda yet each has different roles to play. I really respect these institutions. So, I would not condone anybody who stands up to belittle either Parliament or Cabinet. These have different roles and complement each other in –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two points, which the minister has not escaped. First, is that he is an absentee and he has always been absent when we are discussing very serious matters some of which are part of his docket.

On the very day, he was not here. What he did on the very day when he was not in the House was to go and water down a resolution of Parliament in the media. Within 20 minutes of the resolution, the minister had called a press conference to water down a resolution of Parliament and to undermine Parliament to which he is a member.

Madam Speaker, I do not think that is the position of Government of Uganda to actually undermine the august House. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for a honourable minister who is always absent without any reason, to come here and mislead this House that that was the position of Government and convincing this House that undermining the Parliament of Uganda is a position of Government and being absent from Parliament is a position of Government? Is he in order to mislead this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he had just started I do not know what he was going to say. I was still listening in.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am very much surprised because at least, I come to this Parliament once a week. Secondly, my station of operation is in Moroto. That is where the Headquarters of Ministry for Karamoja Affairs are situated. Most of my time I am in Karamoja and it is on record, if you go there, that I am actually on ground and doing a good job.

Madam Speaker, I do not know what resolution the honourable member is referring to. I do not know whether he understands my role and whether he knows my post? But to stand here and say that in May, I watered down a resolution of Parliament - I do not know which resolution he is referring to!

Madam Speaker, why I said we have been here long is because I wanted to inform the House that we have been having the culture of listening to each other. So, I beg you that we listen to each other. We are voted into this House by Ugandans to represent them not to come here and behave differently. So, as I respect you and listen to you, you should also listen to me when I am giving my point. 

Madam Speaker, my point was that while these two institutions should be respected, we in the Executive sometimes find ourselves in a precarious situation whereby there is a resolution of the Cabinet, which we have to defend. However, there will also be a resolution of Parliament and sometimes we find ourselves at collision. I think there must be refined communication in order to harmonise our positions so that we move in harmony because castigating one side or the other will not move this country forward with steady progress. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already said that this matter will go to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. They will listen to the recording, look at prints and come back to us with a report.

3.28
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week, I was in Kisoro and got to realise that people there are suffering from the influx of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).

Madam Speaker, last week alone Kisoro received over 2,000 refugees who were settled in areas of Nteeko, Busanza, Bunagana, Muramba and some of them in Nyakabande. These are villages neighbouring the Congo border. 

You realise that when things happens in the neighbourhood, it is mainly the host communities that suffer. The people of Kisoro were not sleeping because many people lost their property given the fact that some of the refugees came in with the intentions of stealing people’s property such as food and merchandise in shops.

Madam Speaker, we also realised these refugees have no settlement areas along these borders. As a result, they sleep in classrooms and churches. Unfortunately this time round the children are in schools and so they have nowhere to sleep. 

We would like Government to intervene in this matter and provide food for the people of Kisoro because when the refugees come in, they have no food and, therefore, consume whatever they come across, including that in people’s gardens.

We also request Government to provide enough medical services because the two hospitals in Kisoro, Mutolere and Kisoro hospitals, are overwhelmed by the number of patients yet the hospital authorities cannot differentiate refugees from ordinary Ugandans. 

We also request the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to provide relief services to these people. Many of them, even before United Nation’s High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHRC) comes, are helpless and the burden is put on the local people. 

The other reason we request Government to intervene is because they are also encroaching on our environment, mainly because they have to cut trees to build makeshift houses to sleep in as well as firewood. This has put pressure on our environment.

However, their influx can be a source of diseases. As you all know, there are rumours that there is an outbreak of cholera as well as Ebola in Congo. When refugees come in, they carry with them various types of diseases, which affect the local people. 

We are also having issues of insecurity. Since December last year, we have had people of Kisoro dying, just being attacked by people with guns who come, shoot and run back. So, we request the Minister of Security to help us because Kisoro has been a host community for the people from Rwanda, DRC and Burundi. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask a minister in the Office of the Prime Minister to respond to that.

3.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Gulu we have a small detach in Palaro, which is a sub-county in Aswa County and it is in the community. One side of the road – where the detach is – is a prison farm and one side is the community and it is an open detach. 

Right now, it looks like our soldiers from the Central African Republic are being settled there because as I speak we have over 1,000 of them in that open detach. They are all over in the communities. They are also in the trading centres. I do not know what policy we have for reception centres for soldiers who come back. 

We had a nasty experience in 1999 to the year 2000 when we had Ebola, which killed a good number of people of Gulu where we even lost Dr Matthew Lukwiya. This was because soldiers were returned from Congo and emptied in Gulu. At least in Gulu, the barracks is an enclosed army facility. But even when it was enclosed, the community still suffered a lot from Ebola. Now we have these people – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What do you want the Government to do?

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, we would like the soldiers to be controlled. Government should make sure the soldiers are properly received. The soldiers are clearing food for our people and our people are getting hungry. The soldiers are also accompanied by the balalos. You Government, what do you want our people to do? Explain to us why we receive these people in an open detach instead of taking them to some other centres where they can be controlled. Is that the only detach which can receive soldiers from Central African Republic? Do you want us to experience the 1999 problems again? 

We had a very bad experience and Government should do something as quickly as possible about those soldiers who are actually still being emptied in Gulu. Why do you want -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the soldiers are Ugandans. I think all you are saying is that they should be received properly. I think that is what you want.

3.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance about the impassable roads that lead to Agago, Pader, Kitgum and Lamwo districts.

Madam Speaker, as I speak, public transport vehicles have stopped going to Pader District because of the very poor condition of the central Government road, the Lira-Kitgum road where I pass. The alternative, which we are trying to use is the Gulu-Kitgum road, but which is equally in a very sorry state because it is under construction. 

There is a section which starts from River Aswa up to Loyoboo in hon. Regan Okumu’s constituency where we spend one full hour to travel a 30km distance because it is full of humps. We are finding it very difficult, people are losing brakes of cars, buses are falling off the road and people are getting accidents because of that very long stretch of humps.

I would like to request the ministry in charge to take action and ensure that the Gulu-Kitgum Road and the Lira-Kitgum Road are made passable. Otherwise, I am not able to reach Agago quickly because the Lira-Kitgum Road is completely impassable especially at - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether there is any information for Kisoro about the management of refugees and the settlement of the returning soldiers in Palaro.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I have noted with concern the issue raised by the Member of Parliament for Kisoro.

Madam Speaker, this House knows very well that the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo particularly, the Rutshuru area in North Kivu Province continues to be extremely unpredictable. As Government, we have opened a transit centre in Kisoro in a place called Nyakabende. 

When the situation explodes on the other side of the Democratic Republic of Congo, we activate the transit centre to able us receive asylum seekers and all the displaced people so that we can process them either into refugees, pending transfers into the interior, where we have centres, which are refugee settlements or pending normalisation of the situation in DRC so that they can be helped to return.

Lately, we have noted that there have been movements of militia on the other side of the broader, particularly North Kivu bordering Kisoro and Beni bordering Kasese and Bundibugyo. This has led to a new influx of people seeking asylum in Uganda.

We have dispatched a team to process them into understanding whether it is possible for us to bring them into the interior of the country as asylum seekers and, therefore, becoming refugees or we hold them in the transit centres so that when the situation normalises, they can be helped to return home. We are working with security to ensure that the security implication of the situation is properly handled. 

We are also working with the Ministry of Health to ensure that the children who have never been vaccinated in their countries of origin are vaccinated in our transit centres; whether they are here temporarily or to stay, we are going to undertake to do that. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, respond about our soldiers who are returning from the Central African Republic. We would like to thank them but how are they being received?

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Col Engola Okello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard that there are balalo who are coming from the Central African Republic - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. Our troops have been in the Central African Republic. They have been returned and settled in Palaro in an open field. That is the complaint of hon. Aol. 

COL ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, that is not true because I have just come from the Central African Republic to disengage the operation. We have not officially brought any soldiers back to Uganda. If there are those who have come, they must have come on their own but I have not seen them there. All our soldiers are still in the Central African Republic and officially – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Aol raised a very pertinent issue. I come from the Acholi sub-region and as we speak, there are over 5,000 soldiers who have settled in Palaro.

Madam Speaker, it is not the responsibility of hon. Aol to know where those soldiers are coming from. As a minister, you must be in position to know where the soldiers are coming from. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order, to downplay what hon. Aol raised, claiming that there are no soldiers in Palaro yet the soldiers are there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, leave the ruling to me. Allow the honourable member to say what he intends to say.

GEN. KUTESA: I am rising on a point of order. Madam Speaker, hon. Olanya is insinuating that soldiers coming from –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we operate based on the Rules of Procedure of this House, which this House adopted. Hon. Olanya rose on a point of order. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the Gen. Pecos Kutesa to rise on a point of order before you have ruled? 

THE SPEAKER: I was expecting some information from hon. Pecos Kutesa; that is why I allowed him to speak. He said he was giving information. Let us listen; I will rule on it. 
Order, Members. 

GEN. KUTEESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wearing the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces’ uniform. The soldiers coming from the Central African Republic are UPDF soldiers and they are returning to Uganda. None of us has been told that when they come, they have to assemble in a specific area, because we have got homes. After serving, they are given a pass to go home. Hon. Aol who raised the issue asked where those people were born. When you go home - where is the home of a soldier? Every part of Uganda is their home. Therefore, anyone insinuating that there are soldiers brought in their area – are they from Mars? These soldiers have been serving outside and they have come back home and have been authorised to go visit their families. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you should be doing is to ascertain who these soldiers are but not to say that you do not think they are there. She has said they are many and are in our uniform. Find out who they are and settle them.

Minister of Works and Transport, I think a request has been made to deal with the roads in the areas that hon. Franca Akello mentioned. 

Honourable members, earlier in the session, I introduced the Nigerian National Defence College but they were not yet here. I would like to now welcome them. They are up in the gallery. You are welcome to Uganda and it is a pleasure to have you here. Thank you very much. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE ALLEGED CASES OF TORTURE OF SUSPECTS IN NALUFENYA DETENTION FACILITY

3.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Human Rights of this House, which was mandated by the House on 17 May 2017 to visit Nalufenya and bring a report. Therefore, it is not a motion of the committee but a report. 

However, Madam Speaker, previously we tabled the 17th report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and there is an outstanding motion that the report be adopted, pending debate today or any other time.

This is a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the alleged cases of torture at Nalufenya Police Facility in Jinja District.  

Background

Madam Speaker, following a long history of abuse of fundamental rights and freedoms, the framers of the 1995 Constitution, based on the findings of the Justice Oder Commission, took a decisive break from the unchecked abuse of state power by ensuring that human rights are protected and observed by all agencies of the state. In this regard, the whole of Chapter 4 of the Constitution is devoted to the bill of rights. 

Parliament further passed the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012. All these were intended to promote the rule of law and ensure that human dignity is respected. Further, the rule of law and the supremacy of the Constitution, as core values of our Constitutional democracy, is a prevailing factor why impunity must not be tolerated. Clearly, therefore, a person who inflicts tortures on another commits an offence and is personally liable.

Following media reports and graphic torture pictures of Mr Geoffrey Byamukama, the LC3 Chairperson of Kamwenge Town Council, also now commonly referred to as the Mayor of Kamwenge alongside others, they were detained in Nalufenya and held incommunicado. This led to a heated debate in the House on 16 May 2017, during which Parliament demanded that persons implicated in the torture of suspects and abduction of the children of the suspects be charged in the courts of law.

Parliament, most especially noted that torture is a crime against humanity and it is a breach of the Prevention and Prohibition of the Anti-torture Act and the perpetrators must be brought to book. 

It is against this background that the Speaker directed the Human Rights Committee on 17 May 2017, to visit Nalufenya detention facility and report back to the House on Tuesday, 23 May 2017, which is today.

The Committee on Human Rights is mandated, under Rule 174 of the Rules of Procedure, to among others inquire into any matter relating to human rights in Uganda and carry on such other functions relating to human rights as may be assigned by Parliament. 

The committee was given specific Terms of Reference under which they visited the facility on Friday, 19 May 2017 and now wishes to report its findings to the House.

Terms of Reference

The Terms of Reference for the Human Rights Committee were as follows:

    1. To establish the legal status of Nalufenya Police Facility especially in regard to the detention of suspects or persons.
    2. To visit the detention facilities and assess the condition of the suspects and persons detained there.
    3. To inquire from the detained suspects about the allegation of torture by police officers or other persons at the facility.
    4. To inquire from the police officers and persons in charge of the facility about the allegations of torture of suspects and other persons.
    5. Generally establish the authenticity or veracity of the allegations of gruesome torture of suspects/ persons detained at Nalufenya Police Station/ Detention Facility.

Methodology 

    a) The committee held two meetings with the officials at Nalufenya Detention Facility; one prior to the tour and then after.
    b) Secondly, the committee toured the facility to assess the condition of the suspects and the nature of the facility.
    c) Thirdly, the committee interviewed the police officers and had a one-on-one session with the suspects/detainees. 

Examination of documents

The committee examined documents relating to the establishment and legality of the detention facility and examined registers and other documents related to the detained suspects. 

The status of Nalufenya Police Station/Detention Facility and most especially the legal status of Nalufenya Detention Facility

The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda explicitly outlaws the holding of detainees in unacknowledged or un-gazetted places of detention, that is, those not published in the official gazette. 

Article 23(2) states: “A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law.” It follows, therefore, that for a detention place to be authorised, it has to be declared in the Uganda Gazette. The Minister of Internal Affairs must publish in the Uganda Gazette the location of the detention places. 

In that regard, the committee established that:

    1. Nalufenya Detention Facility is a gazetted police station that has been in existence since 1954 and was initially gazetted for the population of Jinja because of the high crime rate in the district and also for guarding the dam.

    2. However, in 2015, it was re-designated into a Special Operations Centre by the Inspector General of Police to handle special operations on national security as per a letter dated 14 April 2015 addressed to the Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP), who is the head of the facility. We have a copy of the letter and we will lay it at the Table. The letter is entitled, “Campaign against criminal violence.”

    3. The committee established that Nalufenya, therefore, operates as a special police facility dedicated to handling high profile cases where suspects are brought from any part of the country for investigation and interrogations.

    4. The committee was informed by the officers who were led by Senior Superintendent of Police, Henry Mugumya, that the police in carrying out the special operations works jointly with other sister security agencies such as the Internal Security Organisation (ISO), External Security Organisation (ESO) and Chief of Military Intelligence among others.

    5. The committee was further informed that owing to the nature of the crimes and personality of the suspects, this makes Nalufenya a sensitive security installation.

The veracity of the allegations

Conditions of the suspects and persons detained, inquiries

We were supposed to visit and inquire from police and suspects. During inspection of the cells, Mr Geoffrey Byamukama, who is the LC3 chairperson of Kamwenge Town Council informed the committee that he was arrested at the Ministry of Lands offices specifically in the office of the Commissioner Lands. He was handcuffed and put in the van. While in that van, he was manhandled. He was tortured by repeatedly being knocked on the ankles and knees, which caused a lot of wounds, bruises and damaged his limbs. You have all seen the man on your television screens - and this greatly affected his health.

He was then driven away to Nalufenya detention facility, where he was held incommunicado though he was later allowed to talk to his daughter. The following day, due to the state of his health, the police officials took him to a health centre II which is within the facility and he was treated. Later he was taken to Jinja Regional Referral Hospital and finally to Nakasero Hospital on the third day. 

According to him, he was not subjected to any kind of torture at Nalufenya. On the contrary, the police officials at the facility endeavoured to feed and take care of him from the time that he was brought in -(Interjections)- I hear “Nos” but these were his own words and there are witnesses. 

I will also tell you that Mr Byamukama said if he had not been taken to Nalufenya, he is not so sure that he would still be alive and those are facts.

Interactions with the suspects

The committee then interacted with the two arresting officers ASP Patrick and Asp Fred Tumuhairwe and the drivers, Ben Odeke and Roma Habibu, who gave a contrary report as follows: They informed the committee that they arrested the mayor and put him in the van and drove him to Nalufenya. At Nalufenya, the mayor was in perfect shape without any bruises or scratch on his body.

According to them, it can be proven by CCTV cameras at the reception that show that the mayor was walking without any support. Mind you, this was after we heard from Mr Byamukama himself narrating his story of how he was treated.

Committee findings

The legal set up and establishment of Nalufenya as a police station seems to be in contention and the committee is concerned about the nature and mode of its operations.

Arrest of suspects from far places 

The committee was informed that suspects are arrested, transported, referred or transferred from far places including outside Uganda and detained for interrogation at Nalufenya. Suspects have limited access to the outside world including their families, lawyers and doctors.

The nature of the facility operating as a security installation makes it inaccessible to ordinary members of the public. The committee therefore observed that Nalufenya is not a conventional police station.

Madam speaker, even the Committee on Human Rights, which has a constitutional mandate, could only access the facility after protracted negotiations at the entrance to the facility. Calls had to be made to Kampala for clearance. The Members were barred from entering with their official iPads and other communication gadgets and all the media was denied access except for the parliamentary press.

Given the nature of its current operations, the facility does not seem to guarantee the protection of personal liberty as enshrined under Article 23 of the Constitution. We have reproduced the Article and Members can read for themselves.

Conditions of detainees

The committee notes that according to Article 24 of the Constitution, every individual is entitled to respect for the dignity of his or her person and no person shall be subject to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment neither shall any person be held in slavery or servitude, and no person shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.

During the visit, the committee inspected the premises and interacted with the officers and detainees and was informed that Nalufenya hosts less than 50 suspects on average on any given day. On the day of the visit, the committee found 21 suspects, all of whom were male except one. The committee was shown four cells containing four detainees each.

On the face of it, the committee found no evidence of inhuman or dire human conditions. The facility has a medical unit and four major detention cells that are self-contained with running water. Detainees are served with meals and are provided each with a mattress and a blanket.

From the inspections of the lock up book or register, the committee found that within the course of one week, many detainees were transferred to Luzira Maximum Security Prison and other detention facilities. The committee, therefore, could not establish whether there had been over crowding or not or whether those transferred had been tortured at the facility. 

However, given the fact that the visit was not spontaneous the committee could not independently verify the real conditions of the suspects at the facility. Madam Speaker, as soon as the announcement was made here in Parliament, everyone knew that the committee was visiting.

Incidents of torture and other human rights violations

The committee interacted with all the 21 detainees at the facility on the day of the visit. The commander of the facility informed the committee that the isolated cases of torture reported in the media did not take place at Nalufenya. The committee was further informed by the officials that if at all any detainee has been subjected to any form of torture it was definitely not at Nalufenya.

According to them, the facility received detainees in their state as they are referred and brought in. On further interactions with the detainees, including Mr Geoffrey Byamukama the LC III Chairperson of Kamwenge, it was confirmed that torture of suspects occurs outside Nalufenya and none of the suspects interviewed on that day admitted to being tortured at the facility.

However, we found it odd when one person denied being tortured or even being slapped. As stated earlier, the committee could not independently verify the allegations of torture since the visit was not impromptu and many suspects were transferred.

Pre-trial detention of suspects 

Article 23(3) requires a person arrested, restricted or detained to be informed immediately in a language that the person understands, of the reasons of arrest, restriction or detention; and of his or her right to a lawyer of his or her choice.

This constitutional requirement is not adhered to at Nalufenya detention facility. The committee established that there are detainees who have been detained without informing them of the reasons of their detention or restriction. The committee notes that under Article 23 (4) of the Constitution of Uganda, it is unlawful to detain a suspect beyond 48 hours without charges.

However, according to the testimonies from the officials and detainees at Nalufenya, this mandated constitutional requirement is generally disregarded or dispensed with. Some detainees have spent more than one month at Nalufenya without any formal charge preferred against them. 

The police attributed the practice of disregarding the constitutional 48 hours mandatory period to the apparent nature of terrorism cases, which cannot be investigated within that time.

Article 23(5) states that where a person is restricted or detained, the next of kin of that person shall, at the request of that person, be informed as soon as practicable. The next of kin, lawyer and personal doctor of that person shall be allowed reasonable access to that person and that person shall be allowed access to medical treatment including, at the request and at the cost of that person, access to private medical treatment.

The committee observed that detainees at Nalufenya detention facility are held incommunicado. All the inmates noted that since their detention, their families are not aware of their whereabouts. They were, therefore, concerned of the psychological torture to their families.

In addition, no lawyer or family member of detainees have been informed or allowed access to the detention facility. According to the officers in charge of the facility, restriction of access to the facility is due to the fact that Nalufenya detention facility is a very sensitive security intelligence operation unit that handles very sensitive high profile criminal suspects.

The committee was further informed that suspects are not allowed to communicate with family or relatives in the early stages of investigations as this may jeopardise the investigations. They can only be permitted at an advanced stage in the investigations. 

The role of the Police and security apparatus 

The committee is gravely concerned by the lack of coordination in the security agencies in executing arrests of suspects. It is apparent that owing to lack of coordination, the police cannot always account for the cases of torture. The apparent fusion of the police and military is a point of concern to the committee.

General observations

There is restricted access to the facility and for anyone to be allowed access the officers in charge have to seek permission from their superiors in Kampala.

The detainees seem to live under fear and there is a general fear of disclosure of information to any person. Hence, even when the detainees would want to disclose information, they are constrained. 

There were so many discrepancies in the information given by the officers in charge of the facility; for instance, in the beginning, the committee was informed that they had only held two suspects in regard to the torture of the LC3 Chairperson, Mr Geoffrey Byamukama. However, it was later discovered that they were actually four suspects held at the facility.

The committee observed that the two detainees were brought in after issues of torture had been raised on the Floor of this House. However, the committee was unable to establish when the other two detainees were brought into the facility.

The facility appeared reasonably clean; there was hardly any overt evidence of torture. The cases which had been treated at the health unit were not available at the facility except for the LC III Chairperson. The others had been transferred and we were also given the explanation that the facility treats members of the families of the officers who guard the facility and also members from the community. However, the minister can respond for himself.

Recommendations

    1. The committee recommends that while it may be necessary to have a gazetted facility for sensitive profile cases, the police should observe and respect the national and international standards of freedom from torture, which is an inviolable human right.

    2. The police should ensure expeditious investigations of the suspects and their prosecution before courts of law.

    3. Government should commit resources to train police and other security agencies on the internationally recognised methods of investigations, and on handling people in a professional and humane manner.

Conclusion 

In conclusion, the Committee on Human Rights notes that this report comes at a time when cases of violations and abuse of human rights seem to have taken centre stage in our nation, in the operations of the Uganda Police and other security agencies. 

It is our considered view that the recommendations contained in this report will go a long way in addressing the pertinent human rights concerns affecting the people of Uganda. I beg to report and move that the report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, madam chairperson. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the instruments that re-designated Nalufenya into a specialised investigations unit and the report of the committee.
 
THE SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, are you aware of the minority report?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, this morning as we were finalising the report, two members informed me that they were interested in writing a minority report, so they can Table it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, our rules are clear on how the chairperson is supposed to handle members and if there are any minority reports, even if it is at the last minute. I do not know if there is a gazetted time that -

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem? She has said that she was informed today that there is a minority report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, she would have said it at the end; that, “Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that there is a minority report.”

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I have not seen the minority report and I was waiting for it so as to acknowledge receipt.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to remind you that once you have a minority report, you must hand it over so that they are attached and presented together. However, I am just being lenient because this is a serious matter. You should have given it to her to attach to the report but you can present it. However, that is our rule.

4.17
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, this is a minority report on the Committee on Human Rights of Parliament on the investigation of allegations of torture at Nalufenya Police Station/Detention Facility in Jinja.

Madam Speaker, allow me not to repeat the terms of reference because the honourable chairperson has already done that. Whereas I, and some committee members, agree with some of the issues raised by the committee in the main report, in the report, the committee fell short of some facts and observations.

Madam Speaker, the recommendations lacks the actions that citizens who are victims of torture and potential candidates for torture in the hands of the police would want this august House to address.

Legal status of Nalufenya 

Madam Speaker, the committee had two meetings with the police spokesperson, AIGP Kasingye and four other staff, who claimed to be the managers of the detention facility police station and there were a lot of inconsistencies in explaining the legality of the place. The following were the explanations:

    a) It is not a police detention facility but a sensitive security institutions/installation.
    b) It is a special police operation place with special duties.
    c) It is a gazetted police station for over 15 years in operations. 

The officers pulled a document, which is a circular written on the 14 April 2015, which they claimed brought in place the operation of the station and the document was written by Gen. Kale Kayihura, the Inspector General of Police. The circular called Nalufenya a “Special Police Operation Base” but does not bring out the legal status of the station. It gives their duties as follows:

    1. Physically hunt for criminals
    2. Intelligence analysis
    3. Detention of suspects
    4. Interrogations of suspects
    5. Preparation of files for prosecution.

Madam Speaker, the circular also removed Nalufenya from its original status of being a police station as I quote from the letter written by the IGP.

I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker, that it was difficult to even believe that it is an official letter because it has no stamp and headed paper. The letter reads: “Accordingly, I am making all infrastructural, logistical, residential (including evacuation and relocation of current offices/residents of the station and barracks) and security arrangement to ensure that the base is made suitable for the purposes for which it has been established.”

Madam Speaker, when the committee inquired what makes the place special, the police officer explained that the kind of suspects that they handle are high profile cases. They further explained that their operation is special because they have a highly trained investigation team that works jointly with ISO, CMI, ESO and JAT.

The committee went ahead to inquire about the methods of investigations done by the highly trained investigation team and they explained that they use phone tracking, forensic investigation and that some of the methods cannot be disclosed to the committee because they are highly sensitive.

Condition of the detention facility/facilities 

Madam Speaker, the detention facility we visited was seen to be prepared for our visit because the compound, which had been bushy, was just slashed in preparation for our visit. The cells and every surrounding was cleaned and prepared for our visit.

We visited four rooms that the officers claimed were the detention rooms. However, officers at the counter claimed that they have five rooms for detention. We also visited a separate room where the mayor of Kamwenge Town Council, Mr Geoffrey Byamukama is detained alone in a place that the officers claimed is for staff quarters. Some committee members entered a few staff houses but we could not enter in all the rooms due to the limited time.

Beddings

Madam Speaker, the bed where the mayor is detained is a 4x6 feet bed just bought and prepared for the visit of the committee. Even the other mattresses and beddings in the other four rooms where the other suspects were detained looked to have been prepared for the committee’s visit.

Condition of the suspects detained in the cells

Madam Speaker, we found 21 suspects in the cells and according to the report by the police, they were 20 men and one woman. We talked to the suspects and they appeared to be those selected for the visit. The suspects had no wounds and no trace of any torture. They appeared frightened and afraid and they could not tell us anything but merely that they were not tortured and that they were treated well.

Interaction with the mayor, Mr Geoffrey Byamukama

Madam Speaker, the committee had a meeting with the mayor of Kamwenge Town Council and he narrated how he was arrested from the office of the Commissioner, Lands on 6 April 2017, tortured and finally taken to Nalufenya where he is being detained up to now without being taken to court.

The committee heard from the Mayor that after his arrest, a suspect called Hassan narrated that he was over-tortured and he just said that every phone number in his phone are for the people he coordinated with to kill the late AIGP Kaweesi.

According to Mr Byamukama, he was tortured from the van and could not recall the people who tortured him but their names were known to the police commanders. Madam Speaker, the mayor may be able to walk again after six months or one year as per the assurance of the doctor of Nakasero Hospital.

Interaction with suspects detained for torture

The committee then interacted with two arresting officers, ASP Patrick and ASP Fred Tumuhairwe and the drivers, Ben Odeke and Ronald Habibu, who gave a contrary report as follows:

They informed the committee that they arrested the mayor through phone tracking but put him in the van and drove to Nalufenya. At Nalufenya, the mayor was in perfect shape without any bruise or scratch on his body. This can be proven by the CCTV cameras at the reception that showed the mayor walking without any support. 

Madam Speaker, we did not have the time to check the CCTV to confirm. The two arresting officers claimed that after two days, the mayor was arraigned in Old Kampala Police Station when he was walking and in good health condition. After three days, when they reported back to Nalufenya for other duties, they found the mayor in a wheelchair being taken to Jinja Hospital and they believe that the mayor was tortured from Nalufenya. This further explains reasons as to why the two senior police officers were never arrested but left free in Jinja town with no police officers guarding them.

Torture of suspects

Madam Speaker, the evidence from the police officers who talked to us at the inception meeting was that the suspects are brought to the detention facility when already tortured by the arresting officers but they could not present even a single suspect who was tortured apart from the mayor who they knew was already in the know.

We talked to the mayor and his evidence was that the suspects he was detained with on the first night, who were about 26 in one small cell, consoled him that they all passed through the same torture and he should bear with his torture; he will be healed.

The mayor confirmed that Hassan testified in the presence of many police officers that he was tortured too much that he just mentioned his name because of pain inflicted by the officers. 

Madam Speaker, when the committee wanted to know what is done to the officers who torture suspects at the point of arrest and their details, the officers of the facility could not bring the details. 

Visit to the clinic at the facility

Madam Speaker, the facility has established a clinic at the detention facility and the committee made a visit to the facility, which is located within the building where the cells are also located. The clinic had two staff at the time of the visit - one man and one woman were working at the time of the visit. 

Madam Speaker, the committee checked the medical record, which showed that many suspects were being treated with conditions like soft tissues injuries, open wounds, wounds, pain in ankle joints, bruises, deformed and taken for physiotherapy, concussion - one of the medical staff explained further that it means shaky brains – and a particular one case was brought with blood flowing from the ears, bruises and many other conditions associated with long detention in the cells. 

Madam Speaker, even on that morning when the committee visited, there were suspects being treated with conditions of wounds and soft issue injuries but they were never seen among the suspects presented to the committee and never appearing in the lock-up register presented to the committee. The cases in point are William, being treated for pain in ankle joints; Fred, being treated for deformation and taken for physiotherapy; Sulaiman, being treated for wounds and bruises; Godwin, being treated for wounds and soft tissue injuries; Charles, being treated for painful body; Yusuf, being treated for open wounds; and Turyagenda, being treated for soft tissue injuries and many others. 

Madam Speaker, the details of the patients treated that morning and those treated at the facility within the week but were never found at the cells and the lock-up register are attached but not included in this report, taking into consideration the fact that the cases in Nalufenya are referred to as high profile cases. 

Madam Speaker, the AIGP was tasked to explain why those treated in the clinic were nowhere to be seen in the cells and even in their lock-up registers. He explained that the clinic treated the police officers, families of the police officers and even individuals who are residents of Jinja. 

The committee, however, wondered whether Nalufenya is a specialised place for treatment of wounds, soft tissue injuries, pains in the ankle joints and the AIGP failed to give comprehensive answers on the matter. 

Illegal detention and violation of rights

Madam Speaker, the suspects who were at the detention facility had been detained illegally beyond 48 hours as enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 23 (4). They are never allowed to see or even talk to their family members and some of them have stayed for as long as three months without access to their lawyers or personal doctors and their whereabouts is not known to their family members and relatives.

The committee wanted to know from the police officers reasons as to why suspects were being detained for more than 48 hours without charging them in the courts of law. The committee also wanted to find out in particular why the mayor, who is currently crippled and just lying on the bed in Nalufenya, is taken for treatment once a week and never taken to court for over one month. No satisfactory answers were given but that some of the cases take longer to be investigated. 

Observations/findings of the committee

Nalufenya is an illegal detention facility since the circular from the IGP written on 14 April 2015 revoking its original status as a police station since the offices of the police, the station and the barracks were vacated and relocated. This explained the reason as to why suspects are detained beyond 48 hours stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda with impunity.

Some of the suspects were hidden at the time of the visit. It seems the police officers keep many records of the suspects and that is why some suspects treated with different conditions of torture were hidden, and the only fortunate thing on the side of the committee was that they failed to hide the medical records in the clinics. That is how the committee was able to identify signs of torture at the detention facility. 

Nalufenya is a restricted area and even the committee members were harassed at the gate for about 40 minutes to the extent that no phones, ipad or any electrical devices were allowed in. It was therefore clear that the explanation by the AIGP and the spokesperson of the police that some of the people treated at the clinic came from around Jinja Municipality or families of the police officers for treatment of wounds, soft issue injuries and similar conditions, was baseless. 

It is, therefore, clear from these evidences that torture takes place at Nalufenya Detention Facility but the tortured suspects were hidden at the time of the visit by the committee. 

There was evidence that the operation to arrest the Mayor of Kamwenge was a joined operation and some of the police officers were from Nalufenya Detention Centre, other police stations and police headquarters. 

This was evidenced by the conflicting information from the officers that we interacted with in the inception meetings. It is, therefore, clear that Mr Geoffrey Byamukama was tortured by the joint team and it is impossible to exonerate Nalufenya Detention Facility on the torture of the mayor. 

The suspects in the torture of the Mayor of Kamwenge and many other suspects of tortures are never arrested. This is evidenced by the fact that only two out of the four policemen suspected in the torture of the mayor were at the police cells. 

The committee also observed that the two police constables were arrested at the time when the officers were aware that the committee of Parliament was tasked to investigate the detention facility. 

The other two police officers were just in Jinja town while the police officers claimed that they were detained at CPS in Kampala. This fact was unearthed when the AIGP admitted that they were arrested and detained at Nalufenya Officers’ Detention Room, which room turned to be nowhere. 

Recommendations

Madam Speaker, the illegal detention place called Nalufenya should be immediately closed because it contravenes the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, as amended.

Article 24 states that: “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” And Article 23 (4) further states that: “A person arrested or detained- 

a)	 for the purpose of bringing him or her before court in the execution of an order of a court or;
b)	 upon reasonable suspicion of his or her having committed or being about to commit a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda, shall, if not earlier released, be brought to court as soon as possible but in any case not later than  forty-eight hours from the time of his or her arrest.” 

Madam Speaker, the Director of Public Prosecution should investigate and prosecute the police officers and other security officers that have been torturing and detaining illegally suspect at Nalufenya Detention Facility since 14 April 2015, when the facility became operational. 

The suspects who are detained illegally must be immediately charged before the courts of law within 48 hours from this reporting date, and those who might have no preferred cases against them must be released within 48 hours till their constitutional right have been violated for this long. 

Madam Speaker, those who will be charged before the courts of law must be given access to their lawyers, family members and private doctors as required by the law.

Uganda should ratify the optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture within two months from the date of this reporting. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, this minority report has been prepared and brought before this august House in good faith. In the process of the visit to the illegal detention facility at Nalufenya, I made two opening statements to the police officers: one was that we are temporarily living in this world and that so we must make it a good place for the future generations in the event of performing our duties; and two, that we are just small pieces of meat walking around with blood still flowing around the meat and any time we shall leave the world so we should treat each other humanly. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to repeat the same statements to you and implore you to support this minority report. Today, it is the mayor of Kamwenge Town Council, Mr Geoffrey Byamukama, who wept in front of the committee regretting how diligently he served this Government only to be paid in that currency but honourable colleagues, anytime it may be you. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Akol, for the minority report. Honourable members, I am proposing that we hear the minister’s statement and then we debate them all together because they touch the same issues. Can we have the Minister of Internal Affairs? Let us receive his and then debate them all. If we do not do that, we shall revolve around the same areas.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mario Obiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement, following the directive on Tuesday, 16 May 2017, for the Minister of Internal Affairs to issue a statement regarding the allegations of torture at Nalufenya Police Station as well as the unlawful arrest and kidnap of children.

On Tuesday, 16 May 2017, the issue of alleged torture of suspects in police custody, as well as alleged unlawful arrest/kidnap of children by the police was discussed on the floor of this Parliament. During the discussions, the Minister of Internal Affairs was asked to respond to the questions on the matter, the details of which we did not have at that time. I am glad to inform you that I now have some of the information and I would like to address this House. The House remembers very well – (Mr Nzoghu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has been listening to the two reports; the main report and the minority report. Particularly, in the minority report, it has come out clearly that Nalufenya is not a police station – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the member has not said anything about Nalufenya. Honourable members, we asked for this statement, we can distribute it later in the debate. Hon. Nzoghu, please, sit down.

MR OBIGA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. This House remembers very well the tragic incident that befell this country when the AIGP Andrew Kaweesi was shot dead, together with his body guard Cpl Kenneth Erau and the driver Godfrey Mambewa, on the morning of 17 March 2017.

Immediately, investigations into this matter were instituted based at Kira Road Police Station under ref CRB 22/2/17. In the course of these investigations, one Jamil Mbazira Walukaga, a male adult was arrested, not only as a prime suspect in the matter but also as an ADF terror suspect.

He was arrested in the company of his two wives who are aged 24 and 25 years respectively. At the time of the arrest, 14 children were left in the house. Later, Nagalama Police Station took interest in these children because the circumstances under which the children were found in the house were suspicious. First, among the 14 children, it was only two children who were going to school. Besides, given the young age of the two wives of the suspects, it was obvious that the two wives could not have been the mothers of all the 14 children.

The circumstances, therefore, pointed to the possibility for the offense of child trafficking. That is why the police took interest. After the children were taken to Nagalama, the police made consultations with the District Probation Officer of Mukono, as well as Kampala Child Care Ministries, an NGO which engaged in anti-child trafficking and sacrifice, for the safe custody of the children. Thereafter, the children were handed over to the NGO for their safety and care.

Subsequently, following the release of the wives of Jamil Mbazira and the claims made in the press that the police had kidnapped the children; the 14 children were handed over to the mothers. However, interestingly, other women have now come up claiming for the motherhood of the same children. Some of these women have come from Bushenyi, Ishaka Trading Centre, Mbale and Busia. 

Investigations of the matter are, therefore, continuing, pending the DNA tests to know who the exact mothers are - because the other children had been physically taken. This will have the matter conclusively resolved.

There are reasonable grounds like I have already said to suspect the case of child trafficking. The police have made a report of missing children over a period of time. The fact that sometime back in 2014, the same Mbazira was a subject of child trafficking investigations of 65 children from Masaka-Kalungu, made the police take a keener interest in the matter.

The public will remember that in 2015, many children were found in similar circumstances and were rescued by the police. Madam Speaker, you will also recall that you personally contributed money to buy some clothes for some of those children at that time.

Furthermore, during the investigations and for some months now, a number of suspects have been arrested in relation to the death of AIGP Felix Kaweesi, his body guard and the driver. These include Geofrey Byamukama, the LC 3 Chairperson, the Mayor of Kamwenge Town Council but they are also arrested in respect of terrorism generally.

Madam Speaker, this House is aware that so far 13 suspects have already been arraigned before the courts of law, charged on counts of murder, terrorism and aggravated robbery. The suspects are also being charged with other offences related to defilement, human trafficking and recruitment of children in armed activities, which are on other files.

Since the matter is already before the courts, I may not divulge some of the substantive information on the matter because of the very well-known rule of subjudice. However, I assure this House that all the suspects, including Mr Byamukama were arrested based on credible and reliable evidence. We strongly believe that the evidence so far gathered will secure conviction in our courts of law.

On Tuesday last week, some honourable members raised concerns about allegations of torture of the suspects under Police custody. Indeed, what the honourable members of Parliament raised is a matter of public interest that has featured prominently in all media, including social media. 

I am glad the Committee of Parliament on Human Rights has just made a report after they were asked to investigate, they did make their visit and at a later stage when we are allowed to make comments, we shall associate ourselves or comment with respect to that report.

Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate the position of Government on torture. Government showed political will by passing the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012. Indeed, when allegations of torture appeared in the media, the President H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was very concerned. His concern, as the chief executive of Government embodies the position of Government on the matter. 

On 15 May 2017, the President wrote to the security agencies and categorically stated, "The use of torture is unnecessary, wrong and must not be used again if it was being used." He directed that criminals should be arrested "using patient means of evidence collection but not through torture because evidence through torture is not necessarily reliable.” That is the position of Government. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to categorically state that similarly, the current police as an institution in this country does not, in any way, condone torture. Quite to the contrary, there are established institutional mechanisms within the police to ensure there is no torture. First of all, the curricula of police training institutions contain the subject of human rights. There is no police officer who is not trained on the observance of human rights and particularly that torture has no place in police operations and investigations.

Secondly, there is the Political Directorate within  the police  which  is  the  custodian  of  the  pro-people ideology of the police, which should be practiced, to ensure that in the day to day conduct of police officers, they are guided by such positive values such as humaneness, discipline and sensitivity to rights of members of the public, including suspects.

Thirdly, in 2007, the Inspector General of Police established the Professional Standards Unit (PSU) whose mandate is, principally, to address issues of professionalism, human rights observance, as well as high standard quality of police services rendered to the public. 

Between 2007 and 2017, 431 police officers were investigated and charged in criminal courts with various offences of professional misconduct, including abuses in the use of force. Of these, 85 officers were convicted and sentenced. Similarly, during the same period, 915   officers   were charged in   the   police disciplinary courts with 407 convictions.

Madam Speaker, it is standard procedure in the police that as officers prepare for any operation, they are thoroughly briefed and during the briefing, the officers are given the details, purpose, and modus operandi of the operation. In particular, officers are cautioned against use of excessive force while executing their duties. Use of force is guided by the following human rights compliant principles: Legality, necessity, proportionality, accountability and non- discrimination. Indeed, the Uganda Police force incorporates these principles in its operational orders.

Madam Speaker, this House will recall the stern action taken against officers caught in acts of beating, such as the former Divisional Police Commander Old Kampala who assaulted a journalist, or the officers who assaulted Dr Kiiza Besigye supporters, as well as those who beat Mukwano Industries workers in 2015 and who were produced in the courts of law.

The fourth mechanism is the establishment of Directorate of Human Rights and Legal Services, which was established in a recent police restructuring. Its mandate has been expanded from just handling legal matters in the force, to monitoring human rights observance and continuous sensitisation on human rights.  

In this connection, the directorate routinely coordinates with the Uganda Human Rights Commission, civil society organisations and the public. Noteworthy, lately, the Directorate has registered decline in complaints of human rights violations by members of the force.

Madam Speaker, in addition, according to the JLOS annual report, 2015/16, Police performance has continued to improve. Uganda is ranked 1st in East Africa and	12th in Africa in effectiveness of criminal investigation, adjudication and correctional systems, as well as controlling criminal and civil conflicts and the fight against violence with a score of 61 per cent. These are reports not of the police itself but of the entire JLOS sector.

In terms of public confidence in JLOS institutions, at an average of 29 per cent for JLOS institutions, for the purpose of the members, JLOS institutions involve Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Police, Prisons and the entire Judiciary system. 

Uganda Police Force in that assessment scored 49.3 per cent against an average of 29 per cent for the whole JLOS. Significantly, the report notes a 21.2 per cent reduction in complaints of human rights violations against the police since 2010 and 2011.

The above positive picture notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, we must acknowledge that from time to time, there are unfortunate incidents of abuses of force amounting to torture. I must stress, however, that this is an exception rather than the norm and as we noted above whenever they are detected, they are investigated and culprits punished, either in ordinary courts of law or in police disciplinary courts.

Madam Speaker, on the matter of Mr Geoffrey Byamukama, police management got information, soon after his arrest and delivery at Nalufenya Police Station that the suspect had a swelling on his leg 
and had long history of complicated ailments based on the information he gave to the medical team at Nalufenya and at Nakasero Hospital.

The Inspector General of Police then immediately directed that he be taken to Nakasero Hospital given the complicated nature of his health situation and the inadequacy of the Police Medical Services to handle his situation. Indeed, he was immediately taken to Nakasero Hospital and admitted. 

After days of treatment, he was discharged on the recommendation of the hospital authorities and on the agreement of the patient himself. He has since been attending hospital as an out-patient under the continuing care of the Uganda Police Force. The police drive him to Nakasero Hospital for this treatment after every two days. Happily, Mr Byamukama is responding well to treatment and his health condition continues to improve.

In the meantime, the Inspector General of Police ordered the Police Professional Standards Unit to institute investigations into the manner of his arrest and detention. Preliminary findings from those investigations, including testimony from Mr Byamukama himself, shows that contrary to the allegations that he was tortured at Nalufenya Police Station, Mr Byamukama was handled by the arresting team after his arrest but before his delivery to the station in Nalufenya. 

Six police personnel who were on the arresting team have been implicated in the matter out of whom four, not two suspects have been arrested. They are Detective Assistant Superintendent of Police Patrick Muramira, Detective Assistant of Police Fred Tumuheirwe, Constable Roma Habib and Constable Ben Odeke. The others who have not yet been arrested but are being looked for are Sergeant Ronnie Byenkya and SPC Moses Kasiba. They are being looked for because immediately they knew the order from the IGP came, they went into hiding.

The Commandant/PSU and Director/CID have both been directed and are in the final stages of investigation and thereafter, presentation of their matter, as a matter of expedience to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to prepare them for the court action.

This House also needs to know that Nalufenya is not an illegal police facility as some people have erroneously alleged. In fact, Nalufenya Police Station is one of the oldest police stations which was gazetted in 1954 during the colonial period to provide security in the area, principally for the protection of the dam and general security in the area. 

It recently gained prominence after the police designated it as a detention facility for terror and other high-profile suspects, especially those involved in serious organised criminal activities and violence. Most police institutions in the world – with no exception – have such facilities to handle similar high-profile criminal suspects. I am sure in the modern time, you know some of the countries which have been handling such facilities.

Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi informed this House when we had a debate – that some of the suspects who were charged with the murder of AIGP Andrew Kaweesi were in the police custody by the time of his murder. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform hon. Kivumbi and indeed, the House that at the time of the murder of our officers, the police and the sister agencies had begun an operation to dismantle the Allied Democratic Force (ADF) cells that had been detected in different parts of this country and a number of arrests had already been made. I would like to state here that investigations have established that the murder of Kaweesi and other officers is to a certain extent linked to the ADF cells. 

Moreover, the commission of a crime involves not just executing the crime but also when you plan or coordinate even when you are in custody. Therefore, to be a criminal, one does not have to be physically at the scene or outside custody.

Madam Speaker, you recall that Uganda has since 1986 faced insurgencies, terrorism and organised criminal violence. The Uganda Police Force has played its role along sister security agencies in defeating these threats. In particular, you recall that after the 2010 terror attack by the Al-Shabaab in Uganda, the police was at the centre stage working with sister security agencies in Uganda and in the region – especially Kenya and Tanzania – to hunt, apprehend and bring to justice all the terrorists who were involved and successfully dismantled the terror cells that planned and coordinated the attacks in the country and region. 

The Uganda Police Force, working with sister security agencies, have been critical in foiling similar attacks since then. More recently, the security agencies achieved a decisive victory against the ADF when Jamil Mukulu, a high-profile suspect and his top lieutenants, were arrested in Tanzania and handed over to Uganda. The Uganda Police Force played its humble part and has continued to play a critical role in this landmark case. 

Madam Speaker, you also recall the wave of killings of prominent religious leaders – sheikhs – and other prominent personalities in Busoga and Kampala in 2014, 2015 and 2016. The Uganda Police Force, supported by sister security agencies, were able to successfully apprehend those involved and are now facing justice in our courts of law. 

In addition, the comparative analysis of the crime reports of the period January to March 2016 where police recorded a total of 59,166 incidences compared to the same period of January to March 2017 that registered 57,742 incidences indicates a clear decline in the incidences of crime in our country by at least four per cent.

In this regard, it is clear that the Uganda Police is doing a commendable job. While we regret incidences of professional misconduct especially use of torture by some errant officers, this should not obscure the achievements by the Uganda Police Force and its steady development into an effective, professional, pro-people and modern police institution that has secured us the little peace we are enjoying here. 

We appeal to you to continue supporting the police and also point out its weaknesses, especially in strengthening the institutional mechanisms within which the force prevents and detects abuse of force whether in its operations or investigations.

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to assure this House that on the matter of abuses in the use of force, in particular incidences of torture, however, isolated, H.E the President in line with the concerns he has expressed in the aforementioned letter to security agencies, has undertaken to personally handle it and decisively. 
On our part, we pledge to work closely with the leadership of Parliament, the Members of Parliament and the police to continue building professional discipline, humane and good conduct with the police force in doing its operations and investigations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the statement. Honourable members, as we discussed last week, we will receive the human rights report. It was awaiting debate. However, since it touched many of the issues, we thought we should do them all together. You can speak on any of the three. Due to time constraints, not everyone will be able to contribute. However, we will try as much as possible to use this one hour to speak on all these issues. Unfortunately, I will stick to my three minutes.

5.09
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the Committee on Human Rights, for a very good report that they have given. I would like to say that by 1980, I was 17 years old and I saw how Ugandans were tortured and how the credibility of the Government then disappeared and gave respect to Mr Museveni. The reason why Ugandans loved Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is because he restored sanity.

Madam Speaker, what I am seeing - I know tomorrow we may be the victims - (Applause) - we cannot condone the torture that is taking place. It is very bad. Today, it is a different person but tomorrow can be you or me. 

As the minister has said, the people who are torturing people must take responsibility. I speak with a lot of experience and pain that while I even knew what is happening in Nalufenya, it is worse in the waters now where Ugandans are tortured and no action is taken. 

I am pleading with all authorities that we restore sanity in the police. In East Africa, Uganda Police has the most qualified personnel. We cannot say that we are going to take them for refresher courses. It is an issue that we must tackle and an issue that we must tell them.

As the report says, people fear to tell the truth because they know that they will be tortured. So, we must stand to that and police should be brought to order. I plead with the whole House.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.12
MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Committee on Human Rights for the wonderful job done and I would like to support the recommendation of the minority report.

Madam Speaker, you pass Nalufenya when going to Kamuli. There is no single civilian who can approach Nalufenya for treatment of even a wound, even if the treatment is free. If anyone took the initiative and approached the clinic within Nalufenya - and the only treatment offered there is for wounds, it is an indication that there is a problem.

I would like to call upon the minister that we appreciate the work of the police. However, like the President said, the police is invaded by mafias. That is why you find that even amongst the officers, there are contradictions. Others are offering the truth but others are hiding information because there are mafias. The man was delivered when he was okay. Therefore, it is upon the leadership of the police as an institution to screen their staffing and ensure that those engaged in those acts are brought to book so that the image of the institution and Government is not blackmailed –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to thank my colleagues for the two reports but majorly the minority report.

The information I would like to give to my colleague is that what hon. Abott and what hon. Naigaga have said is true. The image of the Government - the fact of the matter is that if President Museveni who went to the bush gets the President Museveni of now, they will fight and kill each other. (Applause) The reason the President went to the bush was to fight against torture.  Madam Speaker, you can imagine I am speaking but not even a single representative of UPDF is in the House. They know things have gone wrong. I, therefore, would like to inform the House that there is something wrong and we need to put things right. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NAIGAGA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, my call to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the responsible ministries and the security agencies is that they should screen the police and ensure there is sanity.

Yesterday, I was attending a burial of a lady in my constituency. She was picked from Bugiri because she defaulted on a loan with FINCA. She was brought to Iganga Prison and she collapsed due to pressure but the police neglected her and she died in the prison –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda ratified the United Nations Convention against torture in 1984, Article 24 of our Constitution and the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 states that “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment”.

It is also the core role of the police to protect the life and property of the citizens. It is spelt out in Article 212 (a) of our Constitution. Now, it is the same police that is torturing civilians and suspects. 

Madam Speaker, this is very unfortunate. It is not even a surprise that the President painfully pointed out at the vigil of the late AIGP Andrew Felix Kaweesi that police had been infiltrated by criminals. It was very painful for the President to say that. Therefore, when we see such acts taking place in Uganda today – we would like to call upon the responsible ministry to train the police the more. Let the police be sensitised more about the provisions of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012. Much as they are doing an average job, more should be done because our Constitution clearly points out on who should be in the force. Article 211(3) says that someone should be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and a Ugandan of good character. 

Honestly, today, there is a problem. We no longer have such citizens in the army. Honourable minister, you have a lot to do. We would like to see more done. You didn’t talk about compensation, but Article 51 of the Constitution allows for compensation of victims. Some are innocent and they need justice. However, there are those tortured and in need of proper medication. What are we doing about these? We need a policy on compensation of the tortured victims. Let them get the justice they deserve.

Your report pointed out that some police officers who commit such offences are punished. We would like to see more are brought to book because our laws are clear –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, let me say Chapter 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda on fundamental human rights and freedom is the longest chapter in our national Constitution. I think the Constitutional framers did it by design.

Secondly, freedom from torture is one of the non-derogable rights under Article 44 in our national Constitution.
Thirdly, Parliament passed the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 and the cardinal principle of strict liability was upheld in that law; not vicarious, but strict.

Let me address my mind to the issue of the arrest of the Mayor of Kamwenge. Was he tortured? The answer now is yes. Who tortured him? The names are in the statement of the minister. Where was he tortured from? It is also clear. Who ordered the torture? I think it is not clear. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think even Government has given its position. First of all, they support the law that was passed by this Parliament. Secondly, the Head of State has made a clear position in blue print. What remains a fundamental issue now is to ensure that the six officers, four of whom were arrested, should be arraigned in court under the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 and they must be prosecuted. That is part of our way forward as Parliament. 

If Nalufenya Detention Centre is not yet gazetted under the laws of Uganda and yet we have people being detained, I would like to move that this detention is gazetted such that even we the lawmakers know that this is a public institution which can be accessed by members of the public. As of now, you cannot access it. (Interruption)

MR OTTO:  Madam Speaker, I wrote to your office about the status of my eyes. I beg to be excused. 

The information I am giving hon. Obua is that even if we move retrospectively to gazette Nalufenya detention facility, there are people we have talked to who have been tortured by toothless lions from that same prison. There is a toothless lion there. What will we do? What will you do about gazetting the lions, crocodiles and snakes? (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I believe this information is new to the two reports and the statement. Maybe, at an appropriate time, this Parliament can again investigate whether there is a toothless lion at Nalufenya? (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

5.22
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with both reports that enlightened us on the position regarding Nalufenya. 

I would like to say that the duties of police come out clearly in Article 212 of the Constitution; “to protect lives and property”, “preserve law and order”, “prevent and detect crimes” and “co-operate with civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally”. 

I would like to say the police are human beings. They are from within us. The people who have been wrongly handled are also from within us and we are not going to get angels from heaven. It is, therefore, important that proper sensitisation is done on the police officers. Also, when recruitment is being done, people should be careful about those they nominate. People go for recruitments with different aims and objectives.

I call upon the Uganda Human Rights Commission under Article 52(2) (e) to execute and ascertain within society the awareness of the provision of the Constitution and to do that in that regard. If I may go outside this report, there are incidences, for example, where somebody is stripped in an accident and the person dies like it happened to the lady who was working with the Registrar General. Somebody kills you off. That is outside the prison, but it is happening. 

I would also call for sensitive reporting because the way in which some of the issues are brought to the floor hurts us and the victims even more. I call upon the law enforcement officers to ensure that the law takes its course. We know that the country is against torture. Government has already expressed its position and people must be brought to book. Thank you.

5.25
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent Kibale County where Kamwenge Town Council is located. Therefore, the mayor we are talking about is actually my voter. May be at some point, I will also have a chance to bring a report from the constituency about his arrest and torture. However, when he was in Nakasero Hospital, I used to get a chance of visiting him almost every day. 

I would like to thank the committee for the main report but most especially the minority report because what hon. Akol presented is what the mayor has also shared with me at various times we talked. (Applause) It is very difficult for me to stand here and talk about the mayor who actually chaired my election taskforce. It is really very painful. My speech is going to be in form of questions and I would like the minister to clarify.

In his statement, he has said they have credible evidence against the mayor but we very well know that he has been in detention for more than a month now and other people who are suspects have been arraigned in court. On behalf of the people back home, we would like to know why he has not been produced in court.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the minister why these people that tortured our mayor and other suspects are not prosecuted until now yet they are known. The mayor himself knows the people who tortured him and even the minister himself has mentioned the names here. Therefore we would like to know why, until today, they are not prosecuted.

Thirdly –(Interjections)- I am going to give you chance. (Laughter) – in the last three - at least when he was in Nakasero, we were able to access him but when he was taken to Nalufenya, other than the human rights committee, no other person has been allowed to access the mayor.

Therefore, I would like to know from the minister what the procedure of accessing the mayor is. If today a Member of Parliament, and tomorrow the wife or daughter wants to visit the mayor in Nalufenya; what is the procedure of accessing him? (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that when you fall sick and you are under government custody, they take you to a government hospital and not a private hospital. Nakasero is a private hospital; that shows that the mayor is not - in fact there is something government is hiding. The mayor should have been taken to Mulago hospital, Jinja hospital or whatever. 

Therefore, the information I am giving - is the mayor safe in these current circumstances when he is not being treated in a government facility and is instead being taken to a private medical facility and being paid for by Government yet Government has its own facilities? The information I would like to give you is that the question you are raising on, our mayor is in danger.

MR ABIGABA: Madam Speaker, in conclusion; one other thing that has confused us  is that the police has come out to actually give conflicting information –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their extensive report and the report of the select committee and also the minister for enlightening us on some of the issues. We do not condone cruel treatment but I would like to say that in the circumstances when our policeman Kaweesi died, each one of you – if you are told that this is the one who killed him - would have taken a stone and thrown it at him because of anger.

However, I would say that it is true, it is through anger and pain that maybe the police tortured these people because he was a person who was still serving us and the way he died was very cruel. However, at the same time, I ask the police to control their emotions otherwise they will even be brutal to people who are very innocent. Therefore, that is about the brutal torture.

Madam Speaker, about the children; the police know very well that a Muslim man can have up to four wives and each woman can produce four children to come to twelve. Yes, those could be his children. Why did they decide to take all those innocent children to sleep in the cell? Why did they torture the children? Do they know anything about this murder? Therefore, please leave the children alone.

I would like to find out from the minister; how many children did you find that do not belong to that man? How are they? Tell us so that we can say that the DNA test shows that this child does not belong to the person. We must not mix children in the issues of adults. The children are already suffering in different ways. Some are tortured in their homes and others are tortured by relatives and others are killed. Therefore, children must not be confused with adults. Thank you very much.

MR WALUSWAKA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. We are discussing three reports but one of the reports by the committee does not have the required signatures. Out of the 30 members, only nine have signed. Are we proceeding well when we do not have the required numbers? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you look carefully at the Rules of Procedure, one third of the members of the committee can sign that report. Therefore it is eligible.

5.33 
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing the main report and my colleague, hon. Akol, for the minority report 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will notice that there is continued reference to the Uganda Police and other security agencies as agents of torture. To me that alone is sufficient indictment that worries me as a leader. 

The second is a finding by the committee that this place is treated as a centre for high profile cases from across the country. It worries me because a police detention facility is supposed to be a transitional mechanism. Therefore, how you transport somebody from Adjumani, take him to Nalufenya and you imagine you will interrogate that person and charge him within 48 hours – to me confirms pre-meditated actions on the part of the police that they do not intend to charge within 48 hours and with that they abuse the Constitution. 

Thirdly, prominent in the two reports is that there is continued interference in the work of the police by sister security agencies. And therefore, they continue with a blame game of accusing each other. In fact by the minister coming with a report, if our rules permitted, we would be getting different reports from several ministers because these are now transactions by different ministries. And they keep blaming each other.

One other thing which is a point of convergence in the two reports as well as the minister’s statement for which I cannot thank him; in fact if we were outside Parliament, we would either have quarrelled or fought - is that there is detention beyond the 48 hours. I find it disturbing that they are talking of a medical facility within Nalufenya. 

The Leader of the Opposition, a committee of this House, Members of Parliament, lawyers, and relatives of the king of the Rwenzururu had to seek clearance from police headquarters but they tell me that ordinary citizens from Jinja can go and visit that facility if they have wounds. Not for gynaecological complications, mothers are not allowed there, not for malaria but for wounds; to me that is not suspicious but confirmation that there is torture in the facility. One thing which comes out clearly is whether Byamukama was tortured in the van, in Nalufenya or anywhere; he was tortured in the hands of government agents. This is when we must summon our minds to implement the law against torture. 

Limited access and that it is not a conventional police detention centre have also come out. What else do we need to conclude that –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the reports of the committee. The honourable minister has mentioned my name having brought information to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that there were some detainees before the murder of Kaweesi who were charged for the murder. Good enough he has confirmed.

However, I have a list of five other members who have been arrested for two months and have not appeared anywhere. They are:

    1. Sheikh Haruna Jjemba Walugembe of Kazo, Kawempe; he was arrested on the 12th of April this year. 
    2. Hassan Nsubuga, who was arrested from Sseguku.
    3. Shaban 
    4. Hassan 
    5. Ddamulira Swaibu

They have been in police custody for over two to three months without charge.

Madam Speaker, let us be careful as we charge lower ranking police officers. I notified the chairperson of the committee about the following police officers who are lead torturers in Nalufenya and in other police stations that I have mentioned. 

I have mentioned that torture takes place in Kireka, on Mawanda Road Police station, Kabalagala and Namuwongo. And the following senior police officers are in charge of torture: Herbert Muhangi in charge terrorism, Francis Olugo who is assisted by Kanaala who is supervised by Magada who is supervised by Musana. They are the chief torturers. I can trace for you what happened when they arrested people and when we had a motion on police brutality.

To my dismay some of the police officers that were penalised are undertaking a senior command course when they are supposed to be on punishment. I am also aware that some of the corporals that were dismissed were re-admitted to the police force. 

Madam Speaker, this is the highest level of impunity and there is no Parliament anywhere that can stand it. There is also a deliberate profiling of Muslim clerics across the country. I have information from Busia, Mbarara, Gulu, Lira, Butambala, and William Street. They are arresting everyone with a beard who happens to be an Imam. 

They are taken to Nalufenya and then can either be exonerated or not. In the Muslim community there is general apprehension that they are a community under siege. 

Madam Speaker, we need to protect those people - I mentioned to the chairperson of the committee before they went that inmates from Nalufenya were moved. I even tipped her on where to find them but she never appeared there. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that as a student of research, there is what we call snowball sampling. This committee had information that some of the victims had been transferred from Nalufenya and taken to Luzira. I wonder why they did not follow up to gather more information and corroboration from those -

THE SPEAKER: Where in Luzira? Is it Murchison Bay, you people?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, there is information that these people were taken to Luzira and they were presumably charged. They would be able to follow up which prison they were remanded to.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, our terms of reference were specific; we were to visit Nalufenya and establish what happens there. If these people were transferred to other facilities – we were given this duty on Wednesday; we moved on Friday and we are here with the report. 

If there is need to go to these other places to establish, that will be something different. And in any case, the Uganda Human Rights Commission has been to all these places and will bring a report. 

MR MUWANGA–KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let us go to the method of torture, which I have clearly elaborated elsewhere. They range from a method called “Liverpool” where they put you under a jerrican of water, called “water boarding” –(Member timed out.)

5.43
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Thank you for this opportunity. I salute the chairperson but more so the person who brought the minority report. In my view that is the main report. 

Madam Speaker, this is not the only incident that everybody knows; in the past there were other cases. Today we should not have been talking about this.

There is a report of the commission of inquiry into the violation of human rights. If the findings, conclusions and recommendations were to be implemented we would not have this problem. 

The recommendations indicated have never been implemented to the fullest, save for the provisions put into the Constitution. Therefore, I proceed as follows:

In 2004 from Arua, a number of people including Ashraf Kelil, Akasa Khemis, and Rativ Henry from Obongi were arrested and tortured in the hands of security agencies comprising of the police and the army; including using methods of getting a molten jerrican dripping on the backs of these people.

If you see Ashraf today, there are wounds on his back. There is another gentleman called Angupiyo Jackson, a lecturer in NTC Muni, plus others who were captured and brought from Arua and tortured everywhere through safe houses.

At the end of the day, they reached Luzira prison. Today Angupiyo is not able to move. There is another person called Nasur Adrabo and others who were arrested in 2011 and tortured right from Arua to Kireka.

Madam Speaker, now that in 2017 we are still talking about torture – if you put it on a line graph, we can project that in years to come, if the situation is not changed, this torture will continue.

Muslims should not think that they are the only ones; and those who are not Muslims should not think that they are not targeted because Byamukama is not a Muslim. If you think that it is only a Muslim concern and you watch others being tortured, what will you say when your day comes? What should we do, as a people?

If you feel that you are going to be arrested and tortured please avoid the arrest; I am talking to the citizens who feel that they are in danger –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the main report and the minister’s report; they do not give clear cut recommendations. Concerning the issue of Nalufenya, which is near Mayuge where I pass on my way home – but even civilians who live in the neighbourhood of Nalufenya are tortured. 

Nalufenya is on the roadside and near there, there is a restaurant. If you park on the side of Nalufenya, you are tortured and even vehicles can be destroyed. Madam Speaker, I was once a victim; sometime back when I was going to Mayuge for my nominations and I had moved with my son in the car, I parked on the side of Nalufenya and went into a restaurant. When I came out, the policeman started beating me and in that scuffle, it is an army man who rescued me. 

Therefore, when I drove off after 30 minutes – because I was minding about the nominations in the village, I did not even report, I realised later that the policeman had used the bayonet of his gun to pierce my tyre. That was the time when Jamil Mukulu was detained and I wondered that the Ugandan government failed to capture Jamil Mukulu until the Tanzanian government captured him. And now Police is trying to show that it is so much concerned about the security and even harassing civilians. 

You can imagine I was even well dressed in a suit, but the policeman went ahead to beat me, Madam Speaker. This shows that there is a big problem at Nalufenya, just like my colleague has suggested. Since they are saying that it is a high security facility, maybe it does not deserve to be there in a public environment. I think that it maybe malicious damage within the police itself because if you look at the leadership; the former IGP and current IGP are all army men. 

Sometime back a wise man told me that if you are in an institution ensure that there is a way for you to go at the top.

All the educated policemen and women in the police do not see themselves up – (Member timed out.)

5.49
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the detainees at Nalufenya detention centre is a lady called Justine Nakakito, who is a resident of Kivulu in Kagugube zone in Kampala Central. She has been detained for over a month on allegations that she was the one sponsoring panga-wielding people, which is absolutely false.

In her interaction with a few people, she was asked to tell the investigating officer that if she accepted that she had committed that offence, she would be freed. However, they asked her to name a few people because of public pressure. In addition, Nakakito has got a son who is a veteran called Kizito and the chairperson of the veterans’ league in Kagugube National Resistance Movement. The husband has gone to every office; he came to my home on Saturday, crying because he has never seen his wife for a period of one month; no access to the lawyer and family. What more to that can you classify as torture to a woman? 

In any case, torture has even gone to the extent of protected people in society, the women and children. The treaty against torture started as far back as 1894; ratified again in 1924 in Paris and further ratified and improved in 1949. In 2015, it was declared a crime against humanity. And therefore, if this is not solved, it can be referred to the ICC; we should not be sitting here to talk about torture and a detention centre that is not in contention. From the findings, it is clear that the chairperson and hon. Anthony Akol who presented the minority report said that the police officers admit that the persons in their detention were tortured.

The question is why are you still with people who were tortured in your own detention? It is first of all, illegal and there are contradicting reports; the people who delivered these people as presented in the report say that if you view the CCTV we did not torture these people – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of torture should be condemned by everybody. I believe this issue cuts across our political divide. The act of torturing any Ugandan, regardless of his or her political affiliation or religion, should be condemned.

When we talk about these tortures, we are not in any way discouraging and stopping the Government from carrying out its responsibility of protecting Ugandans. We are not saying that they should not carry out their responsibility of ensuring that there is peace and security in our country. However, remember when these arrests are done, usually until they are convicted they are referred to as suspects. Therefore, if they are suspects – because after some time they can be proved to be otherwise. But they are not and they have gone under serious torture.

Madam Speaker, I believe that the police introduced the Professional Standards Unit - I do not understand whether the yardstick we were using as Professional Standards Unit is Nalufenya so that we can also know that when somebody has been tortured to death that is the professional way of handling crime. 

The issue concerning security of our country is at stake. We have heard and read in newspapers about Gen. Kale Kayihura and Tumukunde; what has been out in the newspapers is not good for our country; that people are being tortured to say that police – until you say that Gen. Tumukunde was the one who was behind the late Kaweesi killing, you will not be set free.

Madam Speaker, under such a situation, anybody can be forced to say anything so that he or she is freed from that kind of torture. Gen. Tumukunde is the Minister for Security and Gen. Kale Kayihura is the IGP; Madam Speaker, where are we heading as we hear about these conflicts –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I condemn torture that is mainly being done by the police. I am dismayed by the contradicting position that government is continuing to portray ever since this issue came up. 

The President was very clear in his notice through the media. He explained that ever since he came to power, he gave his efforts to training the army on being professional. He also admitted that he has not given enough attention to professionalising the police. 

However, the minister has said that we have a professional and disciplined police. At the same time, he has also admitted that what hon. Kivumbi told us here in the House is right; that we have suspects who were in custody by the time Afande Kaweesi was murdered. 

For sure if we are to be human – the minister read it properly, if I heard him rightly, that those that were in custody are being connected to Kaweesi’s murder because they were coordinating it. How do you coordinate when you are in Nalufenya? 

Madam Speaker, we need to be realistic with ourselves. I do not know whether the minister is simply there because he is employed to be a minister. We need to be human; how do you coordinate a criminal act when you are in Nalufenya? 

MR AOGON: Thank you so much, my honourable brother. The information that I want to give you is that when our team of the human rights committee went to Nalufenya, they gave a report that they were not allowed to enter into the tent with their gadgets. How then can somebody who is a suspect have any gadgets inside there to coordinate criminal activity? That is simple information that I wanted to give you. Thank you for being good.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I want to thank the committee for the report. However, we need to be realistic, if we are to fight for the rights of Ugandans. We cannot have a human –(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee, most especially the people who came up with the comprehensive minority report. 

Madam Speaker, I cannot support any form of torture whether physical, emotional or spiritual. Right now I am going through torture having been cut off from communication, when I actually registered my sim card. I wonder whether it was physical – and the minister is very lucky because if they had brought any paper for censorship, I would have been the first person to sign it because of the grief I am going through. 
Honourable minister, I am not happy with the way you are lamenting as if the mayor had the privilege of being driven in a car, taken to Nakasero Hospital and then brought back. How I wish you would be tortured and taken in that vehicle you are mentioning here! It is not a privilege. He does not wish to be driven in that vehicle because he has his own so why do you come here and lament and tell us all this? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think we need to look at other security agencies. Torture is not only in police. This afternoon, a certain captain was here lamenting on how he was tortured. However I was very unhappy because when I called the honourable members that represent the UPDF to go and attend to him, none of them came out to listen to what he had gone through and now the man is lame. 

Madam Speaker, I would pray that –(Interruption) 

MR MUHEIRWE: I would like to inform the House that the commandant in Nalufenya, Amos, is a Major and not a police officer. Sometimes their arrests are done at night. I have been to Nalufenya to pick somebody on bond. This mzee was told past midnight, when he was picked from Hoima, to go for a short call. He suspected that they probably wanted to find a way of torturing him indirectly and so he told them that he was okay. 

From the time he was in Nalufenya, up to today while he was released on bond, he has never got back his phone; that was six months ago. I really do not know why we keep denying some of these facts, yet in actual sense it is torture. 

It took me three hours after entering that gate to get bond for that mzee. I had to make very many phone calls. They even told me that I could not take him that day because they had not carried out a medical check-up and it was past time. They asked me to go back the next day so I had to sleep in a lodge in Jinja. When I went back the next day, I managed to get that suspect at 4.00 p.m. That is the information I wanted to give you. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, finally, I agree with the report’s recommendations and I am saying Nalufenya should be closed immediately before we even leave this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the interference of the army also contributes to this torture. Let the police do its work. Why should we bring in the army when they are saying that you can only be taken to the army barracks, if you are found with a gun? Were these people found with guns? 

Honourable minister, please let us not think of censoring you. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.05
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am constrained to speak because this torture centre is based in Jinja and it is causing panic and fear among the residents. Our prayer is that this centre is transferred to another place because the people of Jinja are peace-loving people. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, from the report, it is clear that the security agencies are torturing Ugandans. There are so many security agencies coming up with so many uncoordinated reports. Probably the reason for this is that most of these investigations take forever because every agency comes out with its own report. 

Madam Speaker, the uncoordinated information was on arrest; people claim that they were beaten in the van or the centre. Whether they were beaten in the van or the centre, it is the security agencies that did it; so they are guilty. We therefore need a thorough investigation. The police boss, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the security agencies should take responsibility because Ugandans deserve better. 

The chairperson also mentioned in the report that they found that some people had been transferred but they did not tell us whether that transfer was before Parliament had ruled that they should be set free or after. Otherwise, this causes suspicion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the chairperson said that they suspected that the removal of the people was related to our ordering them to go there. It was arranged for the visit.

6.07
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and that of members of the Public Accounts Committee, we would like to convey our heartfelt regards to you and thank you for the support you have given us so far. We would also like to thank you for the position we have acquired so far, because of your good leadership. (Applause)

I would like to raise my concern. I saw like four representatives of UPDF - they marched out when we are discussing this important matter. We need an explanation. Secondly, Madam Speaker, the consensus is, this is a national issue which cuts across parties - issues of human rights. These are issues that concern all of us and we all swore to uphold the Constitution. That is the reason why the President is saying that we must really regard issues of human rights.

Thirdly, I do not see any contradictions in the two reports and the minister; they agree that there is torture. That is the starting point. Why should we discuss torture now? All the laws are clear. The minister presented a good researched paper; international laws and African Charter among others - all that it says about torture. We have agreed to it.

Fourthly, all the reports are saying that Byamukama was tortured. We agreed. Where is my concern? My concern is the fact that there is going to be insecurity caused by security organs here. (Applause) When Kaweesi died, I was out of the country on duty – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, endeavour to conclude, “Pan-Africa”.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Members. When AIGP Kaweesi passed on, there were counter-accusations about who was behind his death to date. When torture cases come up, the security personnel point fingers at one another, accusing each other of inefficiency.

Lastly, there is ISO, it is a separate institution. There is ESO; it has its function and mandate. There is CMI, they have their function and mandate. There is this NSI (Nalufenya Supreme Intelligence) (Laughter) – this Nalufenya, where does it stand? When we say that it is a police station, it must be police at that level. We have said that we are going through a modern way of policing law and we have found out that Uganda was at its best. However, by this torture as we note, we were rated as being at our worst. It was too much on our behalf.

What I am now asking is; the information is there, recommendations are there, government is not implementing. It is today that we must come out with a recommendation that can put an end to this torture and we acquire our status. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.10
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I got afraid when the minister in his statement said that the police were doing a commendable job. We might be able to register improvement in the performance of the police.

I refer to his submission no.21 on page 11. I thank the committee for the two reports. In fact, Madam Speaker, I did not hear much difference in both the main report and minority report. Both reports are bringing out glaring gaps and serious issues, facing our country.

Instead of the minister focusing on these gaps and assuring us how these gaps will be addressed by government, he has sounded quite diversionary; talking about the police scoring fairly well, at about 49 per cent against 29 per cent for the justice, law and order sector.

We are now speaking about Nalufenya, but on this floor of Parliament we have been raising issues on how our people are treated in police cells. You may recall that last year, I raised the issue about one of my people – the late Oyoo James. He was arrested from Jinja, where he was working with Nile Breweries. He was under police custody, taken to Pader District - he was in the police cells. Immediately he was transferred to the prison at Kimendi, he died that same night. I raised this issue here. Up to now, my people of Pader District are still expecting an explanation from Government as to what happened to the late Oyoo James.

I am very disappointed with the minister because you are talking about good performance instead of really helping us calm down by focusing on the gaps. I am really disappointed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.13
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Constitution of Uganda is very clear; it prohibits torture, inhuman treatment, degradation – the Constitution even says that a person is presumed innocent until proven guilty. 

The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act states very clearly that any information which you have extorted from a suspect through torture, is not accepted in courts of law. This now defeats logic why the police would still go ahead to force people to plead guilty when they know that such information will not be accepted in court.

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to the Minister of Internal Affairs. Honourable minister, you are aware that the laws are very clear, but torture has continued in this country and it is reaching to the climax. The worst bit of it is that the image of this country, Uganda, is becoming very unbearable.

When the feature of the mayor of Kamwenge went viral on social media –(Interjections)- just a moment – people were wondering what kind of country Uganda is. Honourable minister, one thing that we are realising is that the IGP has become so powerful that even the minister cannot supervise him – and you must admit this.

Madam Speaker, all the powers of security agents we are mentioning; CMI among others, have all been brought together under the police. This has resulted into a conflict among security agents, and this is what is promoting crime in this country. This is the reason why the police is trying to use torture – even sometimes, other security personnel from other agencies are coming to torture people in order to spoil the image of police and vice versa. That is what is going on in the country now, Madam Speaker.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ayoo, for giving me this opportunity to supply you with information. (Laughter)– very few people and torture victims report to police about the torture cases that they undergo for fear of retribution, harassment and intimidation. As a result, many torture victims prefer to keep their ordeal secret. Therefore, the image is extremely bad in spite of the fact that freedom from torture is an absolute right. This is the information I thought I should supply to you.

MR AYOO: Thank you. We must denounce torture in Parliament and we must hold the ministry responsible, the Inspector General of Police and torture must stop in this country. We are losing very many businesses and tourists will cancel their trips to Uganda once they look at such things. Honourable, we want you to hold your grip on the ground - (Member timed out.) 

6.18 
MR RWAKAJARA ARINAITWE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I condemn torture. However –(hon. Odonga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order, honourable?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this relates to the decorum of the House. Hon. Abala just entered the House from here. He went across the House without even bowing to your Chair - from the Opposition side to the Government side. Then from behind there, it is as if some fire is burning him. He has now moved to where the Independents sit. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we had orientation week in which we were told the manner of entering and leaving the House. In relation to decorum, walking across the Floor without bowing to the Speaker - is the honourable member in order to behave in such an unparliamentary manner as if we are in a cattle market? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind you about the Rules of Procedure. You are not permitted to just move back and forth in this House.

MR RWAKAJARA: Madam Speaker, I have been interrupted by a few small behaviours around. However, we must understand that criminality in this country has been professionalized.

I remember in the late 1990s, certain criminal groups formed around Kampala and they took charge of the city. People were dying in industrial area and they had commanders and named their groups. They were killing people, breaking into banks every day until “Operation Wembley” started. We have been having some peace for some time until recently.

Again, other groups emerged like kifeesi - I have forgotten others but I understand there are many in Kampala again. When you analyse the security issues, they have connections in all departments of government. You will find that they have connections in Police, Judiciary and everywhere.

Therefore, the matter we are discussing needs a professional way of handling it. Extracting information from a suspect by force is crude. I think it is high time our Police and all security agencies started doing enough training on how to get all this information from suspects. Training must be done to make sure we have Police that are more professional and all security agencies to make sure we curb insecurity.

Of course, we are blaming police and security agencies, but let me tell you, when you are attacked by these gangs, that is when you realise that security is necessary. 
Therefore, Madam Speaker and colleagues, we need to recommend to Police and other security agencies and to the leadership of this country to professionalize security agencies to make sure they fight the insecurity –(Member timed out.)

2.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take every opportunity or action as God-sent. We have talked about torture and nobody had ever raised it and that side has always said let them suffer - (Interjections) - yes, I have been here for long; I know what I am raising and you must listen.

Now, we must thank God that the Mayor of Kamwenge who is NRM has been tortured and the whole world is now seeing. Therefore, it means that torture can happen to anyone and at any time. That is the reason today, I have seen a bipartisan debate, which means, if we continue like this, this House is going to move and do a lot.

Madam Speaker, Satan exists and God is there and if God wanted Satan eliminated, He would have done it long ago. Therefore, working together does not mean we have to be friends. Talking for Ugandans does not mean we should be in one party. The thing I have seen today should continue.

Madam speaker, I raised the issue of the hospital. We have the government valuer. If you want to buy anything in Uganda from Government or Government wants to buy from you, they will go to the government valuer. It applies even to the Attorney-General in laws, government medical facilities - I am very surprised, Madam Speaker, before I make that statement, I have been observing the attendance of Gen. Jeje Odong; he has not attended more than 15 sittings and you have not taken action.

Gen. Jeje Odong is the Minister of Internal Affairs and hon. Obiga Kania is being disturbed alone; he cannot take any action but will speak. And Gen. Jeje Odong will maybe say, “You are wasting your time.” Maybe, that is why even the IGP does not bother. 

Madam Speaker, what I was trying to raise is that –

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister wrote to me, asking for sick leave.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I saw him in Toroma walking and running up and down - (Laughter) He was not sick. Madam Speaker, he was even in caucus yesterday. He only wrote to you that he is not around -

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, he is actually -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The man is walking around; he is just lying to you.

THE SPEAKER: I will deal with it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what I am trying to raise is that the two reports are okay. However, I would like to plead with the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights that torture has no boundaries and when you are going to visit somebody, if I am expecting you to visit me, I will clean my home, give you the best food and when you come you will know that this house has just been cleaned but it has been dirty even if I give you the best food –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you were listening when she was reporting; she said it appeared as if they had just prepared. Therefore, they were busy because they knew they were coming.

6.26
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members of the committee and those who have contributed to this debate. I hope at the end of the day, we will get resolutions that will help this country to fight the vice of torture.

I will begin with that very resolution and suggest that one of the recommendations, which should be added to the recommendations by both the minority and majority reports, is that this House designates a committee specifically to investigate incidences of torture in detention areas, gets a list of names of those involved as well as the victims and reports back to this House with the necessary recommendations. If we do not do it this way, it will only be lamentations, lamentations and lamentations.

I have read the minister’s statement; well, I sympathise with my friend because what more could he have stated? (Laughter) If it is only junior officers who are arrested, yet the law is very clear that even a superior who is in charge of a facility where torture has been committed with his knowledge is liable - the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act is very clear on that. 

Secondly, charging these officers – whether junior or senior – in the Police Professional Standards Unit is against the law. These are not disciplinary but criminal offences, and the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act is again clear that they are supposed to be arraigned before a magistrates’ courts. 

Honourable minister, can we have all those responsible for Nalufenya detention facility – from the commanding officer to those who tortured Byamukama – charged in the courts of law before the end of this week? That should happen unless you want some of us to begin a censure motion against you for failure to rein in your police personnel. 

The minister now says Nalufenya was gazetted as a police station; granted, but if it was gazetted as a police station, is it in actual fact a police station as we speak now? Can any member of the public go to Nalufenya and report a case of simple theft or assault? If Members of Parliament could be denied access until clearance is obtained, do you believe that this facility is a police station? As a matter of fact, this is not a police station and that is why I support the recommendation in the minority report –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga North Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Summarising the minister’s statement, one fact comes out, that Nalufenya of Jinja is not only a symbol and symptom of a country full of Nalufenyas but it is actually one of the many. Nalufenya or any other place may not be the issue. The issue is what is being done in those facilities. Torture, whether done in a hotel room or church building, is totally outlawed by the Constitution of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, we have heard descriptions of Nalufenya as a detention centre for high-profile suspects. Torture is not allowed on the basis of any gravity of suspicion, at least according to Article 24 of the Constitution. We have seen pictures, in both social and the mainstream media, of Ugandans being skinned to death. Whether they are high-profile suspects or not, the Constitution totally condemns torture.

Torture is not only physical or bodily, but it could also be psychological. The effect of psychological torture could even cause victims to forget that they were tortured. I have listened to the report of the committee and heard that the Mayor of Kamwenge was actually saying at one point that he has never been tortured in Nalufenya. This is because the torture was psychological and he could even have forgotten that he was tortured.

Madam Speaker, mothers of the children who were raided have never claimed for the same children. What is actually taking place is that some of these mothers cannot trace their children from those that are being paraded by the police. I have information to the effect that it is likely one of these children was actually suffocated to death and because of this, police cannot easily hand them over. That is why you get stories of carrying out DNA tests. Initially, it was that they could not trace where they got them from and, therefore, they wanted to find out the families. Now, it is about having them subjected to DNA tests. There is a likelihood – (Member timed out.)

6.33
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all of us for speaking with one voice in defending all those who have been tortured in Uganda. I would really want to congratulate all of us for standing firm.

I would like to start from where hon. Kasibante ended - the safety of these children who are still in custody. When I was driving to Parliament one time, I heard a story on KFM about children who were arrested and detained in a police station in Apac but one of them died while in police custody. So, I would as well think that actually, the safety of these children who are still there is questionable. That is why I want the minister to give us very clear information –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Lucy Akello, for giving way. Madam Speaker, what hon. Akello is talking about is vivid. In fact, there are some people who were arrested from Kasese, taken to Nalufenya and tortured to near death before being taken to Bombo Military Hospital. Some of them actually died from there. On Thursday, the 18th of this month, those who were still near death were transferred to an unknown place.

Madam Speaker, I have always asked why when it comes to torture, they put the torture chambers in eastern or central Uganda. They will never put them in Ankole or Kigezi and I have often asked why. When it is torture, it is in Kasese; when it is killing, it is in Kasese. For them, they are thriving and alive. What hon. Lucy is talking about is vivid and they should check it.

MS AKELLO: Thank you very much for that information. As I conclude, I would like to say that I am very passionate about this issue and I will still emphasise it. 

Madam Speaker, in your statement the other time, you said these children must be released as soon as possible. I am wondering why we are still having these children detained. Which mother would want to be separated from her children? I am a mother and I know that there is no mother who would want that. What have these children done? Bongole Lutaaya sang a song, which in part says, “Today it is me, tomorrow it is someone else.” Honourable minister, I know you are a very good Catholic and I know you are going to do something good. Thank you very much.

5.37
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Human Rights for their whitewashed report.

Madam Speaker, unlike all Members who are here, I come from the famous Luwero Triangle, where we lost one million people. The current Government purported to be fighting the then Government of Milton Obote, pretending to restore the dignity and humanity of all Ugandans. Thirty-one years down the road, it is still hurting to see and wonder if it has become a culture of this Government to torture. 

As Members of Parliament, we should task Government to publish the names of all security agencies that we have in the country. We have the Joint Anti-terrorism Task Force (JATT), the Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU), the Rapid Response Unit (RRU) in Kireka and even Gen. Kayihura has created crime preventers to protect him - so many security organisations. I call upon Members of Parliament to task Government to publish all security agencies in the country.

Today, when one is arrested, you do not know the organisation that has arrested them. I have given a report to the Leader of the Opposition about a soldier called Lt Mwale John who came to my office this morning. He had a very big wound and he had lost a tooth and fingernails and he put them in a kavera. He said he had been tortured from Makindye. However, surprisingly, I have learnt that when he was leaving Parliament, he was kidnapped by military men and put in a pickup. Now I do not know where he is. I gave that report to the Leader of the Opposition.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that we are only discussing the symptoms and forgetting the causes of all these issues. Until we address the nepotism and sectarianism we have in this country - When these security officers meet, you will assume that they are in a clan meeting and they would not even need to discuss matters in any other language, maybe apart from the official language - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: I would like to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the honourable minister should come and tell us clearly which people put on civilian clothes but have guns and carry out massive arrests of people. Now in the country, you find someone putting on civilian clothes but they have a gun, they arrest people and take them to the police cells. Who are those people? Are they soldiers? Are they security personnel? You need to come up clearly and tell Ugandans. Thank you.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, as I conclude –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, hon. Luttamaguzi, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that we need to relate some of these torture institutions with the activities that take place in other institutions like the mortuary at Mulago.

Madam Speaker, about two months ago, we went to claim a body at City Mortuary in Mulago. When we reached there, we found bodies being thrown from the mortuary room onto a waiting tractor - so many bodies. We asked from the gate why those bodies were being thrown like that. The response we got was that the bodies were going to be buried somewhere along Hoima Road because they were unclaimed bodies. Some of those unclaimed bodies could be products of mass torture. I felt like life was very useless. There is no record! They should be publicizing all unclaimed bodies before any burial takes place. I felt bad and did not eat meat for a month. 

I think that it is not only these torture houses but also some of these private homes where people are being beaten and killed account for those mass bodies. Therefore, the Government should wake up. We are crying for this because life is very important. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I was saying that not until we address the fundamental – (Member timed out.)

6.39
MR ODUR JONTHAN (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank members of the committee and the chairperson, hon. Anthony Akol. I find the two reports very reinforcing to each other and I would like to urge the House to adopt them.

Madam Speaker, torture houses have spread everywhere in this country. For every police station, there is a torture house nearby. One time I was arrested in Lira and it took about five to 10 minutes as the District Police Commander (DPC) and another senior officer from the region where discussing whether I should be taken to the “VIP room”, which is in Lango College and it is known for torturing suspects. So, for every police station we have in this country, there is a nearby torture chamber. This torture has been going on; it has not just started today.

Madam Speaker, the reason why this is happening is because we have an orientation that has been merged with the one of the army. The policeman is trained to contain any situation and that is the instruction they get from their school. However, a military officer is trained to completely destroy. Now we have merged these two institutions together and we begin to question how a combination of police officers and army men can execute an assignment. In Jinja, a senior police officer – I think at the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) - was killed because on the one side, there were army men and on the other side, there were police officers with differing instructions.

Secondly, torture takes many forms. Again, I was nearly a victim of this kind of torture where there were instructions to pick me from the public and undress me completely. However, when the policemen came, luckily I had a brother who resembled me and so they picked him and undressed him completely. If my brother was not married, up to today he would be looking for a woman because once people see you naked, they either fear what they will have seen or undermine you -(Laughter)- and this becomes a very serious problem. 

Madam Speaker, the minister therefore needs to bring to this House a commitment to reform the Uganda Police Force. If the minister is not willing to reform the police, then I will be moving this House to review some of the laws that relate to our policemen in this country because this is too much and we cannot accept it. We need to unite and defend the rights of our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the two reports. First of all, I would like to call upon the minister to clarify to this House whether it is UPDF in charge of Nalufenya or the police. I want him to categorically state that.

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister why the UPDF soldiers who operate with the police hide themselves. Why can’t it be known that these are UPDF officers but operating with the police. At least we know that Gen. Kayihura is an army man heading the police but why are the others hiding.

The third issue I want to raise is on Makindye Military Barracks. That is another place where torture has infiltrated and been meted on Ugandans. Honourable minister, we would like to know what is happening there. The committee should also interest itself in that place and go there. 

I am a victim of torture. I went through what Members are talking about here in 1988. Hon. Gutomoi has also been a victim. Hon. Mayende Dede, from your side, went through the same situation of torture one time. The honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi knows what he went through and how I was protected in Jinja Police Station by fellow inmates. They said, “This is what happens here”. When we were commissioners, you know what happened. 

I survived firing squad but my three other colleagues were killed. When they reached me, Captain Kibuka said, “stop there”. That is how I survived. I was in prison but what we went through was bad. People were being killed at night. We were all naked in the prison. So, what you are describing here is something that has been happening and it must stop. It must stop. I will not say it is just the police; I think it is all the security organs. Sometimes the police are used for a cover up.

Finally, honourable minister, I would like you to take interest in this; last week in Kadungulu, Kabulabula, the Officer in Charge (OC) of that police post, called Emokor, tortured a gentleman. The man cannot sit up to today. I wanted to show you the picture, but it got deleted. It was good that the OC was arrested, but yesterday I was surprised when I got a call that he is now at large. I would like you to pick interest in that case, honourable minister.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of the lieutenant. I met John Mwale taking cover in the washroom near the Members’ Lounge because information had reached him that they were going to pick him even from the precincts of Parliament. His hand is rotten, as described by a colleague here, and he was tortured from a UPDF facility. Maybe that is the reason why our colleagues representing the UPDF took off because they knew the man was going to be picked from here. If that can happen to your clans mate - (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Actually, the information I would like to give you is that as I was moving to my office, I met two soldiers standing after the checkpoint between the North Wing and South Wing. I did not know what they were doing because they were looking at Members and other people passing by in a mean way. This is the information I wanted to give. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: I informed the security here that it would be an ugly thing for this UPDF soldier to be picked from here. I promised them we would not allow this and we would demonstrate. However, somehow while he was trying to get out and we were here, he has been whisked out. 

We demand that the Government produces this lieutenant. Was it a crime for him to come to Parliament as a last resort?  He told me he was trying to find his way to the Office of the Speaker. This is where he was left, and he was dropped. Madam Speaker, I would like to end on that note.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, it is becoming evident that even tortured members of the public cannot access you, the people’s representative, to tell you what is happening to them. This is the same issue that many Members are talking about in regard to torture. 

There were women who were brought naked all the way from Kasese. We also reported the matter of these women who had been beaten in the police detention centres. The police would ask the women to spread her legs and they would whip their private parts. That was the torture meted upon women. When women tried to speak out about these issues, many people thought these were issues of politics and they ignored it. I would like to thank those who saw it as a matter of violation of rights and contributed to the dressing of these women. 

The matter of Lt John Mwale Jr, who hon. Okupa and hon. Luttamaguzi talked about, is very serious. A person runs for safety here where he thinks he can be rescued, but he is picked up from the steps of Parliament. Madam Speaker, we should find a way of rescuing citizens who rush to the peoples’ House for rescue.

In Congo, if you are being chased for any criminal act and you run to any national flag that is raised and you hold onto the post, even though it is the flying squad, they will just sit there until, possibly, you get tired of holding onto the flag post. Nobody will arrest you as long as you still believe in the flag of the Republic of Congo, no matter what you think about the country. It is unfortunate that Ugandans who still believe Parliament can be their place of safety are arrested at the steps of Parliament- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I was indisposed and I could not come to Parliament, but I watched on TV the day you directed the committee to go to Nalufenya. This House should thank the Speaker for that because she was very clear when she gave them only three days. (Applause) It came at the right time when the whole country was bleeding. 

However, where I was seated, - I need not mention the place - I overheard one person saying the Speaker is proving to be powerful. So, when someone comes to Parliament and the person is picked from Parliament, I think this is a deliberate attempt to undermine this institution headed by the Speaker. They are sending a message.

Therefore, the information I seek is whether we could expand the rules so that the precincts of Parliament be expanded beyond this fence, maybe by another kilometre -(Laughter)- because some people are using this to spoil the very good name of the Speaker. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: The other information I would like to give is in two aspects. The first aspect is in regard to the main and minority reports, regarding the preparedness of the officers in Nalufenya. 

On Monday, a whistle blower called me and said they were aware our committee was going to Nalufenya but those who were severely tortured had been moved from Nalufenya and taken to Najjera and Kira Police Station. He warned that when the committee goes to Nalufenya, they are likely not to find any seriously tortured person. There was another person who said he had been called to go and sit in Nalufenya and say that he has not been tortured. He was not a prisoner; he was a police officer. 

Madam Speaker, the second aspect is in regard to the powers of the minister. When we went to Nalufenya and it was apparent that whoever goes there must first seek permission from the headquarters, I looked out for the Inspector General of Police but I could not get him. I looked out for the one in charge of administration, I could not get him. Finally, I called my good friend, Minister Kania, and good enough he picked my call. He is always available and I would like to thank him for that.

When I went to Nalufenya the first time, Madam Speaker, the small men at the gate told me they do not get orders from the minister. The minister looked as helpless as I was. I saw myself, the Leader of the Opposition, being denied entry at Nalufenya. I saw the orders of the minister being disrespected by those small men. We had to call another small man, -(Interjection)– he was not as big as the minister. (Laughter) We were told that small man was in charge of Nalufenya and he was the one to give orders to these other small men to allow us in. That was the second day.

I found the minister, Christopher Kibanzanga, being interrogated by small men at the gate when he was going to see his brother. The king’s mother, daughter, sisters and brothers were denied entry to Nalufenya. It did not stop there; even in his home where he is right now, religious leaders were denied entry, let alone being denied entry into Nalufenya. 

I started asking myself who is in charge of what in this country. If the orders of the minister in charge of internal affairs can be disrespected by junior officers, - police constables manning a gate that enters a police station - who in this country is still relevant? Madam Speaker, that alone was psychological torture for me as a person. 

As a leader, I believe something needs to be done. My colleague talked about the issue of people who were brutally tortured in prison cells and many of them were burnt with jerricans. I am now talking about Kasese victims. They told us they would put a panga in fire and when it is red hot, they would slap it on their faces and tell them, “hold it with both your hands and then start telling us how you became royal guards”.

This is the torture that was meted out on these people. When they saw that these people would go to court because they had been brutally tortured, that is how they rushed them to hospital. Some of them up to now have never appeared before court after six months. Some have died and there are others who underwent surgeries because of the torture they went through.

Madam Speaker, as I give this information, I would like to say that it would be very important for us as a country to reorient our minds to the fact that torture is illegal and therefore no Ugandan should be subjected to any means of torture no matter what. We should remember that even when someone is arrested, he or she is still presumed innocent until proven guilty-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, it is not information. You have smuggled in a contribution for 10 minutes.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and most obliged. 

6.59
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): First of all, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister, the chairperson of the committee and the authors of the minority report. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am going to address myself to the case of Mr Byamukama in line with what we are discussing. I am happy with what the minister has stated here. First of all, he has named the police officers who were involved in torturing Mr Byamukama. It is only unfortunate that one of them comes from my area - that is Odeke, according to the minister’s statement - and I would like to send a message to my friends who are involved in some of these activities.

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to one aspect of terrorism. We lost our good friend, Kaweesi, and my good brother, Erau, in a manner which all of us were not happy about. We all know what is happening in this country and yesterday night, you saw what happened in the UK. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, how are we going to handle matters of suspects, specifically those of terrorism? I would like to first address myself to the way our brothers, Kaweesi and Erau, were killed and also our sister, Joan Kagezi, who was trying to administer justice. Imagine how their families are coping today. I want us to put ourselves in that state. Therefore, when we are addressing issues of torture, it is true that we must condemn torture in its highest form possible, and that is why I would like to thank the minister and the police for accepting to identify those who tortured the Mayor of Kamwenge. 

However, I would also like us, as Members of Parliament, to address ourselves to what we are going to do. What are we going to do as Members of Parliament? We must start looking for solutions. Look at the law of 48 hours; you pick someone today and the police, like the minister is saying, have information and evidence, and within 48 hours it should be - (Interjections)- Anyway, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that -(Member timed out.)

7.03
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County Bududa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues to express kudos to the authors of the minority report. 

Madam Speaker, there once lived a man called Martin Niemöller. He spent seven years in a concentration camp. The atrocities that were committed in those concentration camps are akin to what we see here. If you actually visited Byamukama like I did, it is horrifying to look at that gentleman.

Martin Niemöller once gave a popular quotation: “First they came for the socialists and I said nothing because I was not a socialist; then they came for the trade unionists and I did not say anything because I was not a trade unionist; then they came for the Jews and I did not say anything because I would not identify myself with the Jews; and lastly, they came for me and there was nobody left to speak on my behalf.” Madam Speaker, they have talked about Muslim clerics, the Byamukama’s, and now we are potential victims. 

In the past, the Police Professional Standards Unit was practically seen to have exercised some disciplinary control on errant police officers, particularly the junior ones. However, this torture is being perpetrated because of the kid gloves the police is using to handle these perpetrators of torture acts. They are not being arraigned in courts of judicature. I must say, even the four that are mentioned in the reports of both the minister and the Committee on Human Rights have merely been stage managed for purposes –(Interruptio­n)-  

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, my good friend. The information I want to give is that Uganda is signatory to a protocol on human and peoples’ rights. In regard to torture, I would imagine, irrespective of the circumstances that are prevailing in the country, everyone is still innocent until proved guilty.

Therefore, in all sense, I would imagine that even when the police are trying to execute their work, they should be very cognisant of the available framework that we are proceeding with as a country. That is the information I want to give. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, my sister, for informing me. Madam Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 50, vividly says victims of torture are entitled to compensation. We have seen hordes of them but how many times is this implemented.

Finally, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda is long on talking but short on action. Supposing we use the formidable weapon of the Appointments Committee to whip some sense into some of these, maybe it would act as a deterrent. (Applause) If at one point we declined to appoint some of these - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you are aware that the Uganda Human Rights Commission has consistently complained that the awards they give are never fulfilled by the Government. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I stand on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. This House rescued one of our colleagues in the Ninth Parliament, hon. Dede. Now we hear that somebody was picked this afternoon on his way to Parliament. I plead that Parliament takes a decision to rescue him because he had come to Parliament trying to reach your office but he was picked and taken. If we do not intervene, this person might be held incommunicado.

THE SPEAKER: I was waiting for us to finish with this report and then I address that issue, because if something happened to him here it is not right at all. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when we came for this sitting, the front bench was full, and if you look at the screen now, it shows that 226 people have clocked in. Doesn’t this machine take a record of people who are going out? Where are the ministers in charge of security? I heard the Leader of the Opposition saying that small people at the gate were stopping them from entering Nalufenya. Now here we are seeing small ministers; where are the big ones? 

THE SPEAKER: I expect the small people here to transmit your concerns to their seniors. However, the ones I really wanted here were the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice. 

7.08
MR ASHRAF OLEGA:(NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report and more so, to thank the people who came up with the minority report. When you read the minority report, you will find all the details that suggest that these policemen who were involved in torture should be arraigned before court. I would like to thank the minister for accepting that there is torture in the forces. As far as I am concerned, let us synchronise the reasons given in the minority report with those given by the minister so that torture while trying to get information from suspects is avoided.

Madam Speaker, another point I would like to mention is about the ADF and Muslims. Not all Muslims oppose the Government, maybe it is only two per cent. It would be bad for this country if all Muslims were involved in fighting the Government. Therefore, those who are handling these people must not arrest people indiscriminately. Do not look at someone with a beard and arrest him; that will be unfair for us. 

Therefore, Government must ensure that those who are arrested are those who are involved. All of us are potential prisoners; today it is the people who were tortured and arrested but tomorrow it might be one of us.

Let the Movement Government ensure that torture is a thing of the past governments that collapsed in 1980. I joined the rebel groups in 1980 to fight UNLA because they used to kill our people and torture us. We captured Koboko, Arua and moved on because we wanted to die fighting rather than be tortured. If you want us to thank the police for good work, they must not torture people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.12
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few questions to raise. I would like to condemn torture in the strongest terms. I have been in this country for a long time and these acts of torture remind me of the Amin days and Obote II; I cannot sit back and see our country going to pieces.

I wonder how we can allow people to spoil the good image of this country.  Are we sure that these people who are committing acts of torture are not enemies of Government? If you are not an enemy of Government, how do you start torturing your fellow Ugandans, especially those whom you are not sure if they are guilty or innocent? 

Madam Speaker, one of my colleagues referred to tourists, saying that if there is torture some tourists may fail to come to this country. It is something more than that. How do we say that we are going to attract investors to this country when they see such acts of torture? We commit these acts of torture and people around the world see them. How can they come to a country where citizens are being tortured? How can they be sure of their own investments?

Madam Speaker, I request the minister to give us assurance that what we have pointed out will be acted upon. My fear is that we may say all these things and it all ends here and nothing is done and then tomorrow, we shall talk about more people being tortured. The honourable minister should take time to assure this country that these acts are going to stop from today. If not, we are spoiling the good image of this country, sending away investors and condemning it. Thank you. 

7.15
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members who have persevered from 2.00 p.m. till now, and especially you, Madam Speaker, who came here at 2.00 p.m. and you are still around. At least Members of Parliament and ministers can go out but because of your stamina, you are still here. Thank you for that. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, from what I have observed in the House, be it from independent Members, NRM or the Opposition, we are all united against torture. I saw some discrepancy between the statement that the minister brought and the minority report. The minister said the four policemen were arrested and as for you, you said you met them, and you are agreeing with the main report. Therefore, the minister should come out clearly on this. I do not know whether those people were arrested and put in Nalufenya to attend to these people. I doubt if those policemen were arrested.

I would like to request, Madam Speaker, that the identified people be taken to courts of law because some of these people are damaging the reputation of the police and the public assumes that the whole police as an institution is rotten. Some of us met and talked with the fountain of honour, who is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, and he said he had concentrated on the army but now he is starting with the police. I would like to urge Members to believe that when the President talks, the police will be brought to good books. (Interruption)

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to the House. Long ago - I think hon. Waluswaka was still in primary school - in 1994, I went to Kyankwanzi as cadre 21. I remember in the 10-point programme there was something about unwarranted detention without trial and also torture of innocent civilians, and that is the foundation of the National Resistance Movement (NRM).

I would like to advise the minister. The directive from the President gave the minister the mandate to ensure that the National Resistance Movement, which I love so much, does not become like honourable Nandala-Mafabi’s former party so that we make a difference in this country. That is the information I would like to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving them the opportunity to raise the information. You see, sometimes people want to speak for the sake of it. In 1980, I never voted because I had not reached voting age. In 1986, I was in the university in my first year. Madam Speaker, I have never been in any government. 

Madam Speaker, these are people who do not have parties. The multiparty system started again in 2006 when I had already joined here as a Member of Parliament. Is it in order for an honourable member to just say “the Nandala’s” as if he is my mother, father or clansman and yet he cannot even match my standards of being a mugisu? One of the qualifications is that you must be circumcised; are you circumcised? (Laughter) You may find that he is not even circumcised. Therefore, is he in order to treat me as if I am a boy yet I am a circumcised man?

THE SPEAKER: No, the honourable member has never been in government and therefore, hon. Bukenya is out of order.

7.21
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank you for the good work you are doing for this nation. I also thank the media that came up with a publication that has helped us to discuss this issue of torture. 

Madam Speaker, we need a total ban on torture as a condition necessary for effective rule of law. The three statements adduce evidence of abuse of suspects, and I thank those who put in effort to prepare the reports. The pervasive culture of impunity that allows torture by the police to go unchecked is a very big problem. This ruthlessness is much because of complete lack of attention to detail despite the country’s ratification of key international torture treaties. 

People are tortured in different ways, Madam Speaker; it can be socially, physiologically, physically and even spiritually. The passage of the anti-torture Act should have been a landmark moment; however, no single official has been convicted so far and this has raised a big question as to the Act’s success. We may need a global campaign with a focus on Uganda to stop torture. 

Government has conspicuously failed to track down on rogue officers and this has brought out negativity towards the Government. I believe there is a law that provides for the rights of people against torture and my prayer is that Government puts in an effort to see to it that this Act is well implemented.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me the opportunity to give you information. The information I would like to give is that when we were considering the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act of 2012, we incorporated in our legislation a specific definition of torture that can be applied without exemption, including to the police which is regularly accused of abusing its powers. As you may be aware, the police have been implicated in a significant number of cases of extrajudicial execution involving torture. 

However, you have been spot-on because we need to see a total ban on torture. Torture should be seen as an aspect that should not be tolerated in our country if we are to sustain the current peace and development that we have. Therefore, I thought that this would be important information as you make this submission. Thank you very much.

7.26
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for a job well done. 

I equally do not condone torture. I think one should look at the objective of the investigation they are carrying out; that should be at the back of their minds. If the objective is to extract information which is useful and may lead you to the root cause of an issue, then you cannot use torture. I, therefore, stand here to further condemn the habit of torturing individuals because you do not yield anything. If you start by beating somebody to try and get information out of them, they will confess and the forced confession will not help the country to reduce some of the challenges we are having like terrorism. 

I would also like to detest the action of detention without trial. Ugandans should access justice as the law prescribes. Why do we take long to produce people to access justice? This is not acceptable. The honourable minister is here and I think we need to do better on this. It is not only Nalufenya or places here in Kampala but if you go upcountry, you will find that people take months before they can access justice. We should have people access their lawyers in some of these detention facilities, so that they can appear before the courts of law and justice is seen to be served. 

The other issue that I would like to talk about is the condition of our facilities, including our prisons. I know all Ugandans, you never know, might also end up there. Today I was looking at some of the best facilities in the world and some of them are like hotels and you would like to go there perhaps. Why don’t we also do something because facilities of detention or prisons are for human beings? We should do something to improve them because we are dealing with human beings not –(Member timed out.) 

7.28
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee as well as the authors of the private Members’ report because nothing has been left out; they have done the job they were supposed to do. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk of torture and Nalufenya, I agree that “Nalufenya” is not only in Jinja but it is all over the country. What do we do when the hen has decided to eat its own eggs? What do we do when the police, which is supposed to protect us, has now started torturing us? 

Madam Speaker, in 2011 I became a victim of torture. I asked the DPC in my district why people had spent two weeks there without being taken to court or given police bond. He told me to go inside the police cells and spend two weeks and then I would know why those people are kept there for two weeks. I was assaulted and detained for two and half hours. If I was not a well-placed person in that district, I was also going to get extra torture. Later, I went to the Police Professional Standards Unit and at a certain point, with the RDC’s intervention, I forgave this police officer and he was transferred to Entebbe. However, I think he is still torturing people. 

Madam Speaker, politicians are no longer being respected by the security agencies. I know we are not respected at all. That is why the minister cannot control Nalufenya; even me, Michael Timuzigu from Ntungamo, cannot go to the DPC and advise him. The RDC is in charge of security in the whole district but Members of Parliament are not connected to the RDC and DPC. I, therefore, would suggest that we formulate a committee concerned with human rights where Members of Parliament will be members- (Member timed out.)

7.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to remind the minister of State for Internal Affairs that Uganda is a member of the international community and whatever happens in this country is known all over. 

When we go out to attend conferences, the issue of human rights in Uganda comes up every time. It even came up at the African Union and in the Human Rights Commission for African People’s Rights in Gambia, where the chairperson of the Human Rights Committee has been. This issue always comes up and we get embarrassed and ashamed.

Here we are thinking that Uganda is the Pearl of Africa and yet in the country, we torture our people. Torture has been outlawed by many countries in the world because it reminds us of the slave trade, when we saw our people being tortured. Why should torture be used as a means of getting information? Actually, when people are tortured, they can speak anything, and at times the courts do not even accept that information given under torture. I, therefore, want to appeal to you; surely, Uganda is a wonderful country, why do you have to go that extent of torturing our people? This should be outlawed and condemned. 

The minister said that those who have tortured people and those who go against the laws have been arrested. However, where is a one Arinaitwe who tortured Dr Kizza Besigye? Was he arrested? Isn’t he at large? You see, we are all Ugandans; when Dr Kizza Besigye or Wamanga-Wamai are being sprayed with teargas today, do not laugh because it will catch up with you. We are all Ugandans, so we must condemn torture in the strongest terms and Nalufenya, which is a terrible place. 

Madam Speaker, the other time I stopped at Igar Petrol Station and they came and chased me away. People are not even allowed to come anywhere close to the torture centre. When the minister said that people in Jinja can access medical services in Nalufenya, does he think that we are not Ugandans? We know all these things and that is not even possible. 

Therefore, honourable minister, we want you to rein in on the police. We have been told that the police here are regarded more important than yourself, therefore this torture must come to an end. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.34
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I will address myself to the report first. When you read the terms and references of the committee, they all point to one thing, and that is, whether there is torture at Nalufenya. However, I do not see this come up in the recommendations or even in the conclusion. 

The most annoying thing is recommendation No. 3, where the committee recommends that we should spend money on capacity building on the best way of internationally accepted investigation methods. Why must we make such a recommendation if we have not even concluded that torture takes place at Nalufenya? 

That said and done, if the committee, because it is headed by a person on the side of Government, feared to make that kind of conclusion, then we must now be sure to edit this report and probably bring a better conclusion. Even their conclusion is so annoying. The conclusion is that this recommendation will take this country far in matters of rights of persons. Make specific conclusions in regard to your terms of reference and observations and guide the House. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the fact that they have remained a little bit clumsy in their recommendations and conclusions is even evidence that there is a lot of torture at Nalufenya because they also fear to be tortured next time if it is their turn. 

Madam Speaker, the Bible says that authority does not hold the sword for nothing. The Bible also goes ahead to warn us and say that those who kill by sword will also die by the sword. History in this country has proved that whoever has been the Commissioner General of Prisons - I am just giving an example not related to this - ends up in prison. Mr Konga, from my constituency, was Commissioner-General of Prisons. He ended up in prison. By the way, he was put on death row until the President pardoned him. We requested the President to forgive the gentleman.

The point is that people in authority have killed us, the small people. Like in my constituency, police officers went and killed one innocent villager who was from the garden. The village was rioting because the Government wanted to put a water project where they had their water point. Their protest was on the grounds that for the last 30 years, they have not put for them a water point; so, aren’t they going to disturb this water system? In case of increased production, what would the lifespan of this water be? Technically, Government could not answer these questions –(Member timed out.)

7.38
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister mentioned the issue regarding children. As a mother and a member of the forum on children, before I say anything else, I would like to tell the minister that children are angels; leave children out of torture. (Applause)

If we do not speak for the children who are innocent and are angels, nobody will speak for them. At least adults have the opportunity to come to Parliament and express what they are facing. What about the children? I do not think that children are really involved in terrorism. I feel bad and sad to see that children are part of this issue of torture that we are talking about. At least my government in the 1980s did not do this to the children of Uganda. Madam Speaker, that is why all of us are here in this august House.

Secondly, the President has said before that we are professionalising the army. However, when I look at recommendation No.3, the committee is saying that we need to commit resources to train the police and other security agencies on internationally recognised methods of investigation and handling people professionally and in a humane manner. The head of the police himself is a lawyer. He studied law; what doesn’t he know? He is a trained army man. Do we need resources to train people on how to handle people professionally? We have all the laws regarding torture. I find this recommendation really wanting and I do not support it. 

Secondly, we have been told by the President that the army has been professionalised and now we are seeing the army joining the police in torturing people. We have budgeted a lot of money to the defence ministry and if this is what we are getting as the benefits of giving the Ministry of Defence a lot of money, I think that as a Parliament, we have to think twice.

Finally, this goes to the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs is; the report of the committee has told us that we have ISO, ESO, CMI and others working closely with the police. I would like to ask you, who takes the responsibility when these security agencies begin torturing people? I would like to get that answer from you. Is it the police or the army? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.41
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just the other day when we were in Dubai, a Member of Parliament asked me –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Public Service, are you abandoning the sitting? You are the most senior person today.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I am not abandoning the House. I am just going to wash my hands. (Laughter)

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, just the other day, when we were in Dubai, I invited somebody to come to Uganda and visit us. He then asked about the situation in Uganda. I had just read about torture but I really wanted to be patriotic and so I said, Uganda is very peaceful. I was really feeling pain in my heart that whereas I was saying that the situation is okay, we have these numerous challenges. Sometimes we are pushed to defend what is very difficult to defend. 

Secondly, there is a recommendation saying that we sensitise the police. Really, are the torturers torturing citizens because they are ignorant of the law? I have heard people in law say that ignorance is no defence. Madam Speaker, I think this is deliberate and we need to condemn it but we also have to ensure that these people are not only taken to the PSU but to the courts of law.

Finally, when I saw on TV a mother telling the nation how she was asked by the DPC at Nagalama Police Station to go and sleep with a different man and produce children that are not criminals because she had produced children with a criminal and so they are young criminals, I was touched. How could a DPC say that these children are young criminals because they were produced with a criminal? I was really hurt and I think the minister should tell us something about Nagalama.

7.44
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first appreciate the committee for having furnished us with a report and hon. Akol for the minority report. I would also like to thank the minister for his report because it remains a report.

Physically, I am disturbed because when we talk about torture, it is really torture and indeed torture. Mentally, I remember the Mukura incident when we talk about torture in Nalufenya. In Mukura, people were bundled onto a railway wagon and they set fire under the wagon. Imagine yourself inside that furnace without a chimney. Tell me where your spirit would be hiding within your heart. These matters are disturbing. 

Madam Speaker, when you talk about torture to the people of Teso, they begin running without knowing the direction to take because they know what it means. Nalufenya must be closed with immediate effect. It must be closed. Whatever happens there, it must be closed in Jesus’ name. This House has powers that are given to us by the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you for always standing by this country because you have really kept the powers within the House. We are able to stand because of you. (Applause) How can someone come from outside and arrest somebody within the precincts of Parliament? What kind of behaviour is that in Mother Uganda? I think it is not in order. 

People must be brought to order. I cannot imagine a man going to a church to arrest his wife because she has gone to pray overnight, and you think that God will bless you! God will torture you in the worst way you have ever seen in the world. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I know that through Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), those who are perpetrating this torture are watching what we are saying here. I would like to tell those people to please stop it because I have prayed. I prayed to come to Parliament and God brought me here. I am also praying for you - the people that are torturing people - that if you continue torturing people, within in one year you will also be tortured badly. If it does not happen then, it will happen.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you but we want to say that the power to control the budget lies within this House. The power to do anything, apart from creating a human being, is also within this House. For those that cannot move with us, let us not move with them. We are here to uphold the Constitution; let us stand by the people. For sure, we shall get there and we shall not pass the budget if somebody disorganises us. People should be so sensitive, otherwise we shall not be sensitive to them.

7.47
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Currently, Uganda has proved herself as one of the very high profile crime countries in the world. What has been the cause of these crimes that have caused torture? I have been a victim of torture six times in Uganda. The minority report concluded very badly for me by stating that anytime, you may be a victim of torture. This worries me so much. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament must be firm and get a solution to acts of torture in this country. One, why have we failed to go the way of a national dialogue, where we can discuss each and everything that affects this country? Once you call me “anyanya”, you have tortured me. When you call me a Munyarwanda, you have tortured me. When you tell me that a good Muganda is a dead one, that is serious torture. Now, why are we putting our heads in the sand and not discussing all these issues for the benefit of the future generation of this country? 

Madam Speaker, we need to come out with a deeper insight on the torture system in this country. This is because this regime is using torture as a planned machine to cause problems to the citizens of this country. Therefore, I think that we should come out with another committee to investigate all the torture happening in this country or in this regime and then we report it. When we open the gate, everybody comes out and we will find out what kind of torture we have got. Alternatively, we could have a judicial commission to investigate this because this is too much.

It is not only Nalufenya but all police stations in Uganda have been torture chambers. I remember when we peacefully demonstrated against Umeme that was torturing people in Lira, the torture I received then was the worst. In fact, torture now begins from thinking and then arresting you, transporting you to the police station, entering the police station and then entering the cell. I could not imagine how I was tortured when I was entering the police station; from a car, I was dragged by 10 people and when I was entering the police station, 50 police officers wanted to touch me, saying “today you will answer for it”.

What has been the cause of all this? We have not given ourselves time to investigate what kind of country we are living in and what kind of people we are in Uganda. Are we together? Even now we are seriously talking against torture. 

If we say, let us go and do one action, let us impeach the President of this country - I have a ringtone on my phone that says, “You think I am God to eliminate corruption?” What about this torture, can’t he eliminate it? If he cannot eliminate it, why hold onto power? The military men are mixed up with police officers and the police officers have given up because their promotion –(Member timed out.)

7.51
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to condemn torture in this country. So many of my colleagues here are condemning torture but we are forgetting about the causes. A Member mentioned the root cause, which is nepotism. Most of the leaders in the police such as the DPCs, CIDs - it is as if they belong to one clan. (Interjections) This is very true. I belong to the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we researched about this. All these people are actually of the same tribe.

Most of the DPCs -(Interjections)- I have the information and I am telling you this, and these people are arrogant –(Interruption)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard hon. Peter Ogwang saying that according to the report, one of the torturers comes from his constituency in Katakwi. I also heard names of people from western Uganda mentioned as torturers. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Zaake to tell us that all torturers come from one clan?

THE SPEAKER: No, maybe you are not listening. He said that the commanders of most of the police stations come from one area.

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. I was talking about the leaders and those are the DPCs and CIDs. 

Madam Speaker, these people think that they are above the law. When we, Members of Parliament, face them, the way they talk to us –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. An assertion is being made in Parliament that the DPCs and commanders are from either from one ethnic group or one region. My DPC in Kanungu is called Joab Wabwire from Namutumba. Is it in order for the honourable member to make that claim without substantiating and bringing a list of those commanders in the country on the Floor of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Appointments instructed the Equal Opportunities Committee to do an evaluation of the people commanding different places and the results are what he is talking about. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Zaake, you have won. The information I would like to give, Madam Speaker, is that there is research that was done on RPCs, DPCs, OCs and CIDs and 80 per cent of them are from one area. Therefore, what hon. Zaake is talking about is the truth. Those being touched are getting angry but we shall continue; we are here for you. (Laughter)

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for that information. Madam Speaker, I am a culprit of this. These people even undermine MPs. They just look at Zaake and think, “This one is a child”. When I approach them, they think I cannot talk to them. 

They have created fear in the society; when people find police officers or army men, they just run away. When some of my friends saw a police officer, they ran away and hid but they were arrested, tortured and then released. They were not given a chance to appear in court after spending a week in custody. 

Madam Speaker, let these policemen know that they are not above the law and something should be done. They should listen to your wise ruling because I know you rule very well. Actually, we shall even need another President from another region, and Madam Speaker, you can be one. Thank you.

7.57
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to start by appreciating you and the institution of Parliament for being proactive. This Parliament has taken on challenges at a time when people are desperate.

Madam Speaker, you recall that the Ninth Parliament debated the issue of safe houses and the concept of safe houses was abolished. This Parliament debated and condemned the killing of Muslim leaders. This Parliament was the one that initiated debate on security when Kaweesi was murdered. Therefore, this Parliament has been proactive. 

We have been focusing on matters of serious concern to the people of Uganda and I only wish that this Parliament had a television and a radio station for the people of Uganda to follow what we debate because really, it is the heart of the people of Uganda. (Applause) Therefore, I want to appreciate you and Parliament because on this issue of security, we are unanimous and united.

Madam Speaker, I am however very upset with the response of the minister. If you care to look at the last paragraph of his submission, he simply said that the President has pledged to take up the issue seriously and as for him, he will stand to support the leadership on that issue. In other words, as far as security matters and all these matters we are discussing are concerned, the minister would want to watch and see what the President will order him to do. To me, that is not what he is there for as a minister. 

I think this House must be concerned about why we are spending money on the various ministerial dockets. Madam Speaker, you can even see this afternoon; look at the shadows. These are just shadows of what is real on the other sides. When we are discussing matters of importance, the shadow ministers’ bench is full and they are squeezed and even overflowing to the other side. For the other side, we are even trying to squeeze them to come back to the House. Why? This is despite the fact that they must listen to what we are discussing in order to implement the decisions of the House.

Madam Speaker, allow me to say that the horrendous culture of torture was introduced by this regime. I feel bad to say that. The horrendous torture of kandoya was never known in our culture. Whichever tribe you come from, whether from Lango, Karamoja or Buganda, we never knew anything called kandoya. Can we really deal with the root cause of this horrendous torture? Wherever it has come from, we must all rise up, pray and rebuke that demonic culture of kandoya. It is something, which really runs deep into the minds of the people. When it now spills over to the children, it tortures us who are parents.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we should not just stop at debating the subject of torture but we should come up with a resolution that will guide the Government. When they say we must avail resources to professionalise the police, who does not know that we have put in place resources for professionalising the army and the police? Who does not know that Afande Kayihura is a military person and not a professional police officer? You know that he is the one presiding over all the activities of the police; if he is not professional, how can you -

I know that it is a matter of policy and I also know that we, as Parliament, are responsible but at the same time, we need to focus on how we can change the face of the police’s professionalism, if we are really serious about it – (Member timed out.)

8.02
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I was here but I did not hear anything about my concern on the torture happening on the waters of Lake Victoria. It should be addressed seriously. For us who are not on water, you can torture us and we remain alive but on water, the moment someone comes following you, you drown in the water.

Madam Speaker, another point on torture, which the minister must take seriously, is connivance at the highest level between the police and criminals. Some of my colleagues might have seen on the platform that on Friday night, thugs entered into the home of one of our colleagues and took away the number plates of his vehicle. He reported the matter to Mukono Police Station and good enough, the culprit was arrested. 

He was detained and he said, “I know how you can recover your number plates; we are a big group.” Within no time, one of the police officers was requesting his colleague to drop the case, saying, “Those are our own people. Get your number plate without even giving us money. Go and you will find your number plates at your gate.” That is exactly what happened. The number plates were dropped outside his gate and he was advised by the police to drop the case. 

When you look at the way kifeesi are sitting in meetings with big police officials, you wonder. This Monday, there was a planned strike by taxi drivers but the real drivers were saying, “We are not going to strike”. However, the perpetuators who connive with police were saying, “We are going to meet the police bosses and we must pursue our objectives”. Their objective is to connive and get money from Government. 

The minister concerned must, therefore, take serious note of the total connivance of police with criminals and that is why the cases in courts cannot be concluded. Case files are disappearing and a lot is happening. Honourable minister, something must be done because that is also psychological torture. When you go to court, you see how people suffer; they say, “Come today or tomorrow, your file is not here.” Those people have lost hope and the only way is for you people to come up seriously and we bring hope back to our people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here for almost five hours and at least 50 Members have been able to contribute to this debate. I would have wanted to continue but we cannot keep the Hansard people waiting up to this time. 

Therefore, I would like us to close but I have noted the Members who wanted to speak and I will give them an early opportunity tomorrow. I have seen hon. Ayepa, hon. Komuhangi, hon. Mugeni, hon. Aol, hon. Atkins Katusabe and hon. Olanya. I have also seen hon. Abala and hon. Muhindo. Those will be the first to contribute tomorrow. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights be adopted. There are three reports - Do you want to amend, hon. Niwagaba?

MR NIWAGABA: I had thought -

THE SPEAKER: I am dealing with the 17th annual report. I put the question that the 17th Annual Report of the Human Rights Commission be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We have to go to the minority report and the majority report. They are majorly in agreement except in the recommendations. In the minority report, there is a recommendation that Nalufenya be closed immediately. On the same issue, the majority report recommended that it should be gazetted so that it becomes accessible. That is the main area where we need to agree; those are the areas of divergence. The rest are complimentary. The minority report says we should close and the majority is recommending that we gazette it so that it is accessible. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if we are to do it procedurally right, I think the first thing is to close it. If Government wants it, they can gazette it and then reopen it. After all, we have other facilities. Otherwise, if we continue with it, we would be encouraging an illegality to continue because it is not gazetted. Therefore, it is there illegally and we cannot be party to it. My appeal is that we close it; if Government wants it, they can gazette and then reopen it.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard this debate and it is a very good one. On Nalufenya, I would like to propose that we gazette it so that it becomes our institution and we follow it up, control it and ensure that all that we have talked about is well handled.

Madam Speaker, if we –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I personally lived in Jinja in the early 1990s and Nalufenya Police Station was there. Every police station, from my limited knowledge of the law, has a detention section where they can detain people and that is gazetted, unless you are saying that this is not a police station. 

We might be able to get courage and condemn what is happening there but we cannot deny the fact that Nalufenya is a police station or a police facility. I thought I would provide that information.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you very much for that information. It is based on that information that I will say that we should look at the illegal aspects of Nalufenya. If it is a police station, well and good. If there are other aspects, which should be there but are not properly gazetted, they should be gazetted so that the whole legal part of Nalufenya is known and we can easily follow it up. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the end, especially for those that have come through a torture process, they will remember not the people that tortured them but the inaction of this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, this country entirely depends on this Parliament. It is not surprising that the army officer had to seek protection and provision of shelter in this Parliament. It cannot be this Parliament to make any recommendation, given what we have heard about Nalufenya. It cannot be this Parliament to recommend for the degazettement or gazettement of Nalufenya.

Madam Speaker, I totally agree with those colleagues that are saying our position should be firm and not double-edged. Nalufenya must be closed immediately. We will task the responsibility and the burden upon the Government, the orchestrator and originator of the torture, to either gazette Nalufenya or not, but not this Parliament. That is my prayer. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, these days every district that is opened has a police station called a Central Police Station (CPS). Where there is a district, there is also a CPS. It does matter whether it was there earlier on. Even in the villages where there is need for a police post, they have done it.

Nalufenya has been there and it was at the bridge. It was a police post and after the construction of the bridge, it was removed. What was basically to be done was to build houses for the officers. I think that is what they had agreed with the people who were there. No one has said that the houses they were building were for creating a police post or a CPS.

Madam Speaker, the problem we have –(Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, I have sat in here for all these hours listening attentively. All that we have been deliberating about is against torture. You have said that it is happening in the whole country; this is what I heard. Therefore, why are we gazetting one place?

Madam Speaker, we are deliberating against torture and we must condemn it in the whole country. When we gazette Nalufenya, how about the other areas? Nalufenya is already a gazetted police station. We should condemn the act and not places. If we do this, I think we will be handling just a small thing. I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you are saying that it is a police station, which should have the facilities of a police station, and what we should condemn and end is the conduct inside but the station remains? 

MS KOMUHANGI: Yes, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am happy that my sister has raised the issue that we should condemn torture. Even in CPS Kampala, there could be torture. 

What has happened in Nalufenya has demonstrated that it is beyond CPS; it is a torture chamber. During Amin’s time, they had Nile Mansions, which was a place for torturing people and it was stopped. In this Government of NRM, it is now Nalufenya, which will go in the history books as a torture chamber. That should not be the case, and that is why last Friday, the woman Member of Parliament for Jinja said that Nalufenya should be removed immediately.

Madam Speaker, why don’t they take Nalufenya to Mbarara or Kiruhura? Why should it be in Jinja? We do not want the east to be used for torture. If you want, bring it back to Kampala. However, as it is, if it is a CPS or a police post, let us make it a police post where everyone can access all the facilities. However, in the current state, Nalufenya is a torture place. In fact, one of the recommendations is that the police must be investigated for its torture habits –(Interruption) 

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you so much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I know you to be a nationalist. What would we benefit if we relocated Nalufenya to Mbarara? They would still torture human beings and Ugandans. I would like us to desist from discussing tribes and regions here because this is a national Parliament. (Applause) We must look at everything in the perspective of our country. When you degenerate to the level of tribes and regions, I feel bad and constrained. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for the information but I would also like to give you this information. I would like you to go and look at the directors, commissioners and assistant commissioners of police. Count them; where do they come from? You see, we should call a spade a spade. It means that there is a certain area, which is interested in the police –(Interruption) 

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, I rarely rise on a point of order. (Interjections) No, you are out of order. (Laughter) I do not want to rule. Even if one director is a Munyankole, you will find another director who is a Langi. We should condemn the act. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi -

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We are discussing a very serious matter but it has now become a dialogue between two people. We are not going to allow, under your chairmanship, for two people to throw words at each other - unnationalistic words which cannot be tolerated by this House. 

Madam Speaker, I would like you to intervene and call the two people to order, since they have refused to listen to the order, and ask them to follow procedure. They must debate with honour and respect, knowing that they are in the people’s Parliament discussing nationalistic matters. We do not know anything about their districts and tribes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose the following way forward: We shall deal with the recommendations of both reports but I would like to add a few                specific points. The first one is that this House condemns torture. The second one is that we abolish all illegal detention places in this country. The third is that the perpetrators of torture must be prosecuted. Therefore, I put the question that the main report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I also put the question that the minority report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to move a small amendment, specifically to direct the committee of Parliament responsible for the Justice, Law and Order Sector to look into the claims of torture in various detention places across the country and thereafter, report to Parliament on the way forward. 

If we keep it at this level, we will not have solved the situation. Therefore, I beg to move an amendment to that particular recommendation that the committee in charge of Justice, Law and Order Sector investigates claims of torture in all detention places and reports to Parliament in 60 days. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Niwagaba is proposing can be done by the committee but this is exactly what the Uganda Human Rights Commission does. Even before we went to Nalufenya, they had just been there. Maybe what we can do is to require them to report on a quarterly basis before they produce their annual report. (Interjections) I was giving information - (Interruption)  

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I am at pain - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: We must avoid duplication of duties, although the committee of Parliament can go ahead and do what it can – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: I am on a point of order, hon. Kamateeka. I am at great pain, Madam Speaker. Why do we make rules that we cannot keep or enforce? I thought that after a point of procedure, naturally it is very clear that we have to wait for the Speaker’s ruling and it is until the Speaker makes the verdict that you can speak. Let us be a House that knows the rules and dances according to the rules. That is my proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is a commission mandated by the Constitution to carry out all the things that we are doing. I think if we now took up their work, we would be usurping their powers. Let them do their work and report to us, like they usually do, we debate their report and take decisions. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the House cannot just gloss over this. We need to implore the Uganda Human Rights Commission to go deeper into the issue of torture and bring us a report regularly. I think this has been the tone of the debate - that we have been glossing over issues without going deep. Therefore, we should implore the commission to dig up as much information as possible about torture and report to this House regularly. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe I had not disclosed to you that I met the Uganda Human Rights Commission. You recall that I had sent them to Kasese to go and conduct a survey and come back. They were unable to go because they had no funds. Therefore, I called the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and he said we should give them sufficient funds so that they are able to do their work. Therefore, let us give them the money so that they can do their work, report to this House and then we debate the report.

Honourable members of the UPDF, I am directing the Police Commandant of Parliament to locate and bring to me John Mwale who had come to see me. He can respond tomorrow but I have asked the commandant to locate and bring that man to see me tomorrow. House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 8.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 May 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

