Tuesday, 23 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESS AND JOURNALIST BILL, 1995

Clause 21:

(Question put that Clause 21 do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.)


Clause 22:

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I move that Clause 22 sub-Clause (11) be amended as follows: He was have been convicted of an offence under this Statute or involving moral turpitude provided that such disqualification shall cease to apply two years after the end of the sentence.  The Amendment has been circulated. (Interruption) 


THE CHAIRMAN: Well we are on Clause 22, but I think hon. Omara Atubo is providing for a new Clause 22(11).

MR OMARA ATUBO: No, I am amending that Clause 22(c) rather it was badly typed.  This Amendment seeks to achieve the following: 1. In the original draft it did not provide for disqualification because of the offence under this Act.  The offence is under this Act is important because it actually involves professional conduct, so if you are saying that a person shall not be enrolled or continue to be Member of the institution if he has been convicted of an offence involving dishonesty or moral turpitude. 

First of all being dishonest is already an offence of moral turpitude, offence of moral turpitude basically consist of two things, one, offence of dishonest and sexual offenses these are the well known offenses of moral turpitude; embezzlement, theft all these are offenses relating to dishonest and they are attacking the morality of a leader, the morality of a person and also sexual offenses that is why they are called offenses involving moral turpitude, so there is no need to say dishonest or moral turpitude because moral turpitude already involves dishonest.  

Secondly, I intend to provide that a person shall not be involved or continue to be a Member of the institute if he had been convicted of an offence under this Statute.  Say, now you are not going to permanently disqualify a person for the rest of his life simply because he has been convicted of an offence.  Even under the draft Constitution, a person who has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude is disqualified from being a Member of Parliament the draft had spoken of ten years after the sentence, but we have now approved we have reduced it from ten years to five years but basically I am one of those who believe that once a person has served his sentence there is no need for society to continue to condemn him.  In fact, since the Journalist themselves possibly had considered to close - I personally would have strongly had an objection to that, because if a person has been convicted of sexual offence or other offence of moral turpitude and he is sentence to five years imprisonment and he comes out of jail why are you allowing him to be convicted to continue serving a sentence outside the prison? But since this not an issue and still the Journalists had considered to it and since you have also seen it under the Constitutional Provision I am now only providing that at least that disqualification should cease to exist two years after he has served the sentence. 
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SEKITOLEKO SEBASTIANO (Bugangaizi County, Kibale): Mr Chairman, the Journalism profession is very, very slippery indeed, it is very difficult for one to be in the profession without being imprisoned.  I have trained and I have worked as a journalist and I have been editor of quite a number of papers in this country, I know hoe difficult it is.  First most of the journalist are very young men - disqualify him at a young age, throw him in the public without anything because he has been imprisoned, jailed after coming out then you say, now you are disqualified I think it is very, very unfair.  It is very, very, unfair since - one reason why somebody is imprisoned is for him to learn to reform we expect that if somebody comes out of jail he is a reformed person and he is much fit to live with other in the society.  So, I think we should not really continue punishing such a person, it is very unfair.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, this amendment has come and we do not have much problem with it because we all know that human as we are none is permanently bad or none is permanently invariable only that I would like to say that, while we accept this it needs a kind of policy because the drafting of the amendment lacks here and there but in principle we take it that this has been something which may from time to time remind the journalist to do good.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24:

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Clause 24, Mr Chairman, is really to polish up sub-Clause (e).  First of all, it says, to do anything that is incidentally to the functions of the institute, if you look at the provisions dealing with the institute I think just we talk of anything about functions, it talks of the institutes.  And secondly, the executive committee may also need to carry out some of the activities which are conferred on the Council, so I am amending 24 (e) as follows: the functions of the executive council shall be (e) to do anything that is incidentive to the functions of the Council because functions - refer to the council and for the object of the institute and objects referred to the institute.  So, that is the amendment, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, this was an oversight, although that has technically it is the institute which is to cater for the professional size of these journalists, but since the council is the supreme body, whatever has to do recognises its supremacy; we have no quarrel with that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, during the representation of our report we did circulate this amendment which we would like now to formerly propose that the committee sate that in Clause 26 sub-section 1(b) that we insert immediately after the word donations the following from acceptable resource.  Because the Committee recognizes that donations can come but this could be in line with what the Council may want.  Not all sources will be acceptable to the country and that is why we found that it is paramount to have these other words to go with that particular sub-section (d). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, in Clause 30 the Committee will on the advise from the Attorney General’s Office found that this particular area should as well find provision in this particular Clause and therefore, we have come with another number; number 4 which is not here, that the Minister shall within three months after receive of the Report refer to it in sub-section (3) of this section lay the Report before Parliament because this particular council being created and when it becomes law it will be guided by Act of this Parliament, Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32:

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, in Clause 32 there really very simple amendment just a corrects of fees and substitution of is in 32(2) the Council shall upon payment of the prescribed fee not fees. And in 2 the practicing certificate shall be valid for one year and is shall be instead of it shall be renewable upon the payment of the prescribed fee.  (Interjection)

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I agree entirely; I did discuss it with him and with the chairman of the committee - simple grammatical -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 32 be amended as jointly proposed by hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Kazora John.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 32 as amended do stand as part -(Interjection)- hon. chairman, I do not have your amendment here there is nothing on - well proceed hon. chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, Clause 32 sub-section (5) we find it to be a bit vague and not very clear so that we have gone ahead and substituted it with these amendment, substitute in this section a person is deemed to practice journalism is he is paid for the gathering, processing, segregation, or discrimination of information and such person includes – Journalist.


(Question put and agreed to.)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you Mr Chairman, in 32 (4), in the last sentence it is supposed to read; pays a fine or imprisonment that should be ‘or’ failure to pay the fine; to imprisonment for a period not exceeding rather than of three months.  So, there is a ‘not’ exceeding rather than of three months.

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33:

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I have an amendment to section 33 which I now propose; it says, add a new sub-section (c) to read that, ‘it is not will to declare on oath to ad here to and to abide by the professional code of - and practice are set out in schedule 1. 

As we all note this Act is divided into two. Section 1 is the section where authority is committed are published by fine or imprisonment and the second part is where it is professional misconduct are dealt with by the commission.  Now, in Law you find the mischief that something which you think should be regulated and then you impose a penalty when it is a fine or imprisonment, or if it is a professional misconduct then there is a declaration as a question of bidding own, say, I swear on my own that I will abide by what are the regulations governing the profession body.  

So, I thought if we are trying to do this that all who apply for a licence to practice should sign declaration as an assurance that they will honourably abide by the rules and regulations which are contained in the schedule and the declaration is also simple, ‘it says; I, so and so, of P.O. Box.... whose name and particulars on enrolment had been entered in the register of Journalists in Uganda and he is qualified and entitled to be issued with a practicing certificate do sincerely declare that I am willing to ad here to and to abide by the Professional code of - and practice as set out in the first schedule of the Act and I make this same declaration consciously believing the same to be true. So, it is purely a matter of bidding moral obligations which are professional without any difficulties.  That is the point I am trying to include in.

THE CHAIRMAN: Just a matter of procedure, I am sorry, hon. Omara Atubo had an amendment in (a) but then I did not see him rise so I called hon. Kazoora John who came with a new amendment as far as a (c) is concern, it is just a matter of procedure you will excuse me there I will call you later then if you could allow me to deal with what is already on then Floor then I will call you later before I put the question.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I do understand the statement behind the Amendment by hon. Kazoora the only thing he has not added at the end of it is so help me God -(Laughter)- I have a feeling that what he is trying to put forward is really covered under 33(d) he has failed to comply with an order made under this Statute, all what he is talking about is to be able to - that if you are not able to abide by the rules in this Statute should not be allowed to practice and I think that, it is a kind of probably it is not necessary with (d) in place.  That is my personal feelings.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman there is a distinction between affidavit and declaration and therefore, I will help my Friend there legally there two totally different cups of tea that is why it is called a declaration if it was an affidavit then it would be known as an affidavit I do not want to indulge in legalistic analysis but the two are totally different as I am different from the hon. Member who has just mentioned this.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, hon. Kazoora would like to add a new section to inquiry this Journalist to declare on oath but, except that we have not reached there is Article or Section 46(1), it says, ‘a Journalist enrolled under this Statute shall be subject to the professional code of ethics provided in the first schedule which would take care of this requirement and as to the format of the oath, the Council is given and the Institutions are given leeway to design the format of the oath.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, in 33(a) I must confess that the out set I have failed to understand the meaning and the import of is likely to be discharged from the role.  if this is a pre-emptive action that somebody is about to commit an offence and therefore, you stop him by not enrolling him then I say it is not only prejudicial but also unconstitutional because you are punishing a person for an offence which he has not committed. But if the intention is not to issue him with a practicing certificate if he is discharged from the role that is one amendment, another one could be as I have proposed here that you will not be granted a practicing certificate if you are not on the role, so depending on what I hear the committee has it could either pick the first one which says, you will not enroll somebody who is discharged from the role or you will not enroll him if he is not on the role, but to say that a Journalist should not be enrolled because he is likely, that only happens when - that may happen in some fun offenses when you, a good partner entering a hotel and then you say, he or she is likely to enter the hotel and do something if he is a problem, but for all these professional offenses it does not apply.

THE CHAIRMAN: Could any of the Committee Members clarify?

MR MAYENGO: I think hon. Omara Atubo is right, there was a kind of oversight here -(Interjection) he could propose how he want it to be but the idea of seeing lightly was an oversight it was not the intention of the committee to anyone. It is true that he might be having something to answer, but it is not true that he should be prejudged that whatever he has to answer he is likely to lose.  So, it is in that respect that I am saying hon. Omara Atubo is right and I would like to consider what he proposes the way we should put it.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I am putting the question on the amendment as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo -(Interjection)- order please, one at the time hon. Member with due respect.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, first of all there is an article we have just removed where somebody would not be enrolled or continue to be enrolled, as a member of the Institute if that was in 22; he has been convicted of certain offenses and he has been discharged and when such a person has been convicted of certain offenses specified here then he is the likely person to now be registered on the role but that article has been removed.  So, hon. Omara Atubo is right, the committee would have no objection.  Mr Chairman, for Omara Atubo’s Amendment that he would not be granted a certificate if he is not enrolled, so if he would move the amendment the committee would have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is now a matter of hon. Omara Atubo moving the Amendment as proposed by hon. Gasatura, so could we now formerly move the Amendment.

AN HON. MEMBER: He is not enrolled that is the amendment, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not enrolled that is the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  In Clause 34, Mr Chairman, sub-section (1); Members revisited and found that if left in the Law book as it is it will not be stating clearly has it is hereby proposing the Amendment that we substitute that particular Clause with the following; that no person being an employee of a foreign Mass Media organisation all working as freelance for that Mass Media shall practice journalism in Uganda unless he is in position of an accreditation card issued by the Council that is to make it clearly. Mr Chairman, I beg to propose.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35:

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 35 by adding the word ‘Members of the Council’ to read; there is an established a disciplinary committee consisting of Members of the Council. Matters of discipline and inquiry are very important to an individual professional.  As proposed in the Bill it puts 6 people of 13 members of the council are proposed to sit on the committee as it is and it stipulates a quorum of 4 people which means, it will be subjecting someone to 4 people out of 13 and taking a list from the medical council these matters are important because somebody’s feature is at a stake, I would prefer that the entire council meet and decide on these matters rather than leave it to a reflected few.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I do not see the fear of hon. Luyombya here because even if we write consisting of the Member of the Council I still see only one person who is not a member and that is the secretary, otherwise, the chairman of the disciplinary committee is a member of the council.  All these 4 others are also members of the Council and in case of quorum unless we can propose otherwise, we had already recommended that the disciplinary Committee be composed of 5 members and if anything like quorum would have - but this is a very sensitive and very demanding area where I think if Members here know their role as very important serving a link between the other person and the council then they should actually take it that they should not bring this quorum quite low otherwise, we are beginning from a position of witness and that is why unless any genuine reason is given we still stand by what we have proposed here. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 35, put and agreed to.

Clause 36:

MR KAZORA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I have an amendment to section 36; when you read section 36 sub-section (3) it does not give the chance to the complainant to be present when the hearing is taking place. But, I am asking your indulgence Mr Chairman and hon. Members to transfer this sub-section to schedule 4 which will be dealing with the sitting of the committee.  So, what I am asking for is to allow me not to introduce it under this sub-section but I will rise again when we are dealing with schedule 4 and show where it will properly fit in.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I wish to improve on the drafting of Clause 36(1); if you read it, it says; a complaint or an allegation against a Journalist which if proved would constitute professional misconduct may be made of the Disciplinary Committee by the Council or any person.  I have problems in understanding the mode of submitting complaints. I have also a difficulty in wondering what the deference is between a complaint and an allegation and why we should have both. I think it must be very clear in the Law how complaints should be submitted to the Disciplinary Committee.  

I am proposing, therefore, that we substitute that sub-section with the following; that a complaint made against a Journalist shall be submitted in writing to the secretary of the Council so that Members of the Public are very clear; (1) that when you make a complaint you must have it in writing, because you will end up going to this committee by word of mouth or whatever the case may be and make complaints some of them may be rumours, so I think it is important that a complaint must be in writing and I think the Law must be clear and stipulates the fact that the complaint must be in writing.  

Secondly, it must be very clear to who should receive the complaint other than the secretary of the Disciplinary Committee.  Mr Chairman, therefore, I think this will be a greater improvement on the drafting of that subsection and I hope the chairman will not object.  I beg to move.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, hon. James is not proposing anything new really, only that, not at all sign he should entertain written complaint it would be against the principle of National Justice and for this some people may be offended and they have narrowly none to write for them but they are able to prevent themselves and explain what might have happened, so this is just how we look at it.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, having listened to the chairman of the Committee and to hon. Mwandha and aware of what goes on in the Disciplinary Committee of Law Society where you can make all complaints and so on but these complaints must be reduced into writing by the secretary and then send it to the accused.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  On the basis of that improvement, Mr Chairman, I beg to accept.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can now hon. Omara Atubo comes with a formal amendment -(Interjection) it is being clarified please, could you now put a formal amendment with that improvement?
MR OMARA ATUBO:  A complaint or allegation made against a journalist shall be received by the Secretary and then forwarded to him -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order; allow him to finish, then you will come in. Please, proceed. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: And then forwarded to the Journalist in writing and then the others will follow 30 days and the council meeting and so on.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the principal here hon. Members is just that an complaint raised should be routed through the Secretary who is turn will cause it to reach the Journalist against whom the complaint to be lodged this is just the principle.  I now put the question that Clause 36 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha and improved by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to

Clause 38:

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I am moving to delete Clause 38(c) which reads that the Mass Media Organisation which publish the matter that make the conference pay compensation to a person who suffered the loss of injury as a result of misconduct. This should be blanket condemnation; I thought that it should be removed because 39(1) still says -(Interjection)- it should be the Editor not the owner of the Media because some of these things may be started there by sub-editors. The publisher is not the editor; how do you make him answerable to the conduct of somebody else.  So, we should delete this and leave it to the Editor to serve the consequences.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to oppose that Amendment. First and foremost, we have here hon. Marwas’s Amendment which were circulated could he actually tell us where these were really typed because if it where in some other Parliament on legal making bodies this would be a very big task for hon. Marwas to explain.  Because, does he represent Kweni County which I know is in Kapchorwa District - even if it is in Uganda there is a principle involved here in the sense that some of our Members have gone behind trying to be taken care of in a manner which is unparliamentary.  So, I beg also to object to this.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I rise also to oppose the amendment. I oppose the amendment because I believe that the Editor-in-Chief act on behalf of his organisation if you write an article which offend somebody and the matter is taken to the court rules against that organisation it is the organisation to pay or suffer the consequences and fire the Editor otherwise penalty maybe to heavy for the Editor to bear, in which case the man who is offended will not be compensated adequately.  So, I oppose the amendment on that ground. Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 38 be amended as propose by hon. Marwas.

(Question put and negatived.)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I note that in Clause 38 there is no power given to the Disciplinary Committee to cancel the practicing certificate of the convicted Journalist was it their intention did they consider this as one of the powers that the disciplinary committee should have.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I want to clarify that there two certificates, one certificate the professional certificate is issue by the institute. Having been enrolled within - you come to the Media Council with your proof of enrolment as a Journalist and they give you a practicing certificate valid for 12 months. This is a certificate which the Council may suspend during that year and you can apply in the subsequent year.  But the Council has no powers under this Bill to suspend the professional certificate. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, my amendment is on 38, you know that first paragraph it is really once again drafting problem and I think the draft man must have made quite a number of errors, because he is saying after hearing the Journalist to whom the complaint lay and after considering the evidence abuse the committee may dismiss the complaint if no grand for disciplinary action is disclosed or if a grand for disciplinary action is disclosed imposed any or a combination of the following penalties.  I think what he meant rather that the word ‘disclose’ is proved because I cannot understand how the word ‘disclose’ comes in here. So, I amend this Clause by substituting the word ‘disclose’ as maybe, found here by the word ‘prove.’ The reading will be much better and the law will be much certain and understandable. I beg to move.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I find it almost difficult to accept because we are dealing with disciplinary actions and not cases in court of law which must be proved.  We are using this at this stage as something to reconcile both parties, so -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, normally for a disciplinary procedure there are two steps but in this one there is only one step. The first step is that when a complaint or an allegation is made to a disciplinary committee whether it is a law council or I hope the Doctors as well the committee will consider the complaint and the allegation as brought to the committee, they will read it, they will also carry out their simple investigation. If there is what we call a case disclosed then they summon the person against whom the complaint is, but if they find that this is a simple complaint and they do not even have to go into for the full hearing they will just dismiss it without having to bother the Journalist.  But here I can see the professional or the committee having shortened they all procedure say, you receive the complaint you reduce to writing even if it is nonsense you still call the Journalist you have to hear from him.  In that case, hon. Mwandha is correct because it is no longer the discloser only but you are going to hear from both sides and if the case is not proved then you have to dismiss it so the word technically should really be proved not disclosed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well if this one involves premature case then I think the word ‘prove’ bears in much more suitable, but it is simple matter.  Mr Chairman, with that clarification what do you have to say.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: With that clarification, Mr Chairman, and the light of the good law that we are making, we have no objection to this.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 38 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment which was submitted quite sometime back.  The amendment before - I would request, Mr Chairman, that we go to the ABC of that Clause 38.

THE CHAIRMAN: But even then, we are still in order because we have not - this is the main opening sentence.  It is the main body; we are dealing with it.  Can you now proceed with your amendment?

MR WANENDEYA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. At the end of the word ‘Committee’ I move that -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is 38(a).

MR WANENDEYA: 38(a), Mr Chairman. That after the word ‘Committee’ we should add the word, including the same boldness of lettering used and the page where the article appears in the News Paper.  The reason for proposing that, I would with indulgence like to show you an article which was published on April, the 11th 1995.  It was published -(Interruptions) Thank you, Mr Chairman. It was in bold letters and the article said, ‘Wanendeya fights with Court Brokers.’ When I refuted the allegations, you find that they came up without putting the word ‘Wanendeya’. They just said ‘no debt’. That is not the only thing; everything is there.  I mean, I am talking about the headlines.  You can see that, that is in bold letters for those of you who are near and when they knew that, I had refuted correctly.  They just put it as ‘no debt’’; they did not even put my name so as to conceal facts.  And that is not morally good enough.  

Not only that, but they came up at one time with an article which said that, Wanendeya had been arrested.  ‘Arrest Order for Wanendeya’ and I will come and lay it on the Table and they did not only stop there. (Laughter) When they knew that I had not been arrested, then they came up with a correction which was so minor that nobody could see it and I also lay it on the Table, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

Now, this is usually done literally to defame peoples’ images.  But mine as you all very well know is clean, and the Badadiri entrusted me by re-electing me again to go to the CA and they are saying, I should be re-elected again.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, the Amendment says, after the word committee to read; including the same boldness of lettering used and the page where the article appeared in the Newspaper.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, appreciating hon. Wanendeya’s concern, we took care of that, under 38(a), knowing that, there are many valuables, we entrusted this with the committee that a Journalist be admonished or be required to apologise to the aggrieved party in the manner specified by the committee. That may well be one of them.  But otherwise, they may just shake hands depending on the First Schedule. In Rule 6 also in the First Schedule, a journalist shall not deny any person with a legitimate claim to write reply to a statement.  Correction and rejoinders are to be published in an appropriate form without delay and in the way that will be noticed by those who have received the original information. So, hon. Wanendeya’s concern will be well taken care of. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that -(Interruption)- would you like to withdraw?

MR WANENDEYA: It does not appropriately take care of what I am talking about. If hon. Gad Gasatura had written on so many times, and they may decide to just stick something somewhere in the paper without giving it the boldness. So, I am talking of what I know without him noticing it and he says he is a saved Christian but when it comes to actions this is the time when everybody who is honest -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to support hon. Wanendeya. (Applause) Some of these writings may cause damage.  This is understood as being defamation.  Whereas the one who is defamed has there usual cause of going to the laws; if the one who wrote the original offensive article realises that, he made a mistake.  I do not see any harm in printing exactly in the same style in which he printed the damaging article and on the same page a correction.  This is what hon. Wanendeya is fighting.

I have never had a chance of having anything written against me, but hon. Wanendeya has produced enough evidence of what has happened.  The only thing here which we could say is probably the answer, is in the first schedule.  But even that one is a little bit vague.  It does not say exactly what hon. Wanendeya is talking about. The same type of print, on the same page.  Mr Chairman, I want to support hon. Wanendeya.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, I now put the question that, Clause 38(a), be amended as proposed by hon. William Wanendeya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, once again there is a drafting error in 38(c); the word ‘that’ should be deleted.  I think that the drafting people must really pull up their socks. I think this is not good enough.  This law has been made looking funny just because of the very poor drafting that has actually taken place. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, Clause 38(c) be corrected as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, Clause 38 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 39:

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, Clause 39 sub-clause (3) to read, where the council suspends a journalist, a journalist shall not  - while as appeal is pending under this sub-section, be entitled to practice.  Mr Chairman, I am saying it should be deleted.  Because if you see 36(1), she had a complaint or an allegation.  Now, we are saying, when things are still pending before court, somebody should not practice because of an allegation that has to be proved.  I think this is destroying the journalists completely.  You are already pre-judging.  You do not know the outcome of the High Court. And you are saying, before that comes out, he must not practice.  And yet, in our laws now, before matters are discharged by any court.  Nobody can be said to have committed a crime, otherwise, you are saying you are guilty until proved innocent, if we have to go by this Clause.  

So, I am saying that Clause 3, should be deleted because the man is still in court and there is no reason why, just for one allegation he must be admonished from practicing all his other things.  So, I am saying this Clause 3 should go until the court decides, otherwise, this man or woman should be allowed to practice.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, this came about because we know the process of appeal can be used to make mockery of the procedure.  The hon. Member from Kween County, Kapchorwa  -(Interruption)

DR YEKKO KISSA:  Point of information.  I want to inform hon. Gad Gasatura that I am the one who represents Kween County in Kapchorwa not Marwas.

MR GAD GASATURA: Then I am afraid we might be debating amendments by the wrong person. But Mr Chairman, hon. Marwas’s Amendment is ill-placed in that in all respectable professions, when adjudication has been passed by a disciplinary committee, such certificate is suspended and I understand he is now taking law at the LDC. Lawyer’s practicing certificate would be suspended while appeal is pending, same for medical practitioners and we think that journalists are equally respectable.  So we would oppose that amendment.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  To supplement that Mr Chairman, recently for those people who have read in the New Vision, there is a court case put in by hon. Alhaji Abubakar Mayanja and he is even asking New Vision to stop publication or making anything against him especially when this sort of case is going on. We are not saying that when these cases are passed, giving the journalist, he is found to be having no case to answer, and then he continues normally. But this is just something which put while the case is in court. Not just to prejudice the hearing.  That is why we have proposed it in this law.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the committee’s view as to how long this suspension is going to be. If for example, they suspend a journalist who by livelihood he is only a journalist and the period spreads over two years or one year while waiting for the decision.  How do they expect that journalist to survive? I would like just to know how long is this suspension and for what period because otherwise the man could find himself out of job with no support for a very, very long time and yet we are saying this suspension he will still earn some living but it becomes very difficult of he is a freelance journalist.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I think here, even then when you read, the matter we are talking about is a court matter.  So now the suspension will be as long as the matter is still pending in court.  Because it will be the court.  If they make judgement quickly, then the suspension may be lifted.  But I think that is the clarification.  With that I now put the question  that Clause 39(3) be amended as proposed by hon. Paulino Marwas.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR JOHN KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, one of the speakers has said we are dealing here really with the livelihood of journalists and they have families which they have to feed.  So when we are discussing the question of suspension, even cancellation, we really must be realistic about what is happening. This brings me to when we are discussing the question of suspensions and cancellation, we really must be realistic about what is happening. Now, this brings us to the amendment I proposed which also deals with the same  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Point of information from the Minister.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, is it a point of order or clarification or what? No, Mr Chairman, I am entitled to say no, and you can sit down, Sir. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, Mr Kazoora.  Hon. Members, here we are selling our ideas to the Colleagues to accept or to refuse and I think democratically, it is just good conduct to maybe listen to one another so that you are listened to.  Now if i see that maybe information is coming from the owners of the amendment, that is the Minister in charge of the amendment, then I think it is just a matter of courtesy.  It is not a directive that you should give the information or you should accept.  You are not obliged but I am only calling upon you to treat one another with brotherhood.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, I accept -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not ruling you out of order.  I am just appealing to all of you that here when you are debating, you know you are also banking on a number of Friends who might support you. So, it will help one another to really be as brotherly to one another as possible. So with that, if you do not accept the information, proceed.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, I allow the hon. Member to say what he wants to say.

MR PAUL ETIANG:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, with due respect to my good elderly and hon. Friend with whom we set together at the Back Bench there, I would like to inform him that the nature of the Bill in front of him is such that we are protecting both sides.  We are protecting those who have families and children who are the masses.  We are protecting those who have families and children who are the writers.  So as you debate, the emphasis on one side having family and not the other does not arise here.  It is the physical and ethics.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we are discussing matter of suspension of Ugandans and nothing.  Is it in order for us to continue on these critical issues when the House does not form a quorum?

THE CHAIRMAN: Before I give you the final decision as what we have to do in terms of the quorum and so on, I have to inform you that we have very pressing business ahead of us in a few days or a few weeks’ time. You are aware the budget day is just about two weeks from now, call it three, that is on the 15th of June and as you know, the budget cannot be delivered in the old session. Therefore, this session has to close and Members have to go for recess, then come for the next session during which the budget will have to be read.  And yet we have a pressing task ahead of us here.  This bill is also important.  In the CA, we are deliberating very important national issues.  

So, everywhere, every time we need time and as I appealed to you last week, I told you that you have a national obligation to deliberate here and if you have to re-examine what your Colleagues elsewhere in the world, in Britain, they go even up to midnight at times, Members of Parliament. We have been appealing to you and you are deliberating only for few hours in a week, that is to say, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and from 2.30 p.m. Hon. Members, I am appealing to you for the last time that since you chose to represent the people of Uganda, since you have a noble duty, since this duty needs dedication, let us rededicate ourselves and handle these matters in a more business like than ever before.  

I feel ashamed to be calling on you to come and make a quorum when you know it is your duty.  I will appeal to you for the last time that if I am forced to take administrative measure encroaching on your emoluments viz-a-viz the attendance here, do not blame me.  I will pay you according to the attendance if that be the case.  Hon. Members, now that the quorum is formed, let us go to business.

MR JOHN KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, I would like first of all to respond to the hon. Minister’s comments.  I have not in any way suggested that government is not fair in the way that this bill has been presented.  What I was saying is that the bill comes here for us to discuss, to share together what is in the bill and make it as a good bill and then eventually as a good Act as our fellow countrymen and fellow country women want it to be.  So I was not in any way saying that the government was anti-press that I am for the Press.  No, that was not my intention.  

Now, my amendment is on section 39 sub-section 2(b).  What I, is the words in open court be added to the words there between upon by a judge so as to read; heard and decided upon in open court by a judge.  As I said this sub-section deals with livelihood of journalist to decide their appeal summarily would be unfair and contrary to natural justice.  So, if an appeal is lodged I would invite you, Mr Chairman and hon. Members that it should be heard and decided in an open court because in law, summarily, the judge sits in his chambers and he can dismiss it without arguments being entertained. That is the only point I am trying to make.  It should be in open court and this amendment should be part of the proposed bill.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, this amendment is unnecessary because once there is a hearing in high court, it takes place in open court, unless there are reasons for not doing so.  So to add just open court is redundant.  So, I think it is just unnecessary. Maybe, as my hon. hon. Colleague who is a lawyer knows very well, the hearing in high court takes place in the open.  But if for some reasons or other, it is deemed to be in camera, then a court is moved accordingly.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, I with respect disagree with the hon. Member who has sat down.  What is the word summarily then to mean if it is not to be dismissed without being in open court?

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, a summary trial is where it is in open court but they are not all these pleadings, counter pleadings.  In other words, you have a court proceeding normally but there is an economy on proceedings.  You do not have a plain, and a defence and a reply and that sort of thing.  You have a statement of the facts on which the appeal is based and it goes on.  But otherwise it is in open court.

MR KAZOORA:  I disagree with the learned gentleman.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 39 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41:

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I am again concerned with adopting. In Clause 41, it reads: the council may on receiving new facts relating to a case of a journalist on suspension revoke the suspension.  Now the new facts may be facts which confirm what already is known or they may be facts which actually exonerate the journalist.  So, really I see that one of the Members has said, it is exoneration which is being implied here.  

Therefore, I wish to move an amendment to that Clause so that it is read as follows: that the council may revoke the suspension on receiving fresh evidence exonerating the journalist.  I think that is clearer rather than saying on receiving new facts which facts may actually be concerning what has already been received.  So I think it should be amended accordingly. 

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman it is very unlikely that facts which confirm that the journalist should remain suspended will cause his being reinstated.  It is quite obvious here that the facts, that it is only the fact which could cause a revocation of the suspension.  I see no reason why we should even change it.  I think it is clear even to the Mover of the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 41 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 42 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43:

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, Clause 43 at the end, it says that a journalist shall not be compelled to disclose the source of his information except with the consent of the person who gave him the information or an order of a court of law. First of all, I may have the opportunity of the committee telling me under what circumstance the court would compel a journalist to disclose his source of information and why.  And furthermore, I believe that this is a very dangerous provision for a journalist to be forced to disclose his source of information. 

We have provided in article 5 and also in the Constitution the right of access to information not only by journalists but also generally and if a journalist were to be compelled under law to disclose his source of his information, then you are really going to strangle the profession completely and it will also endanger the other party where for example you have a dictatorial regime that is excessively abusing human rights or a corrupt regime and you have people within the system, public officers who are ready to sneak out certain documents for the press which I think is positive.  And if the press publishes this information, in public interest and then the man is taken to court for criminal libel or sedition or something of the sort like hon. Kayondo is standing trial because he got a letter which was written by the then DA of Gulu, Mr Ochaya advising the government against certain politicians and these politicians were arrested and charged with treason.  It was only this letter which saved these politicians from being hanged.  Now if this letter possibly was never sneaked out by a good Samaritan from the Office of the Minister, these people would now be waiting to be hanged in Luzira.  

Now, are you going to force somebody who has done a good job because of this to disclose that I as a personal secretary to a Minister, conscientiously believing in morality and law and knowing that this is a wrong letter sneaked it and it helped somebody.  

So, I find it very difficult to justify a provision of this kind unless the committee can give this House an overwhelming circumstance so demanding that the court can force a person to disclose or a journalist to disclose the source of his information.  Thank you.  Otherwise I formally move that that phrase; or an order of a court of law be deleted.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Point of clarification. Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like this point to be clarified to me when I wanted to take PTA member to court because he banked the money of the PTA on his bank account.  And I went to the bank and asked on my personal ground - when in our PTA we discovered that the money was banked in the wrong account and we cannot discover it, we went to the bank authorities and we said, we would like you to tell us the account number of so and so.  The bank said that we cannot do that until in court.  So I believe the court is one of the arms but again is the separator of the masses and the professionals like the bankers and customers, and so it will be with the journalist and the masses when the court therefore decides.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, if that is the reason which led the hon. Minister to insert this Clause, then that will strengthen the reason why it should be completely deleted.  First of all, the two circumstances are completely different.  A court order to the bank - first of all it is supposed total secrecy of your account with the bank and if you want any information from the bank on certain account, it comes through the court order and it can even be held in camera. But what we are saying is that a journalist is standing trial or certain  information is required by court because it is published in the Press.  Then that journalist either is being charged or being called as a witness. Then you are telling that journalist, who told you this story?  How did you get it?  Mr Chairman, I think this is totally wrong.

MR IBRAHIM MUKIIBI:  Mr Chairman, much as I appreciate the views pointed out by hon. Atubo - because he is now having in mind a case where there will be some political implication.  Okay now I think I want to assure him that if that is the case, then the court of the law, the judges will also be here in Uganda and they will be aware of the political atmosphere.  (Interjections) Yes, are we saying that we do not trust judges? Then the judge will not order the journalist to disclose the source of information because he will be aware of the atmosphere in the country.  Why not? Do we not trust the judges?  Do we not have confidence in our judges? Are we saying that judges in Uganda are always on the side of wrong? That they support despotic regimes so that they do not care and they order you to disclose the source of information even if they may be aware that they are putting you in danger? I think we should have confidence in the judges that they are also Ugandans. They will be here and they will be aware of the political atmosphere. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Mr Chairman, I want hon. Omara Atubo to help me.  In situations where you get a journalist who is very dishonest himself, it is on personality.  Supposing he concocts a story about somebody.  He has not even received information but he concocts it himself and writes about it and now you are providing for him that he cannot discover the source.  So can he clarify to me what can somebody do in those circumstances.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, the argument of a second Minister now strengthens my case more.  Because if he says he concocts, that means the man never had a source.  So where do you now force him to disclose that source which is non-existent? Because he concocted it.  (Laughter) Then the journalist himself will have to face the law because he has nothing else to disclose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, I now put the question.  Please, we are opening a pandoras box.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am a Member of a Committee and I think it is not criminal of me to exercise right as a Member of this House.  Mr Chairman, the other day in some country, there was a High Court Judge who retired and they were discussing I think human rights and the like and we said that in that country, quite often the judges would first the government what decision to take.  (Laughter and Interjection) Yes, they do ask. I am quoting what I read in the newspaper and I could have added that it is not too far fetched to think that there might be a situation in this country when such would arise. 

I also remember the pentagon papers in the United States where the people who were involved in exposing what had happened, the government was insisting that they say where they got these papers and it was going to be extremely dangerous for these journalists if they exposed where they got their information and yet I think the pentagon papers were a landmark in the journalist history of the United States of America.  So, I was going to ask this House to exercise caution where we consider the provision herein.  

Although hon. Mukiibi wondered whether we cannot trust our judges, I think we cannot trust our judges any more than we can trust other Ugandans.  They are part of our society, admittedly they are trained but you know that there are even circumstances under which the constitution is going to be very clear about how these people are appointed and maybe I was going to add which I heard my Colleague murmur that this could only happen if the order is made by the High Court but not any other court. At least with the high court, you are sure that men and women on the Bench are people of reasonable integrity Mr Chairman.

MR ATEKER EJALU: Mr Chairman, I actually would like to clarify one thing, that this provision, contrary to what hon. Atubo fears gives integrity to the profession of journalist, so that when somebody is writing or he is broadcasting, the public know that he is practicing a profession within certain parameters which are acceptable to society.  That is true of any other profession, be it a medical profession or any other profession.  Because if you say, a journalist can write on say, anything and then he is not forced to disclose his source, will lead to a field of a anarchy in public information, it will lead to a situation where an allegation can be made and then when somebody goes to court to say I cannot disclose my source and then he quotes this law here.  It means that truth will be defined for the third time, one by Jesus and one by the public and the third one by the word of Journalists which will be very sad.  

I, therefore, speaking as a journalist, and a Member of the House, would urge the House to place this profession within the limit of all professional organisations.  Going beyond this, this is the standard safety valve provision in any country I know including the United States.  There is no country which does not respect the decision of the courts where it comes to disclosing public information.  What we are protecting in this law is not the journalist.  It is the public.  Therefore, when an order of court is made, there is a procedure to it.  It means that proper steps have been taken to report the matter to court.  A hearing has taken place and judges in a considered opinion have come to a decision.  So, I would urge the House to retain this Clause.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 43 be amended as propose by hon. Daniel Omara Atubo.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 43 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, as a Bill circulated, I would like to propose that Clause 44 sub-section (1) be amended bringing in sub-sections as have been circulated so that the existing ones become sub-section (2) and then sub-section (3) also to read as circulated so that sub-section (1) of Clause 44 should not read: ‘a person who receives any information of document from outside Uganda and disseminates that information or document so disseminated.’ 

Then sub-section two remains as we have it here and it reads now: ‘for the purposes of this section, matters published outside Uganda shall be taken to have been published in Uganda if they have been delivered for dissemination in Uganda.’ Then subsection (3) in this section, negative effect include anything that is contrary to any law in force or morality or public morality.  Then we now cross because we had earlier on crossed other social values so that it remains or public morality. I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I understand the reasons which they have forced the committee to move these amendments are that I am very, very concerned, with its effect.  Let me give you an example. In my worry and why I would like the whole clause deleted.  Somebody writes a letter care of you Mr Chairman, so many letters to be distributed care of you, you do not know the constants, you distributed them to hon. Atwai, to hon. Prof. Kagonyera, all of them and this letter is in confirmation of the Lango master plan or something like that. You have distributed them Mr Chairman - I am using you as an example so that you can understand - and its address is originating from somewhere where you know. You will have distributed these letters.  You have no slightest information as to what is inside but you have been a courier.  Then you will be held responsible for disseminating that information.  That is point number one. 

Point number two, is on electronic media, the radio and television.  We are now having small television stations which are railing the information from outside. The station is yours. After mid-night, it is taken over by CNN, BBC and what have you. The thing comes on that station.  You cannot censor even despite Clause 14 which we have passed which allows censors to go through this thing.  You will still be held responsible because you have no control of the airways.  Thirdly, you would not know, it will have gone by the time you get.  

Thirdly, you can now in the system of electronics actually originate the facts from somewhere else as if it originated from your own facts and this is a fact of life and it will be distributed all over the place and disseminated as if it is coming from your facts but actually it has been done in such a way that it actually is from elsewhere and you will be held responsible and it will be very difficult for you to prove otherwise.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Just a while ago when this paper was being reported here, the hon. Members of this House were informed that there will soon come electronic bill and I am sure, such a bill, when it comes here as was accepted that it should come by this House, it take care of all those anomalies just as we wish to handle this particular one on mass media.  So if you now begin to talk about two bills or two laws, then are we not confusing issues?  Let us handle the one on mass media and then when the electronic bill will come, we shall it also Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the information for instance, of sending letters to my mailbox, if it is sent to me, must I be punished for that when I have not even circulated it? And supposing somebody in government wanted just to follow my mailbox as ISO sometimes opens up letters, will that be the right way?  

And, therefore, sub-section one and three should just be deleted because it would make matters like somebody who introduced the detention without law in this very Parliament and he himself was in the end detained.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, even with the information from the hon. Minister because I have not responded to it, the clause is as now put, do not distinguish between electronic and public media.  The clauses are just general and unless there can be a way of protecting people from abuse by people with bad intentions, these provisions as amended by the Reverend would not allow hi to go to Heaven.  (Laughter) Because Mr Chairman, I am saying this gaudily knowing that the Reverend is a man of God and I can see problems arising out of this submission.  

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, convinced a Christian as hon. Yona is, I do not know whether this Biblical Statement as to how people go to heaven can be qualified in the laws that we make or they come from the absolute laws which we get in the book of the Bible because I do not see it here.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. For information, Mr Chairman, it is also from the Koran and other religious writings. But I am just saying, unless really there is specified information and detailed protection to he general public, as hon. Wanendeya has just said, you are a courier, you are not a party to the publication which has come, it is found in your mail, you have distributed it innocently and you are caught!

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that as far as human rights are concerned and violation of human rights are concerned, regimes do not want to be outspoken or exposed and international media quite often has helped various countries to respect human rights. A clause just like this is negating that and may be misused for a dictatorial regime to declare anything negative and gag the documents or information that would have even helped its own citizens to survive torture of that particular regime.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  Mr Chairman, I want also to support hon. Kanyomozi on this issue to delete this article; because actually what happens is that government or bad regimes do a lot of things.  Even if they write on them those things, the government goes ahead to have those documents in their drawers but they do not allow us the citizens also to know what the other people have written about them, as hon. Luyombya has actually put it.  Secondly, Mr Chairman, it will - (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give is that sometimes we forget.  We may just focus on the present circumstances and we forget to gauge the consequences of the law that we pass. During Amin Regime, no article, no anything published was allowed in this country.  It was a closed society and this was reminiscent of dictatorial regimes.  Now, we are now by this Clause trying to gag any responsible criticism that may be forthcoming from abroad.  Inside it may be helpless but publications from abroad may help bring down a terrible regime.  So, my information is that I am appealing to the Members that we have responsibility to this country, we have responsibility for the safety of this country, we have responsibility for our citizens. Let us pass laws that force and encourage democratic regimes and not this one. 

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  I thank you for that information.  The other point that I wanted to make is that it would be wrong for somebody to commit a crime in London or in Kenya and me Serwanga found with this document is penalised.  It is not correct at all.  If you want to penalise, you go to the international court and argue your case there but do not penalise me the man found with just a documents.  So I support the Motion to delete.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I am saying that rather than gag society, rather than penalise the innocent, rather than make it very difficult to be rescued in case we land into problems, not now, let us delete this clause.  I propose that the clause in its entirety be deleted and adjustments be made.  

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members against this amendment are distorting what is meant by this amendment.  Suppose one received leaflets which are urging Ugandans to riot and he receives these leaflets and he distributes them, and after distributing the leaflets, those who receive them actually riot. Who should we blame? The one who sent the leaflets? Mr Chairman, we are looking at three parts of this Amendment.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of information.  The information Mr Chairman is that a person with such materials could be charged for libel or for possession of seditious materials but this one is superfluous unnecessary.

MR MAYENGO: What he says is exactly what is in the third section.  It says, in this section, negative effect includes anything that is contrary to any law in force.  That is exactly what he means. And what is wrong with you emphasizing it?  The complaint is not that you are wasting paper.  The complaint is that the whole thing should not be in at all. The other time when we were debating, hon. Kanyomozi rose on a point of information and he sought actually clarification.  He wondered at that time.  He said suppose I receive mail in my mailbox and I pass it on to a friend, have I disseminated?  And I rose at that time and explained to him that it was not that type of thing. If you receive one magazine which is obscene and pass it over to a friend, you are not disseminating.  But if you received 2,000 copies and disseminated those and those ones affected public morality, who should you blame? Should you blame the publisher in Chicago or the one who received these magazines and distributed this in our society?

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information. The point of information I want to give is your mail box is used as a challenge.  You have not even seen the contents.  You have just delivered the letters to the owners; you have not seen the contents and my hon. Friend should know.  There have been cases in the past and during Amin’s regime where letters were written to friends in Uganda and people got in problems for them.  Are we going to allow that situation to happen?  People got arrested for information they had no access to.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, when I gave the first example, the hon. Members said, it was perfect.  But how could a person receive hundreds of letters in one’s mail and without even knowing the source of those letters.  He just distributes and to whom do you distribute? The best you could do is to burn them. It is far-fetched and not likely to be true. 

MR BUTIME: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is the word dissemination.  It is a mass media terminology.  It does not mean to pass on to the next person necessarily.  It means to propagate, it means to broadcast, it means to multiply and give, it means to publicise.  So we should debate knowing those particular words.  But hon. Kanyomozi is saying to pass on to just one or two people.  That is not the argument is to publicise, broadcast, multiply and give and not just give a letter to the next person.

MR ABA MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, it seems to me that this matter has been discussed and left in the air and now if you put the question, I certainly will not be in a position to vote.  There has been an attempted definition of the word dissemination for instance.  Now I note that dissemination has not been defined in the Act itself.  Now can we take it that definition given is that commonly agreed?  Is that the dictionary meaning of the word dissemination?  So, in fact I was calling the Clerk to assist us with a dictionary.  It is important that we should know whether dissemination means that or whether we should tell them to go and define it specifically for the purposes of this Act.  

THE CHAIRMAN: But I think hon. Members what is on the Floor, is a proposal to delete, that is the major thing, we are  -(Interjections) is just part of the argument.  Allow me to proceed with you know, I like following procedures, do not derail me. Now, this is a very important matter, this is why I allowed you to discuss.  I am now going to put the question, that Clause 44 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


AN HON. MEMBER: The chairman of the committee made a proposal and in answer to that proposal hon. Kanyomozi proposed deletion.  I am surprised that hon. Kanyomozi’s deletion is being put first before the chairman reports.  Can I -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The procedure is this, I will clarify.  The procedure is that we deal with the matter which departs furthest from the proposal and I think hon. Kanyomozi’s is the furthest from the proposal, this is why I am starting with it.  You see, I have been in this Council since 1989, so I am telling you. (Laughter) I now put that the question that Clause 44 be deleted as proposed by hon. Kanyomozi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

Clause 46:

THE CHAIRMAN: I beg your pardon, hon. Members that is one is just in respect of 45 (i) but there is an Amendment from the Committee in as far as 45 (ii) is concerned.  So, let me call upon the chairman of the committee.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  I wanted Mr Chairman, to wait after your ruling on sub-section (iii) which should then read: Any person aggrieved by the decision or order of the court may appeal to a higher court against the decision within 30 days from date on which the visa/order was issued.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46:

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, this is just to assist in a situation which the first schedule could be amended.  I know that no powers have been given to the Minister, neither here nor in the general Clause but in the previous one, we have given the Minister.  So, I tend to move that the Minister by statutory instrument and after consultation with the Council amend the 1st Schedule.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Since Mr Chairman, this was an omission, we have no problem with it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 46 be corrected as proposed by hon. Daniel Omara Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as corrected, agreed to.

Clause 47:

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, Clause 47 is intended to give the Minister power to appoint an interim executive committee. This is really transitional provision in which within three months the Minister is supposed to appoint an Interim Executive to implement the provisions of this Statute. But this power is a very big power and the Minister, by appointing the Interim President of the Institute and the General Secretary could be exercising a power which could adversely affect the whole future of the profession.  

If you look critically at the Article dealing with the institute, the executive - sorry, for the purposes of proper management of the affairs of the institute, there shall be an executive committee consisting of the President, Vice President and so on and the other members; and the executive really of the institution could very easily be appointed by the Minister in consultation with a professional body and this professional body are the journalists; we already know them and the Amendment by the Chairman of the Committee actually, having a saving clause, that anybody who is now practicing in Uganda as journalist, shall continue to practice and I think this is a very useful provision. 

My fear and with due respect to the Minister without individually looking at them as either Paul Etiang or Latigo Olal, but looking at whether this power should be exercised by a Minister to avoid an interim executive of a professional body, my view is that, it is not proper, because we already have a body of non-journalists and non-profession and that all the Minister has to do, is to work in collaboration with this body in consultation with them and then, not only appoint - actually here, in Clause 47, he is going to appoint, I think two people only, the interim president and the general secretary of the Institute; two people to start off.  
But my amendment says, the Minister shall within three months after the commencement of this Statute, in consultation with the registered Association of Journalists appoint an Interim executive of the institute as provided under Clause 23.  

I think this is a much better arrangement if it were to be done.  Moreover, the Minister could as well, there is even more delay while the Minister cannot go ahead and appoint the Media Council because if you look at the people who are constituting the Media Council, under Clause 13, they are for example, the Director of Information or a senior officer from the Ministry that is responsible for information. This does not need any delay in the appointment; a distinguished scholar or two distinguished scholars appointed by the Minister in consultation with NIJU which would have been constituted in (a) and then you have a representative nominated by the Newspaper and Registered Publishers and so on, and then two representatives from Electronic Media, who shall represent the NIJU again and then the public and a distinguished practicing lawyer nominated by the Uganda Law Society.  

So, the delay in the Minister to carry out certain provision rather than have an interim one, to me, will not be taking a good foundation - the interim President, the executive appointed by the absolute power of the Minister, they entrench themselves and use their positions to continue, and in building up really a new profession, and actually we are laying a foundation for a new profession, it may give a due advantage to certain people within that profession. 

It is honestly in this spirit that I looked at this provision and tried to carry out this Amendment; so that the foundation for a proper Journalist profession is made without undue interference from the State or from bureaucracy. I thank you Mr Chairman.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, since hon. Dan’s observation is not against the interim, but on the modalities of appointment, and he is just suggesting, because one thing, we Members of the House; especially those of us who are used to sitting at the back should have confidence in the hon. Ministers who are fronted in their positions and we must know that when they are appointing members they will have always have some consultations and interim is supposed to be interim, quite so.  A mechanism should be in place to allow the general assembly to be called and then they put their house in order.  But it seems he is proposing that the Minister does so in consultations with the established bodies here have no problem with that, I beg to take it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50:

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, because of the nature of what we wanted to a tally with immediately after 49, the committee did propose that a new Clause 50 be instituted and wanted to read:  A person who is practicing journalism, immediately to power to the commencement of this Statute, may continue to practice journalism until he is duly enrolled as a journalist in accordance with the provisions of this Statute.  They did this, because in the streets and elsewhere, there was already growing fear that once this law comes in place, then the practicing journalists will now be called to lay down their weapon and this will now take care of that one, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  I have a problem with the old 50, it says the interim executive committee.  the elected executive committee as soon as it is practicable.  I think there is some vagueness there, I think it is better we put a time limit, as practicable it may be two for Parliament interim executive committee.  So, I propose that the interim executive committee could hand over within three months other than just -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you proposing; three months?

AN HON. MEMBER:  One month.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI: There is nothing like permanent Mr Chairman in interim and if members like to bring it down, even to one day, but I think for purposes of formality, it should be one month so that the new officials office bearers can then take responsibility.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, there is a minor Amendment here, in Clause 51 sub-section (i); where we would like to substitute the word ‘councilor’ and bringing the word ‘cabinet.’  The Minister may on the advice of the Councilors make regulations for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this statute; because regulations are always made by the Act of this House, not by the councilor.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA: Point of clarification.  I thought he was deputising for the Minister of Information. (Laughter) Could the hon. chairman of the committee for this Bill, please say it again, because I could not quite hear the purpose of his proposed amendment.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, as a chairman of the select committee who right now, until about 20 minutes, that I will be retiring and going to back to where I belong, still carrying the work of the Minister here, I would like it to be noted that this Bill has come in place and it was brought here by the Cabinet after the Cabinet’s then a Minister was used as mouthpiece to come and present it here for debate, and if there is any power to confer or be put in, the Minister it is on the advice - not on the advice on regulatory matters of the Council but of the Cabinet, that is why we are deleting the word council and replacing it with the legislature -(Interruption)

MR LATIGO OLAL: Point of information. Mr Chairman, if you look on page 21 and turn over to page 22, section (iii) of 51. It says, not withstanding the provisions of the interpretation of the Decree 1976, the Minister may with the approval of the legislature, we are saying cabinet, by statutory instrument, increase any funds specified in the Statute.  So, we are saying, replace the word ‘Legislature’ by the word ‘cabinet.’ Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  I now understand that the Amendment is on clause 51 sub-section (iii) to replace the word legislature by the word cabinet so that, the Minister would, with the approval of the Cabinet by statutory instrument increase any funds specified in this Statute.  But it is very unusual to legislate for Cabinet, because the Minister consulting with the Cabinet is a domestic internal matter.  You do not legislate for the Minister consulting Cabinet, it becomes very difficult, sometimes they may even refuse to do, and then say that, well we do not provide so in the Statute.  

Now, the whole question is whether this House wants to give the powers of determining the time which is a legislative process to the executive.  It is fairly important and it should not be slided over very quickly like that; that is why I said I wanted to debate.  If this House, in its wisdom thinks that these funds from time to time by the Minister, by statutory instruments, then we can say, we do not need to mention cabinet, we can say the Minister may.  I would have perhaps been happier if instead of - if we do not want it to be done in the legislature, because it might be cumbersome, he should at least consult council, the Press Council, whatever you call it, the council which we give him proper professional advice on the adequacy or inadequacy of funds and so on, but when you say that the Minister may do so with the - in consultation of the cabinet, you are really not saying anything because the Minister determines whether he should go to Cabinet or not to go, according to the gravity of the matter, and it should not really be for this - for the legislature to make a legal requirement that the Minister should consult cabinet.  Therefore, I would oppose that Amendment and either say that the original wording remains or at least we substitute the Council for the legislature.

MR LATIGO OLAL: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  But on 51(i), it says exactly that, and the other one says notwithstanding. 51(i) says, the Minister may on the advice on the Council and so on. So, we should have -(Laughter)

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Not withstanding is not - it is just not withstanding not 51(i), but not withstanding the interpretation Act. Decree or whatever.  I think it is - I do not quite understand - let us talk openly and make a good law of it.  Why should the Minister not consult the Council on the funds?

MR SIBO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I think there is some misconception. The increasing of funds is actually amending the law. Normally, a Minister may publish statutory instruments in forms of regulations and so on in accordance with the provisions of the Statute.  But the funds, is actually a saving in the provisions of the law; in the main body.  So, to ask the Minister to amend the main body without coming here into the House, is asking too much.  So, I think it would be wrong - it becomes absolutely irregular, it would be wrong to ask the Minister to amend the law without coming to the House.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  You have allowed the debate to take place in this provision, before the question was put.  My argument is exactly what hon. Sibo said, that this is a punitive provision and normally in a punitive provision, we do not just give somebody a power to create fines, say the sentences will go up and down.  You come to the original body and therefore, I still concur with hon. Sibo and with hon. Abut and urge this House and the Chairman, that leave it without the chairman of the committee, that there is no need of amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52:

MR KAZORA: Mr Chairman, this is a very important Amendment I am proposing, because it sets out to delete the section namely; the Newspaper and Publication Act.  Now, the Newspaper and Publication Act contain various provisions but the most important ones are that the publisher and the printer are liable to pay damages when they publish and disseminate libelous allegations. So, if it is deleted, repealed or much obliged, a pauper who is a journalist of repute, may publish libelous and malicious allegations but the injured party will have no way of recovering damages because the newspaper editor or the journalist will be poor.  

I did intimate to the Minister of Information, that I was proposing to make this Amendment, and he concurred with my suggestion and I have also indicated it to the hon. Minister of State, who is in the Chair there and if there is any doubt, of course, they can contact Mr Paul Etiang and he will confirm this, but quite apart from that, I want you to put yourself in the position where you feel grievously harmed by the publication of a newspaper but the injury which has been inflicted on you really is that which is published in the newspaper; because even journalists have these evil intentions in his mind and hers and kept it to himself nobody would be hurt, but tarnishing the reputation of any of our citizens and publisher and the malice shown is published in a form of an Article and you cannot recover damages, is I think a grave act it would be a grave act of injustice to our society. 

So, I appeal to you Mr Chairman and hon. Members that this is really something you should think about because you never know, you may be one of those who may in future be faced with the predicament of having been maliciously libel but there will be no position to recover damages from the publisher and printer.  I therefore, move that the Newspaper and Publications Act should not be deleted from the Statute but it should actually remain on it, and the main parts of this article could then be deleted or repealed.  

I, therefore, ask the Chairman to support my appeal because it may be one day, who will be in trouble and this point has been brought about particularly by hon. Wanendeya’s comments earlier on.  I therefore beg to move that the Act should not be repealed.

MR ATEKER EJALU: Mr Chairman, for different reasons, I would like to appeal to the committee chairman, to not prematurely repeal this law; because one of the reasons why this Bill delayed to come here, was that it was discovered that there was more comprehensive work outside what has been proposed; that there were other laws under other Ministers, Minister of Internal Affairs, the Attorney General and Minister of Justice, which affect media situations like the pornography act and so on. So, it was decided that we structure thing as the hon. House has agreed to delete the Electronic Media so that the whole thing is approached comprehensively.  I am afraid that if we delete these laws without knowing the full content of each of them, we may remain with lacunas in our legal systems in this area.  

So, I would suggest that we leave these laws as they are, the hon. Minister goes back to his desk as he has promised in the Electronic Media, he works out a comprehensive consolidation of the Media law and comes out even if with just a simple Bill proposing relevant deletions.  Otherwise, we may end up in situation where we are creating vacuums. Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: In that case, are you supporting the Amendment? Okay, let us not - please, could you react to that? 

REV. ANGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, we have in this Bill before us come up with Mass Media Bill and in most clauses that we have come across, we have been deleting newspaper in favour of Mass Media organisation and we have discussed in our committee meeting, the Newspaper and Publication Act with a view to ensuring freedom of the Press.  In that, we found much of the provision which we are trying to keep as has been advocated for by none other than the professional journalists, that this particular area is outdated and at that material I think the committee found out that it was intended to muzzle the Press.  Aware that if we date that about 1915, something of the sort, and that is why we are now saying, since it was done may be in that phase, during colonial times, and now that we have got these Ugandans who are capable of making good laws and marrying some of those why do we not now say that, because of this we have accommodated, updated that which has other wise been silenced or intending to tamper with the freedom of the press and that is why I find it difficult to accept that amendment or hon. John Kazora, Mr Chairman. 

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Kazora raised an Amendment on Newspaper and Publication Act.  With all due respect, Mr Chairman, there are just 23 articles in that Act and none of those articles, in Chapter 305 refers specifically to ones right to sue the publishers. Having talked to the legal experts from the Attorney General’s Chambers and hon. Omara Atubo here, we were told that the right to sue the publisher, the rich man, as hon. Kazoora refers to him for such redress, is derived from the common law, that is one.

Number two: is the would be amendment by hon. Ateker Ejalu; whereas hon. Kazora was saying, do not repeal the Newspaper and Publication Act because you lose that right and their technocrats, here, are saying no, you do not - you have same rights as before. Hon. Eteker Ejalu wants to go further and say, remove or do not repeal the Censorship Recollection Act which as we said in the long title of the Bill, we are seeking to ensure freedom of the press, the necessary bits in the censorship Act has been incorporated; the others have been found to be outdated, and I can refer for example, whereas previously we have required that a newspaper be registered at the Post Office, now it is the Editors particulars to be given by the proprietor.  

I wish to oppose the Amendment because it was well considered by the committee that we need not to continue to muzzle the press at the same time, the necessary elements have already been incorporated by the august House in the Articles we have already passed.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAZOORA: I am addressing the Chairman not hon. Gasatura  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We are at the Committee Stage and the laws here, some part of it say that when you propose an Amendment it does not even need to be seconded.  Then secondly, when you put the Amendment here, you do not even need to reply.  So, please demand for what is not protected by the law here. Excuse me please, be well guided by the Chair.  Why are you - why do you not want to be guided? I am putting the question that clause 52 be amended as proposed by hon. Kazoora.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 52, agreed to

The 1st Schedule:

MR WANENDEYA: Code of ethics -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But I do not see your Amendment.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I will give you one more.  It was circulated long time ago and it is dated 12th of May.

THE CHAIRMAN: But in any case, hon. Members, please, on these schedules here, most of the things are straight forward; let us try to minimise on time.

1st Schedule:

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to add three code of ethics points to that schedule.  The first one, if I may say so, and I again present something to prove the case, this one is in connection with -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of procedure.  Element on Rule 1, but hon. Wanendeya intends to make addition, we should come after 9, please No.10 and so.  So, I think those who have Amendment Rule 1, as you seem should quickly; so Mr Chairman Amendment on Rule 1.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we have reached a very critical stage of this very, very important Bill and we do not have a quorum in this House.  Is it in order for us to continue discussing the Motion and when it is already after 5.00 o’clock? Is it in order Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Mr Latigo Olal): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has carefully considered the Bill entitled the Mass Media Bill 1995 and passed all the Clauses with several amendment and by the time the committee adjourned, it was left with the Schedules.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MOTION ADOPTED FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Mr Latigo Olal): I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Members, one statement in form of information.  Tomorrow we intend to tackle the Leadership Code Sectoral Committee; I hope you have been served with circulations; and we that, that topic is important, we would like to deal with it tomorrow, apart from other pending assignments here.  So, I am calling upon all of you here present or absent to be here on time tomorrow; so that we finish the important business pending.  And with that, we come to the end of today’s Session and we adjourn the Council until tomorrow 2.30 p.m.


 (The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 24 May 1995.)

