

Thursday, 25 May 2017 

Parliament met at 10.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you know, we have a very tight timeline. I can see on the Order Paper today, all the reports of the sectoral committees are here and we need to be able to handle all of them today. That is the reason we have sat in the morning. This includes that Bill, which remains outstanding for the final vote. In the circumstances, I am going to allot time.

I would like the chairpersons to give us the decision points they would like to advise the House to take decisions on, without presenting the whole report. We do not have time for the whole report. Extract for the House what you need the House to pronounce itself on and we will do that. I am sure the chairpersons will be able to do this between five to seven minutes so that we can have a short discussion and then we proceed.

Time is tight and it had been proposed that we sit tomorrow. However, we will not be able to sit tomorrow but we will sit on Monday, 29 May 2017 from 10.00 a.m. Members, you could go tomorrow to your constituencies but come back early so that on Monday, we can start at 10.00 a.m. Would that time be okay? We have to finish supplying everything and finish with the budget by Wednesday. We, therefore, have to start on Monday at 10.00 a.m. Let us now start on the business.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was for final reading but the minister is not here. Can any of the ministers move this final motion? You need to simply say that the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass”; as simple as that.

10.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Philemon Mateke): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill be read for the third time and do pass.
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minster, for assisting the House and thank you, honourable Members.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 07/17 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not in the House. Has he delegated somebody to ask this question for him? Let us move to the next item. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018 

10.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2017/2018 and made a number of observations.

However, I am constrained by your guidance, Mr Speaker, to present the summary of the recommendations. In the interest of time, allow me to read the conclusion and I will lay the report on the Table for the records to capture. We can always discuss the details in the Budget Committee report. 

The committee recommends that Parliament approves the revised budget estimates for the following votes:

Recurrent Budget

    a) Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Shs 136,696,684,000.
    b) Vote 108, National Planning Authority – Shs 20,295,766,000.
    c) Vote 129, Financial Intelligence Authority – Shs 7, 752,684,000.
    d) Voted 130, Treasury Operations – Shs 8,623,676,550,000.
    e) Vote 131, Auditor-General – Shs 63,436,743,000.
    f) Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority – Shs 311,320,084,000.
    g) Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics – Shs 34,492,382,000.
    h) Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority – Shs 11,290,117,000.

Mr Speaker, there are a number of observations that ought to be debated by this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Development?

MR MUSASIZI: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. 

Development Budget 

    a) Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Shs 328,595,229,000.
    b) Vote 108, National Planning Authority - Shs 836,000,000.
    c) Vote 129, Financial Intelligence Authority – Shs 465,000,000.
    d) Vote 130, Treasury operations – Nil.
    e) Vote 131, Auditor-General - Shs 3,975,510,000.
    f) Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority – Shs 54,930,711,000.
    g) Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics – Shs 18,670,420,000.
    h) Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority - Shs 2,320,000,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, that is the report of the Committee on the Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. I propose it for your debate. The debate will be limited. Mr Chairperson, is there something else you want to do? Do you have documents to lay on the Table?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the original report that is duly signed by the members of the committee, together with the minutes and all other materials that the committee used in consideration of the ministerial policy statement. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, there being no debate, I will put the question for adoption of the report of this committee. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

10.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Mutonyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for financial year 2017/2018.

A week ago, I laid the main report and the minutes of the meeting on the Table. I had appeared before the Budget Committee but because there is need for us to submit now, allow me to submit this report. However, since we are constrained by time, I would request to make just one comment because if I do not, there will be problems. 

On the issue of gender and equity responsiveness, the report that came out showed that the missions were not responsive. They scored very low and there is a threat that if they do not comply, their budgets may not be passed. Mr Speaker, this is a new thing for the missions and they are not yet well acquainted with the process. 

Our committee recommends that since it is new to the missions and they have not undergone training, their budgets should be considered for passing as they await capacity building by Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as we were informed. I beg to submit on that.

Mr Speaker, the budget for foreign affairs comprises the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters and missions abroad. However, because we could not outline all of them, I put all the missions together; otherwise, we would have 33 votes. We have amalgamated them and put the estimates for the missions together and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters separately.

Our conclusion is: subject to the observations and recommendations, which I have not read, the committee recommends the approval of Shs 181,355,420,000 for vote 006, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters, and votes 201-232, missions abroad, for the financial year 2017/2018 to enable them deliver on their mandate. The breakdown is as follows:
Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters
Wage recurrent -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deal with the totals, please.

MS MUTONYI: The subtotal under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters is Shs 31,856,136,000. For votes 201–232, missions abroad, the subtotal is Shs 149,499,284,000. The total for both is Shs 181,355,420,000. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, that is the report. I propose the question for your debate for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for financial year 2017/2018.

10.28
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the chairperson. In her report, she says that the issue of gender responsiveness is new to the missions abroad and yet I know that this issue was brought before this Parliament some three years ago. She is saying it is a new issue for the missions abroad but I wonder, because the missions are represented here by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I believe that they know about this issue very well.

Therefore, the clarification I seek from you, Madam Chairperson, is this: When they talk of bringing the missions on board, could you give us a timeframe within which this will happen? This is because the issue of gender and equity is not a simple issue. This is where we get disadvantaged groups of people and if we leave it blank like that, when will the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and maybe the Ministry of Foreign Affairs bring these people on board so that we really see them? When will this happen, and yet you are persuading us to pass the budget awaiting for compliance from those two ministries? Thank you. 

10.29
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the chairperson. I visited our foreign mission in Washington D.C. and their complaints were on two issues. Unfortunately, the chairperson has not read the recommendations. 

The mission complained about delays in the release of funds to missions abroad. Most of the time, by the end of the financial year, the approved budget is actually not released to them. I do not know whether the committee has dealt with this issue. This is actually not an isolated case; I think they have gone to many missions and that is the complaint they have got.

Secondly, the budgets for our foreign missions most of the time cater for payments. The activities’ budget is very meagre to the extent that they almost have nothing to do but sit and enjoy the wines as diplomats. They do not have a budget that is enough to help them implement their planned activities. I do not know whether that concern has been taken up by the committee. If it is not taken up, then it is important that the Committee on Budget reallocates some money to ensure that the activities’ budget is taken care of. 
Thank you.

10.30
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the committee chairperson. 

According to the Public Finance Management Act, it is the role of the minister, not the chairperson of the committee, to present the issue of gender and equity responsiveness on the Floor of Parliament. I understand we have a minister; can the chairperson clarify to us if she has been given the powers by the minister to come and request that we pass the budget of these foreign missions when they have not considered the issue of gender and equity responsiveness? Thank you.

10.31
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and members for coming up with this report. I went through the report and I have a few issues.

In the report, some missions are prioritised as those that need renovation or those that need to be worked on. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and when we visited Ottawa, both the Chancery and the residence were condemned and they were supposed to start construction by the second quarter of this financial year. However, when you look at the list, Ottawa is not prioritised. They do not have enough money and are paying a lot for accommodation and office space.

The other issue is about international organisations. Uganda has persistently refused to pay subscription fees to the international organisations that they subscribe to. I worked with one of them and I know that Uganda is technically locked out. You cannot argue for your country because you do not pay subscription fees. The other day, the Speaker told us that if we had paid money to one of these organisations, they would have sprayed the armyworm. 

I would like to find out from the committee chairperson whether they have allocated enough money to cater for our obligations to the international organisations. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) has positions that Ugandans can take up, such as director of finance and administration and others, but we cannot take them up because we do not pay. Thank you.

3.33
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, in the same vein allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. Not long ago, we had a heated debate in this House about the condition of the labour force that is exported out of this country, especially to the Arab world. It was observed that the condition of these workers is inhumane, irregular, unacceptable, unconstitutional and uncouth. 

One of the reasons advanced is that our foreign missions in these areas could not oversee the welfare of these workers because they had inadequate budgets. It was recommended that we need to enhance the budgets of missions in such areas so that, among other things, our foreign missions could oversee the welfare of the workforce that gets exported. I would like to know from the committee chairperson whether this matter has been considered in this budget. Thank you.

10.34
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for a very good report. We are being asked to pass the budget, but we have a problem of looking after our money in the foreign missions, particularly in regard to court cases against our embassies. I have an example of a court case where a Ugandan employee took the embassy in Geneva to court. 

As we pass this budget, the embassies should take utmost care to make sure that the staff they employ are not mistreated to the extent that they have to resort to court. I am sure the chairperson is aware of a lady in Switzerland who took the Geneva mission to court and part of our money had to be used. My appeal is that the money we appropriate to these missions be looked after. Thank you.

10.35
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Mr Speaker, I am concerned about the mandate of our missions abroad. The chairperson has listed them, but I would like us to look at the tourism sector. Recently, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry presented a report about tea growing in Uganda. We were told that there is a challenge in as far as our tea is concerned because Uganda’s tea is not being marketed. Generally, it is the same thing with the tourism sector.

Mr Speaker, tourists come not only from within Uganda but also from abroad. If we do not market our tourism, we shall not have many tourists coming and yet it is one of the sectors that brings us a lot of income. I would like to find out from the chairperson why they have not captured this as something very important for our missions to do. Thank you.

10.37
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee. 

One of the concerns for which I need more clarification is the issue of asset management and development in our foreign missions. Mr Speaker, you have helped us travel to these missions. Despite the fact that we have acquired assets and some are already developed in terms of land, Uganda is highly embarrassed because some of the land is not properly owned and some of the houses are in bad shape. 

I would, therefore, like to know from the committee whether they have the stock or record of land and other developed property we have outside this country. In addition, what strategies have they identified to ensure that these assets are properly managed and they make Uganda shine?

Secondly, together with the members of my committee, we observed that there is very low pay in commercial diplomacy. In many of these missions, concentration is on issues of security and other types of relationships that we need to build but commercial diplomacy is hanging. 

When we visited some of these foreign missions, we asked them, “How do you want our country to gain economically when you are deployed here?” The answer they gave us was that Uganda had not yet taken off officially in these missions, in terms of putting up structures and facilitating them to sell our country so that investors and tourists from outside come here and we benefit from them. I would like to seek clarification on whether the committee has pointed out issues in relation to commercial diplomacy that can benefit us.

Thirdly, I am concerned about the nature of deployment and withdrawal of our staff. In New York and Canada, our experience was that many of these polices are not strictly followed. You find that a staff member is deployed and they can be withdrawn any time. Again, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, based on personal relationships, can retain a staff at a station. This is a major source of conflict and it has resulted into the mission being forced to use extra money as they deploy another person in the same mission.

Lastly, on the issue of gender and equity responsiveness, we need more guidance from the committee and from you, Mr Speaker. Issues of gender and equity are cross-cutting. This is not a new thing to the Government and Parliament. How are we going to exempt this ministry yet we are enforcing the same parameters for other ministries? We expect Ministry of Foreign Affairs to comply like any other ministry. For the permanent secretaries - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you are a member of the committee, why don’t you just ask the questions? 

MS ABABIKU: I am not a member of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Please, raise the clarification. 

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, the accounting officers in this country have got the same level of training, I believe. Therefore, it becomes very difficult to say that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be exempted while we are enforcing the same for other ministries and sectors. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the chairperson now. If the minister has some rejoinder to make, he will make it later.  

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a pity that many Members of Parliament arrived here after you had given us the instructions on how to move. If you take time to read our main report, all these issues you have raised have been well laid down there. However, because this morning the Speaker directed that we only read the summary of the figures, I would like to request Members to go through our report on their own. 

Briefly, on gender and equity responsiveness, which was raised by the honourable member for Oyam, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has complied with 52 per cent of this requirement. It was assumed that our missions abroad were under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but it is a new policy that the missions abroad must submit their own budgets and they must be evaluated. When the Committee on Equal Opportunities went there, they caught them off guard.  

Mr Speaker, we have been assured, with a timeframe of up to July, that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are going out. So, the timeframe is up to July. Therefore, we expect them to show us in the next budget how they are complying with gender and equity issues.

The honourable member for Adjumani asked why I requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be exempted. It is the missions; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing well. They have no problem because they already adjusted since they entered the programme earlier, but it is a new thing for the missions.

Concerning delays in Washington, just as I said, if you read our report, you would have seen our cry in the report. Due to time constraints in time, all of us have been requested to present summaries today and I could not read the entire report. However, what Washington is experiencing is the same thing that all the missions are experiencing - delays of releases and losses on poundage. 

Even when money is released, not all the money indicated is got because of loss on poundage. This is because the exchange rate keeps on changing. Here, we budget in Uganda shillings yet the missions outside receive the money in the currencies of the countries where they are based. Therefore, when there is devaluation, they receive less money than indicated and that money is catered for in either supplementary budgets or arrears in the next budget. The problems are only delays and loss on poundage.

Another Member said that the budget is not for activities but for people to wine and dine. It is true and it is not only the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The cry of Parliament and that of Ministry of Foreign Affairs are the same; when requests go to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Development, they dictate what to give to the ministries. You are aware of the ceilings; they do not adjust and if they do, it is minimal.

Mr Speaker, I would like to respond to the last point raised by the honourable member for Adjumani, on the issue of commercial diplomacy. I wish to inform Members that for the first time, we have put money aside for commercial diplomacy in our missions.  There will be no jokes any more about dining and wining because we expect them to produce results with this money. They have been given money, although they started with only eight missions. We are expecting that in the next budget, they will roll it out to another 16 missions. They have not honoured that. 

When we talk about commercial diplomacy, we are talking about industries, trade, and tourism among others. Honourable member from Amudat, we hope that will be covered within the commercial diplomacy money. We wait to see results this year and next year we shall recommend the next 16 missions.

The minister has assured us that they are going to train and sensitise our missions on the issue of gender and equity responsiveness. I am answering the question as to why the minister is not the one asking for that. However, he is here and I think he will respond to that issue. 

Mr Speaker, we still face a problem of contributions to international organisations. Ministry of Foreign Affairs struggles to get money and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development blames it on a limited resource envelope. At least for this year, out of Shs 49 billion that we owe the international organisations, they are releasing Shs 9 billion. We will struggle with the Shs 9 billion under our ambit and request for more. We were assured by the minister that this year, they have endeavoured to pay so that whenever there are meetings, we are not locked out. We are yet to see what the assurance is going to give us.

On the issue of labour export, there is a suggestion that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is in charge of this sector, should create a liaison office at our missions so that they deal with these issues. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not releasing any money in that respect, to take care of our distressed Ugandans. 

Since this is a burning issue, I talked to my colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, and she said we have got to liaise. She said the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be the ones to create that office since now issues have come up and we have realised that there is a problem. 

On assets, as my final submission, we have very serious issues with the plots especially in Abuja and Brussels. However, US$ 44 million was earmarked for development of the Abuja plot, which could be taken away. Unfortunately, they entered a public private partnership and it failed because the partner wanted to collect his dues within 60 years. Government of Uganda did not agree to that and therefore, that one flopped. They are now looking for other developers.

On Brussels, the structure that honourable members used to talk about was demolished. It is being addressed because money has been put aside for development as soon as the renovation for the chancery is completed. The money that has been allocated in the budget is not enough and we are still crying for more. In New York, London, Dar es Salaam, Abuja, Copenhagen, Brussels, Kinshasa, Bujumbura, they are going to construct chanceries and the official residences for the ambassadors. I do not want to give details because I am constrained by time. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, do you want to add something or we should proceed? Please, say something and then I can put the question.

10.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Dr Philemon Mateke): Mr Speaker, this question of gender equity is very important and we take it seriously. Serious attempts are going to be made to make sure we comply. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for financial year 2017/2018 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

10.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Col Fred Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, last week, I laid this report on the Table and it was uploaded on the iPads. I have already presented it to the Committee on the Budget where most of the questions were discussed. However, Mr Speaker, in line with our mandate, I now have the honour to present for your consideration and adoption the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs in respect to the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2017/2018. 

The committee scrutinised and considered the following votes:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I recommend that you go to the conclusion.

COL MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The presidency and security agencies are key for the development of our country. The committee has comprehensively scrutinised the relevant policy statements and made critical recommendations. The committee has proposed a re-allocation of Shs 7.944 billion from vote 122 to vote 001 to operationalise the Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority and Metropolitan Affairs. 

I now move that considering the observations and recommendations of the committee, Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies:

Vote 001 - Office of the President

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 118,928,091,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 5,216,904,000

Vote 002 – State House
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 233,228,827,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 12,338,411,000

Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 64,786,412,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 245,404,928,000

Vote 107 – Uganda AIDS Commission
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 7,201,299,000
    b) Development expenditure  - Shs 127,809,000

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 3,888,855,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 210,597,000

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 198,067,620,114
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 135,984,606,110

Vote 159 - External Security Organisation
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 30,951,106,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 392,000,000

Madam Speaker, I beg that this report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion I propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2017/2018. That is the motion for your debate and we start now.

11.01
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, yesterday we were discussing the State House scholarships and we said that they should be transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports. Members would then know the selection process for those who qualify to get the scholarships. Currently, we do not know how they are selected. 

I would like to find out from the chairperson of the committee if this is included in the budget that he has read in the House. I would like to know if it is included, so that it is transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports for purposes of helping Members understand and make a follow up as they perform their oversight role as Members of Parliament. Thank you.

11.02
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to ask the Minister for the Presidency to tell this Parliament and the country whether State House has now officially been turned into the National Resistance Movement (NRM) headquarters. All the NRM meetings are happening at State House. No wonder, if you look at the budget of State House, we have Shs 233 billion. Sometimes participants at these meetings are bad mannered; you remember in one of the recent meetings, they nearly fought there.

State House is supposed to be one of the most respected institutions of the state because that is the presidency. Maybe during some of these meetings, the minister can advise the occupant of State House to quickly construct the NRM headquarters so that the meetings can be held there and maybe in Kyankwanzi.

We have been looking at foreign affairs and we said we want to promote this country. One single story can change the world. One of the great journalists called Amin went to Eritrea during the time of food shortage and the single photograph that he took made the whole world intervene. If the pictures coming from State House are of NRM politicians fighting there, which sort of country are you promoting?

However, most important is the budget. This country cannot continue funding one political party. You go to State House, which is supposed to a public house, eat our food, use our water in the toilets and at the end of the day, you come to Parliament and the request is that we should give State House Shs 233 billion for you to go and enjoy. That is the question I would like to put to the minister. He can advise the occupants of State House because we have two problems: bad mannered people at meetings of State House and also the expenditure that the country is incurring. Thank you.

11.05
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, especially for coming today; you have been away for some time. I would like the minister to clarify on the justification of having State House with a different vote from the Office of the Presidency. I seek that clarification because the same President sits in the Office of the Presidency and sleeps in State House.

In relation to what hon. Ssemujju has just said, members of the public do not understand the two because sometimes meetings are held in the Office of the President and sometimes they are held in State House. Even when they are held there, some of the meetings are not national in nature but they reflect the activities or the programming of the President concerning issues of his political party. I would like the minister to clarify why we should have two different votes and why we should not merge them.

Secondly, on the issue of scholarships, we have asked for a list of students who benefit from the State House scholarship; since the Ninth Parliament, we have been asking for this list every financial year but have never received that list. Why are we not being given that list? When you get outside this Parliament and go to most of the institutions where State House is sponsoring students, you will find out that most of these students are simply from one region. Over 90 per cent are from one region and yet the money that we appropriate to this activity -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu, for giving way. I know you are my friend; we are all short. (Laughter) I seek clarification from you. You stated that you demanded for a list of scholarship beneficiaries from State House and the list has never come or you have not seen it. However, you went ahead to say 90 per cent on that list are from one region; on which list that you have never seen? Where do you get that 90 per cent?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I was very careful. I went to serious schools, did English and I said that when you get outside this Parliament and go to the institutions where there are students who are reportedly sponsored by State House, over 90 per cent come from one region. 

I would like to inform hon. Byabagambi that this side is an alternative government, so do not think that we sit and sleep here doing nothing; we do research. Government should officially bring the list here for the rest of the country to know what is happening. (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, very much, hon. Nzoghu, for giving me this opportunity to give you information. In 2014/2015, in just one year, when Amolatar District where I come from made a request to this State House programme, we were able to get 16 students sponsored by State House. That was in Amolatar alone. (Applause) Therefore, that level of assertion may not be true, unless you substantiate. 

If I can get 16 students in one financial year, then the assertion about one region cannot be true, unless you are saying that it is the northern region that is mostly benefitting from this programme. According to me, 16 is a big number. I think this information is useful for your debate.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Nzoghu. In regard to the State House scholarships, some of the Members seated in this House who hail from different regions of this country benefitted and are holding degrees because of those State House scholarships. 

As the Woman MP of Ngora, I personally made a request for scholarships for the very vulnerable students of Ngora in the previous Parliament through State House and over 23 students have so far graduated with different degrees. Therefore, I think it is for the right cause. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, for your information. However, I would like to tell the country that hon. Amongin is not telling the country that she benefitted from that programme. I talked of 90 per cent of the beneficiaries. The other regions are simply receiving about 10 per cent. That is what I am saying. This Parliament has asked State House to give us a clear criterion for their selection process and tell us how many people are benefitting; we should know, for example, if I may ask - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Nzoghu knows very good English and he has been very articulate in raising his issues. One of the issues he raised was about State House failing to avail the list of beneficiaries of State House scholarships to this House. He has continuously said that 10 per cent of the students that benefit from these scholarships are from the other side. I wonder whether my good brother, hon. Nzoghu, should continue to be heard or whether he is in order to continue articulating on hearsay without laying evidence on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Busongora North, I think you have an issue there. Going to a school and then you come out with an estimate of 90 per cent - I do not think it is scientific enough for you to move this House with that kind of information. Please, try and correct it.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, given an opportunity, I will ask for time on the Floor of this Parliament and I will bring some of the names of the people who are benefitting and you will see where the tilt actually is. 

All Ugandans, irrespective of the regions they come from, rich or poor, pay taxes. During the Obote Government, students were selected on merit but today, there is no merit in selection. (Applause) The President should know that he is a servant of all Ugandans. (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Honourable member, in Masindi the President of this nation said that he is not a servant of Ugandans. Therefore, you are making a mistake by saying that he is a servant of all Ugandans. Maybe he is a servant of the few 90 per cent individuals you are talking about. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: I would like to say that if he was not a servant of this nation, we would not be making this appropriation because we pay for his water, food, clothing, medication and therefore, he is a servant of this country. 

Finally, I want the minister to explain to us this scenario: Time and again, we have said that we must reduce on public expenditure and particularly, on the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). The role of the RDCs is not seen. What do they do that the chairpersons LC V, the Chief Administrative Officers, District Internal Security Officers (DISOs), RPCs do not do? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now debating a constitutional provision in that line? The RDCs are provided for in the Constitution. For as long as they are in the Constitution, you cannot begin challenging their existence.
 
MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, it is Parliament that constitutionalised them. We are simply saying that the same Parliament can amend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you bring an amendment to the Constitution to remove RDCs instead of debating at this time?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, first of all, we must put Government on alert at this stage and say that there is this loophole. It is now up to Government to declare that they are not able to bring that amendment here and we know that formally, so that we can see what to do next. 

COL FRED MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, this matter of State House scholarships was discussed and resolved in the Ninth Parliament. The list was brought to this House and it is a property of this Parliament. In this financial year, when I was appearing before the Committee on Budget, the same question was asked and I promised to bring this list and it is being compiled. However, I can give you a summary. 

The President has a budget of Shs 74 billion for donations and out of this budget, he donates a portion to educate Ugandans, not foreigners. As of now, university students abroad are 20; university students abroad (new intake) for specialised training in India are 41 for medicine, two for ICT training and two for petroleum engineering. Other students in local universities here in the country are 2,000.

Mr Speaker, last year, the document that was supplied, which is in this House, showed very well balanced statistics. At that time, there were 8,000 students but now there are 3,000. Out of the 8,000 students, 4,000 were from the east and 3,000 were from central. The so-called one region, which you are talking about, the western region, had the least. This document is in this House. This matter has been discussed time and again but I think we should support the President to educate Ugandans. He does not educate foreigners – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the honourable chair is talking of figures. I had the privilege to serve in the Ninth Parliament and during the Ninth Parliament, I never saw a list of the State House sponsored students being laid on the Floor of this House. He has further said that the statistics show that 4,000 students from the east benefited from the State House scholarship. 

Wouldn’t it be in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable chair to lay the information on the Table since he is the chair in charge of the presidency? He is also talking about information which is critical and which we have asked for before; wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to lay this information on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on order and you are now seeking procedure. If this information is available, please find time and bring it to the House.

COL MWESIGYE:  Mr Speaker, I am not a liar; I do not have this document here. You can go and use your own sources of information -(Interjections)-  I have said this document is in Parliament and if you go to the library, you can find that document. However, I have no access to this document but I promise I can bring this document because they are listed here. (Interruption) 

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Mr Speaker, we respect the honourable chair of the presidency and that is a very big office. He has given us figures and information and again, he is challenging Members to go to the library or internet to look for them when it is his responsibility as the chairperson of the Committee on the Presidency to lay them on the Table. Is it in order for him to insist and keep refusing to give the documents and instead tell Members to go to the library?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the document was already laid before the House, then it should be in the library. If it was laid before the House, it would be in Parliament, in the library and everywhere.

COL MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. I still insist that this document – The current situation is being compiled and when it is ready, I will bring it to this House. However, the Ninth Parliament received this document and it is in this House. The Speaker has guided and this document is in the House. 

Those were the questions that were raised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Kasirivu Atwooki): Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the committee has given good responses and I do not have extra additions to make. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can I now put the matter to vote on this issue?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, it is today that I have learnt that hon. Kasirivu is the new Minister for the Presidency. We have asked questions here and the minister says he has nothing to add. This is not a ceremony where we stand here to raise these issues and you stand up to say that you have nothing to say. Why then are you holding that portfolio? 

I asked a question here regarding the turning of State House into the NRM headquarters for all the NRM meetings yet we keep appropriating money here for national but not partisan activities. However, the minister says that he has nothing to say. Please, be frank and tell Parliament that the minister responsible is not here.

Mr Speaker, can we get the right Minister for the Presidency to answer these questions before we pronounce ourselves on the figures that the chairperson has read before this House? 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Ssemujju. It is very clear that State House is not the NRM headquarters and it cannot be turned into that. It is still State House and that is why there is a budget for it, and we are spending time to consider it in addition to State House matters. 

The NRM is indeed in advanced stages of having its headquarters constructed. The party is still sourcing for money and you are all aware that constructing headquarters takes a lot of money. The party is, therefore, sourcing for its own money and very soon, God willing, it will have its own headquarters.

Furthermore, meetings that are held in State House, particularly those of the NRM Caucus, are sponsored by the NRM Members of Parliament. (Interjections) Every month, each NRM Member contributes money for caucus matters and it is this money which helps the NRM members whenever they go to meet their chairman. Thank you very much.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you for giving me this opportunity. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Member that State House is for everybody. Members of NRM have been there and I am very sure that even members of the Opposition have been having meetings with the President at State House, especially at night. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question? We do not have the time. We are constrained by time; can I put the question to this matter and we go to the next item? I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2017/18 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

11.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I laid this report on the Floor of Parliament last week and it must be on your iPads. Since we do not have much time, I will look at the budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018 and then also briefly pick out some of the recommendations and observations by the committee. 

The committee looked at seven votes under defence and internal affairs: 

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 806,800,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 492,542,005,000

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 16,690,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 1,258,702,000

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 21,790,984,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 21,933,000,000

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Forces 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 402,436,000,000
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 101,663,000,000

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 138,866,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 39,299,000,000

Vote 305 - Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratories
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,538,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 5,344,000,000

Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 63,422,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 21,142,000,000

Those are the respective votes. 

Observations

Under the Ministry of Defence, we looked at the persistent supplementary budgets. The committee recommended that Government, through the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should adequately provide for the requisite allocation under recurrent expenditure. The committee on classified expenditure should also carry out a thorough scrutiny on the classified expenditure budget, which has increased overtime, to avoid wastage and misuse of public resources.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)

We recommended that Government should re-examine the terms and conditions related to the AMISOM operation and assess its performance in terms of costs and benefits. 

We also recommended that Government should engage the United Nations (UN) to pay the US$ 10.6 million to compensate for the wear and tear of the equipment in line with the existing memorandum of understanding. 

The committee was concerned about the perennial accumulation of arrears by the Ministry of Defence. Right now, their arrears stand at Shs 718 billion and yet in the budget for the financial year 2017/2018, they have provided Shs 109.65 billion. Therefore, as a committee, we recommended that the ministry should stop forthwith committing Government but instead prioritise payment of arrears going forward. Government should also place a cap on accumulation of arrears and reprimand those who accumulate arrears. 

A holistic approach to clearance of arrears should be implemented, whereby the current stock of domestic arrears should be recognised as part of the public debt and cleared under treasury operations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Let us open up the debate. 

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the report on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, but I thought you said that you had laid it on the Table last week. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. That is the motion for your debate. Let us have a short interface, taking time into consideration. If there are no interventions, I can put the question. 

11.36
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have three issues to raise. We have been debating issues of security and internal affairs a couple of times in the last few days. 

I would like to ask the chairperson, or probably the minister because the chairperson served in the Uganda Police Force, about the welfare of junior police officers. One of the things that have been disturbing me, and I want someone to help me understand, is that in most of the police stations that you visit, you find all the housing units dilapidated. You do not have to go very far to see this; you can find that at Jinja Road, Kiira Road and so many other police stations. 

Many of these houses were constructed during the colonial era and by the first post-independence Government. I just want to understand where we got the money then and yet now we cannot get the money to house our policemen properly. The budget of the police has increased from about Shs 150 billion in the last seven to 10 years to now Shs 500 billion; can’t we construct decent houses for the policemen and soldiers? 

I pass by Mbuya every morning as I come to Parliament here and I always see senior officers being driven in the latest models of Land Cruisers, passing by ramshackle houses of their juniors. One day, we will have a problem in this country because of that. It is as if the seniors now take all the money that this Parliament appropriates and buy themselves very nice cars, stay in very nice houses and then keep accommodating the ordinary policemen and soldiers in ramshackle houses. 

Can the minister and the chairperson of the committee tell us whether there is now a solution to this, or will we continue having the seniors live like angels and the juniors sleep like goats? 

I see the committee reports on the increase of crime. We appropriate money and in terms of personnel, the police have grown. What is it that they want to combat crime? We have given them money and they have been recruiting personnel; so, what do they want Parliament to do for them to be able to fight crime? If they cannot fight crime, they probably need to tell us.

There is the issue of human rights that we discussed here in the last couple of days. We are appropriating big sums of money for the police. One of the things that disturbed me as I left here, especially about Nalufenya, is that from this money that we give them, they have even constructed a health facility in Nalufenya where they will treat people they have tortured. 

Instead of building houses for policemen, you build a facility where to take people you have hit. It defeats one’s understanding that a health facility is constructed to deal with people that you have tortured. Why don’t they use this huge amount of money to deal with the welfare of policemen? Thank you.

11.40
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is in relation to our soldiers in Somalia and their allowances. Some time back, I raised this issue of the delayed payment of their allowances while their colleagues from other countries are receiving theirs. At that time, we received information from the minister, hon. Bright Rwamirama. He said that these allowances are delayed by whoever gives money to the Government of Uganda. 

I had received many calls from some of the soldiers who come from my constituency. They told me that in other countries like Djibouti, their governments pay their soldiers and whenever the money comes – I do not know if it from the African Union - it is just transferred back to the relevant ministry.

I would like to request the committee to look into this issue. Having soldiers in Somalia for ten months without receiving their allowances when their colleagues from other countries are receiving theirs, and you just say that it is because of the delay from the funding agency, does not add up for most of these soldiers. I would, therefore, like us to look into this issue and see how Government can devise a way of paying these soldiers and then the money is refunded by whoever is giving these allowances. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.42
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues to raise. First, I would like to thank the committee for the report; it very well written. What is disheartening is that about Shs 500 billion has been appropriated for the police to run their internal affairs and to ensure law and order in the country.

Unfortunately, Shs 101 billion of that money goes to development, which is in terms of housing, staff, research, their ability to handle crime and ammunitions. However, I would like to say very clearly that although the police have tried, we have not seen their full participation in certain areas.

The other time I was listening to the IGP and he was saying that every parish around Kampala has a police post, but in Karamoja, it is the reverse. In Karamoja it is maybe a subcounty, and by the way, there are only about two policemen in the subcounty, which is quite funny. That means that money is a little wasted. Where does the rest of the money go?

As we support these resolutions, Mr Speaker, the best we could do is to ensure that we look into the corrupt tendencies of the police. The ministry in charge should also make sure that the police are sensitised to avoid corruption. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we are to debate the way the member has debated, we will not finish this budget. I am asking that considering the time, we ask questions of clarification so that matters are clarified. If we are to start debating, we will not finish. We have only today, Monday, Tuesday and yet there are very many issues. We have not even started with the budget. Let us intervene on clarifications briefly, and then we conclude these matters.

11.44
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I would like to thank you and also the committee for the report. 

I have about three questions to ask. One is in regard to the plight of the crime preventers. These were massively recruited across the country, especially when we were approaching the general elections. However, as we talk, I do not seem to see any direction that the police are taking to either absorb them or to formalise the existence of these crime preventers. 

We have so many crimes now coming up and many times, some of these are being associated with these crime preventers that were recruited. Can the committee chairperson and the minister responsible clarify on this?

Secondly, my concern is in regard to the express penalties that the police have been have issuing, especially the traffic police. Can the committee tell us how much revenue we have generated as a country from these express fines? We need to know where this money has been allocated or how it is being utilised.

One of the police officers that is involved in issuing these express penalties asked me the questions that hon. Ssemujju asked here. There seems to be an element of corruption in the administration of the books that are used to issue the fines. Can the committee tell us how the Ministry of Internal Affairs is administering the fines and how the revenue that is generated out of this is being administered? Thank you.

11.47
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I basically have one question on a very important item, and that is the pension of the retired soldiers, police and the prisons officers. I need clarification because I do not know whether all this is provided for in this budget.

As we talk now, after having served the country very diligently, most of pensioners are just languishing. They cannot take back their children to school, they cannot treat themselves; they need – 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to you is that the police have got money meant for pension, but they have nothing to do with this money; in fact, this money is supposed to be returned to the Consolidated Fund at the end of this financial year. 

I raised this matter yesterday. We may be interested in knowing how much this idle money is, whether the committee has taken this into account and if the committee has pronounced itself concerning this money, which is about to be returned to the Consolidated Fund.

MR ABALA: Thank you. I think that is very important. If money is there yet people are languishing and crying and it is not being spent, that raises questions. 

The other issue is: I do not know which mechanism we are going to use to stop this - maybe the committee can advise me - but the police officers are still collecting small bribes on these roads. As you move, they stop you and ask you to pay Shs 50,000. I need some clarification from the chairperson because this is something very interesting. I do not know if the minister can give me that information. Thank you.

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification on a few things. First, I have seen allocation for development expenditure this year and the figures are the same as last year. I wanted to know what major accomplishments were registered that we have to maintain the figure.

Secondly, the President made commitments to pay ex-servicemen. I have seen allocation of about Shs 17 billion to deal with issues of arrears. I need to know from the committee if the issue of the ex-servicemen has been dealt with in this budget provision.

Thirdly, there is a threat of biological war, which our country could experience. I need to know if there has been particular provision for bio-security in our budget, so that we are able to avert possible biological threats from within the region. Thank you.

MR WAMBEDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for finally seeing me. I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on the installation of CCTV cameras for security around Kampala city and other public places. Has this been provided for in the budget? Thank you.

MR GONAHASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Over the last few weeks, we have been grappling with the issue of national identity cards and telephones. Access to identity cards was originally a matter for elections. It would show that you are old enough to be a member of the electorate and therefore you would be registered and you got an identity card. 

I see Shs 21 billion for development in this budget and I would like to know what plans we have for children who are not old enough to be members of the electorate and yet they have telephones or would like to have access to telephones? Are they going to be registered and is this Shs 21 billion part of the money to provide that service? Thank you.

COL BYEKWASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is on the recommendation under arrears that concerns reprimand of accounting officers. I thought I needed to comment on this because the defence ministry is a culprit in this area. I am sure the accounting officer of the defence ministry would want to remain within the commitment or the procedures of Government. However, because of the activities of the sector and also the fluidity of the security situation in which we operate, she is constrained to remain within this. This could explain why we have these arrears amounting to Shs 718 billion.

I seek clarification on the nature of reprimand that the committee envisages. If we pass this motion with this line, it will affect the security of this country. This is because there is a mismatch between our plans and what comes after the plan. A General once said that actually, you will always make the first plan but if you shoot the first bullet and your plan remains, you are very lucky. Most of the time, after the first bullet, the plan has already changed. 

The other observation I wanted to make is about AMISOM. The committee is recommending re-examination, but I want to assure this House that even in light of reduction of allowances, our troops are not demoralized. I want to assure the House on that.  This is welfare for them. This House passed a law here that has not enabled us to have our welfare improved, especially in terms of our defence forces shop where our troops can shop from. Therefore, for them this US$ 700 is a very big plus. I would like to tell you, Members, that actually these troops are not demoralized. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we take the responses and see what is remaining?

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, you have raised many issues but some of them were captured in our main report. 

I will begin with the honourable who talked about the welfare of junior officers. As a committee, we were concerned about the welfare of junior officers in the police, military and prisons but as you are all aware, the funds released are inadequate. They cannot allow them build houses that can accommodate all the junior officers.

However, we recommended that maybe Government should look at long-term plans, like getting a loan or money from somewhere else, to make sure that our officers get decent houses, because this problem has been long overdue –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and chairperson. I need clarification on the current budget that is before us, especially concerning the situation and condition of the barracks, especially the police barracks. I always pass Naguru when coming here, and whenever I pass other police stations in this country I see flies. The sanitation situation of barracks is very alarming. 

I have not seen an initiative where sanitation and hygiene in these areas are addressed in our budgetary allocations. What plan does this particular sector have in regards to addressing sanitation and hygiene in police and army barracks?

The other clarification is about the situation of the inmates. When I went to Luzira Prison, I was told that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on information.

MS AMONGIN: Yes. It is about the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has not raised that matter. You are giving information on what she has raised. You have your own time to speak.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable colleague is talking about hygiene and sanitation, but I know that those respective barracks have commanders or officers in charge and they are supposed to manage their hygiene and sanitation. In addition, they are allocated money to do that within their respective departments.

Honourable members, I would believe that even in our homes we are supposed to clean. How do you expect a budget to cater even for cleaning? Of course, the Directorate of Logistics and Engineering can provide things such as detergents, but officers are expected to take care of their environment and make sure that they clean it on a daily basis.

The first honourable member who commented talked about the crime rate in the country and he was asking what this Parliament can do. I would propose that – (Interjection) - Let me proceed, General. We are talking about the crime rate and what Parliament can do. Honourable colleagues, our work is basically supervisory and legislative. I propose that we continue doing our work of guiding and looking at the operations of the police and seeing how best they can be helped. We might realise that maybe re-training and refresher courses as well as mentoring these officers are crucial.

A Member talked about Nalufenya having a health centre. Colleagues, I would like to inform you that every police station is supposed to have a clinic because the suspects in those respective police stations may get problems and they can be handled in those clinics. If the case is complicated, it can be referred to a major hospital. I would, therefore, see it as normal for a police station to have a clinic.

Hon. Flavia Byekwaso talked about the allowances for our troops in Somalia and her concern was about the delayed payments for the AMISOM troops. We have recommended that the Government engages the UN and AU to make sure that they speed up the process. However, I have been informed by the minister that the issue was handled. Maybe he will clarify further.

A colleague raised an issue that money and troops are concentrated in Kampala metropolitan area. He said when you go to the upcountry districts, the troops are few and there are no logistics for the personnel to carry out their duties. That is true, but you realise that the concentration of crime is in the Kampala metropolitan area. 

In addition, in our upcountry stations, we need help. You realise that we do not even have the infrastructure, for example in Mityana. Much as the police would like to establish a police post or station everywhere, they may not have money at the moment to make sure that they reach out to each and every parish. They may also not have the personnel to be deployed to the respective parishes. Maybe that is why they are encouraging us, as well as local council chairpersons in our areas, to be police personnel in one way or another and make sure that we detect and inform them about crime for a quicker response.

Another Member talked about crime preventers, saying the crime preventers have not been discussed and he asked if they are going to be formalised. Members, I would like to inform you that crime preventers fall under the Directorate of the Political Commissariat, and they are the ones who are mandated to make sure that they monitor the activities of the crime preventers. 

However, crime prevention is voluntary. These people are members of our own communities. They come on a voluntary basis to offer their services to the respective communities to make sure that they monitor crime and work with police to prevent crime in their respective communities. However, as we continue with our work, we shall make sure that we encourage the police to have a policy for the crime preventers. Right now, they are using Article 212 of the Constitution to work with the community as well as the local civil societies to make sure that they curb crime.

Somebody talked about pension for the military. We realised that pension for the military still remains an unfunded priority. They needed Shs 357.9 billion for this activity and it could not be provided for in their budget. We suggested that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs in collaboration with – (Mr Atiku rose_)- the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had risen on clarification and now you are saying “order”. Please, let us have discipline in the House. You cannot rise on clarification and when it is denied, you say “order”.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of pension, we recommended that Government should find a way of solving the pension arrears once and for all –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the committee chairperson is not being sincere to this House. When you look at her report, under pension arrears the revised budget for financial year 2016/2017 was Shs 3.185 billion, the release was Shs 3.185 billion and the actual expenditure was Shs 2.645 billion. This means that actually, they did not even spend what was released to them and what they had requested for. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to lie to the House that the money was not available and yet they even spent lower than what was released?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you have got that clarification. You better correct your record.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for that pertinent concern. However, I would like to say that you were referring to the budget that is running – 2016/2017 - but we are discussing the 2017/2018 budget. If money was not used, it has to be remitted back. 

In addition, these were submissions given to the committee by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. We are following the information that was given to us, and that is why we recommended that a verification process be carried out and Government looks for a way to settle these pensioners – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Mr Speaker, we are in Parliament and really have to respect one another. The committee has been given a task on behalf of this House and we expect the chairperson to do due diligence on behalf of this House. 

The honourable member said money for the financial year 2016/2017 was not absorbed, but she said there was no money available. They are now putting her to task to explain how she knew money was not available when money was not absorbed. This means that she is not knowledgeable about her committee. How can she rely on the report of the minister? Couldn’t she have investigated or found more details and read on her own instead of telling a lie on the Floor of Parliament? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, committees of the House are supposed to advise the House on what to do. That is the principle role of the committees. So, please, advise the House properly.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, allow me to inform you that this very House discussed the issue of pension and arrears. As the minister was going to present a report on that day, his report was referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for further scrutiny. I would like to request this honourable House to believe in our committee; we are still doing our work and we shall present the report on that specific subject of pensioners in the military.

Mr Speaker, a Member asked about CCTV cameras around the city. I would like to inform you that during our committee meetings, we did not discuss CCTV cameras. We expected the Ministry of Internal Affairs to introduce the subject to the committee but it was not brought to the committee. We believe that at an appropriate time, the minister will be in position to bring the matter to the committee and we shall pick it up and find ways to inform the House on the progress of the CCTV cameras.

Mr Speaker, another Member asked about the national identity cards and SIM card registration. Allow me to inform this House that last week, hon. Seninde, presented a report on the registration of children from the age of zero to 16 years old.  I think what the honourable colleague is asking about is catered for under the registration of children from zero to 16 years old, which is expected to end in August.

Lastly, the member representing the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) asked about the reprimand of accounting officers. During the process of scrutinising the budget estimates, we retrieved the previous budget reports by the committee and we realised that arrears were accumulating over time. According to the Public Finance Management Act, arrears are supposed to be given first priority in the respective votes but we realised that arrears are accumulating over time and they are not being considered. That is why we came up with that recommendation. We believe it was in good faith and that the accounting officers will find a way of handling and attending to the arrears that are building up over time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please be brief.

12.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and Members for the questions raised. I think the chairperson has clarified on the issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a challenge of time. We have to give time to the budget itself. Let us leave this here. Let me put the question and we move. We shall discuss the actual figures when we deal with the budget more specifically. 

I put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE FOR THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2017/2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akora, you know the rules.

12.15
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Maxwell Akora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report for the Committee on Information and Communications Technology on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018, and to submit the report to the House. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR AKORA: Mr Speaker, the committee submitted the detailed report to the Budget Committee and the report has been uploaded on Members’ iPads. I wish to present an executive summary to the House. 

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Information and Communications Technology oversees two votes: Vote 020, Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance and Vote 126, National Information Technology Authority -Uganda (NITA-U) 

In addition, there are four other agencies under the sector: the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), Posta Uganda, Uganda Institute of Communication Technology (UICT), and Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). I will not go through the mandate of the ministry and strategic objectives. These details are in the main report. I wish to proceed straight to the budget proposals for 2017/2018.

Vote 020 – Ministry of Information, Communication, Technology and National Guidance 

The total vote allocation for the financial year 2017/2018 is Shs 50.399 billion, comprising of the following: 

    a) Wage - Shs 1.744 billion;
    b) Non-wage – Shs 26.829 billion;
    c) Development – Shs 17.597 billion;
    d) Non-tax revenue – Shs 3.5 billion.

This includes Shs 20 billion for recapitalization of UBC, Shs 15 billion support for ICT innovation and Shs 3.77 billion for the new Department of National Guidance that was transferred to the ministry.

The planned priorities for financial year 2017/2018 are:

1. 	To provide an enabling environment for ICT development and regulation, with an allocation of Shs 11.58 billion;
2. 	Provide effective communication for Government and national guidance. With the Shs 20 billion allocated to UBC, this amounts to Shs 34.37 billion; and
3. 	General administration of the ministry, policy and planning - Shs 14.447 billion.

Under observations and recommendations, the committee noted that there was delayed release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance in the current financial year. This is impacting on the operations of the ministry. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and UCC should release funds appropriated in a timely manner.

The committee noted that double reporting of the Institute of Information and Communication Technology to the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance as well as to the Ministry of Education and Sports is affecting the performance and accountability of UICT. The committee recommends that Government should urgently review the Act governing UICT to streamline the administration, management and reporting structure of the institute – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, can I propose that you go to page 12 of your summary.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence so that I go through the committee observations because they are important – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please go to page 12.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Page 12 is the summary of the proposed appropriation by the Committee on Information and Communications Technology for vote 020 and vote 126 and other agencies under the sector.

Vote 020 – Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 30,939,234,518
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 19,459,639,476 
That gives us a subtotal of Shs 50,398,873,994.

Vote 126 – National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U)
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 51,364,376,627 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 36,615,856,310
The subtotal for NITA-U is Shs 87,980,232,937.

Uganda Institute of Communications Technology (UICT)
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 3,869,661,195 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 6,278,248,100
The sub-total for UICT is Shs 10,147,909,295.

Uganda Communications Commission (UCC)
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 47,990,273,814
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 59,198,355,875 (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, you guided very rightly that we go to page 12, but in the report I have downloaded on my iPad, that page has key priorities and -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Page 12 in the summary of the extracts from the main report. There are pages that are dealing with those figures. You may not have the page 12 of the executive summary, but you have everything in the report. 

MR AKORA: This is the executive summary that has also been uploaded onto Members’ iPads. If you would like to use the original report, then it is on page 29.

Posta Uganda
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 19,971,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 486,000,000
The subtotal is Shs 20,457,000,000.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 12,000,000,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 20,000,000,000 
The subtotal is Shs 32,000,000,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I propose the question for your debate. 

MR AKORA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings of the committee while scrutinising the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of ICT and aligned agencies for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate -

MR AKORA: I have two other documents to submit. I beg to lay on the Table the strategic plan for Uganda Broadcasting Corporation for five years, from 2017 to 2022. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AKORA: Finally, I beg to lay on the Table a report from UCC on integrating ICT into education in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. 

Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Information and Communications Technology on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. That is the question for your debate and like we said, let us raise issues of clarification so that we can shorten the time of engagement.

12.24
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify to this House why there is a very big disparity between urban and rural schools, especially in realising the agenda of Government of promoting ICT in schools. 

Why is there a disparity in the distribution of computers to schools? The students in rural schools, for example in my constituency, do the same computer exams as those in urban schools even if they do not have access to those computers. Hon. Tumwebaze, why haven’t you supplied computers to my schools?

12.25
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee. My first concern is on UBC. Sincerely, if you look at the programmes on UBC, you feel like turning off the TV. Secondly, when I talked to the person in charge, he told me the machines are obsolete. 

Mr Chairperson and honourable minister, in the five-year strategic plan they have put in place, is there a plan to make sure that machines purchased. Even some of the presenters were trained a long time ago and things have been changing; are they going to be sent for other trainings or you are going to lay them off and get people with modern skills to handle issues in Uganda?

Thirdly, can you have balanced reporting and programmes that speak to the minds of Ugandans other than targeting particular issues that you want Ugandans to see?

Finally, honourable chairperson and honourable minister, the world is changing and everything is becoming computerised. There is a course in social security that is very necessary for Uganda now because of the numerous cybercrimes in the country. I shared this before with the minister that we need to train people in that course that deals with people who investigate cybercrime and issues like that. 

Is that included in your budget for this financial year so that we protect this country against terrorists who are now using computers for their activities? How are we going to protect our children and country if we do not introduce these courses now and build the human resources we need to deal with these issues? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

12.27
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for coming up with this report.

Mr Speaker, I need clarification especially on UBC. My colleague has mentioned some of the issues, but I am wondering whether we should continue funding this sick entity. I remember the COSASE report put it clearly that UBC was sick and yet we continue sinking money in this institution. I would like to find out from the chairperson or the minister what plans they have. Are you going to restructure the entire entity? Thank you.

12.28
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My comment is in relation to the Rural Communications Development Fund (RCDF). The levy is two per cent and I think one per cent should go to the RCDF. I remember recently, the Minister for ICT wrote to MPs who do not have network in their areas asking them to submit their requests but I have not seen anything that has been done.

Mr Speaker, I can tell you that some of us come from gazetted hard-to-reach areas. If the telecom companies are to put a mast in an area, they told me it should generate $ 10,000 per month. This is what they consider since they are business-oriented. Therefore, the only way out would be for Government to put up the infrastructure in these areas where the telecom companies would not make money and then the telecoms just come to connect.

I will give an example. I managed to put up a telecom mast in my constituency and it cost around $ 200,000. I went to the telecom companies to have it connected but I was told that I need to buy a generator and fuel it because I do not have electricity. I have a mast but they cannot connect it. I would require another Shs 20 million to Shs 30 million to run it per month if they are to connect it. How can Government help me in using this money under the RCDF?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I see a recommendation by the committee on the money from UCC as part of the levy. Uganda Communications Commission gave Shs 2.3 billion to the ministry and they are recommending Shs 3.5 billion. What was the basis for this? I would propose that if UCC is charging telecoms in terms of percentages, then the ministry should also be given a percentage. So, once the money increases, automatically the money going to the ministry to help it perform its duties would increase; once it goes down, then it would also reduce. That would be the best way to do it, other than fixing a certain figure yet you charge in percentages. I thank you.

12.31
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report and my colleagues, hon. Akol and hon. Tayebwa, for raising these issues. I would expect Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, which has the widest coverage in this nation, reaching to all parts of Uganda, to engage in educational programmes. I expect them to have programmes that build up morals and ethical values; raise awareness of issues like human rights, respect for self, respect for the rights of others; and educate parents on preparing adequately for their children.

Recently, there were people who wanted Government to provide sanitary towels, for example, for the girl-child. However, with some of these issues, we should begin to prepare our parents to embed into the children ethical values and also sensitise the parents that when you produce a girl-child, you expect her to experience what all women do at age nine, 10, or 11, so prepare for these children. Produce the number of children that you can adequately look after so that you can educate them, see them through school and give them the necessary facilities so that we have a quality population. 

We expect UBC or the ICT ministry to work together with other ministries so that we have quality information going to the public. Therefore, I am wondering whether in this budget these issues have been taken care of. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us raise clarification; a debate will not end this matter.

12.34
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the high cost of internet services in this country. I would like to know from the honourable minister what Government is doing to reduce the cost of internet services in this country so that we can do business easily and promote our country. I request that you extend the internet services to areas where the services seem to be very scarce. Thank you.

12.34
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues of clarification. First, I seek clarification on the availability of free internet zones in the country. This issue has been in the public domain and the minister indicated to us that he was taking steps to ensure that in order to promote communication and for easy coordination of business in this country, some zones are going to be provided with free internet. I wonder how this has been addressed in this current budget.

Finally, Mr Speaker, colleagues have talked about UBC; in order to keep their audience glued to the channel or station, there is a lot that UBC needs to do to up their standards. I hope that in the reforms that are taking place, you are addressing these issues. I suppose you are not comfortable with the figures so far as they stand. How many people watch UBC? They are really not giving a lot of service to this country, so they should step up. Thank you very much.

12.35
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of ICT and the committee for the report. I would like to as for some clarification.

There are some areas in the country where there is poor network in some parts, particularly in Kiruhura District. I would like to find out from the minister whether there is a plan to construct masts in some places. There is a place in Kiruhura District called Kanyaryeru Subcounty where people have complained over and over again about the poor communication network. There is need to construct a mast in those areas so that we can improve the communication network. Thank you very much.

12.37
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most of the telecommunication companies are involved in mobile money businesses and they are making a lot of profits from this business like the banks do. Honourable minister, MTN last week sent a massive message to its customers that they intend to increase their charges especially on withdrawals and transfers as well. This House just passed the tax Bill last week and there are no taxes that have been increased on the same; why are they increasing the charges?

Honourable minister, I would like to find out whether you have control over unsolicited messages. These telecommunication companies overcharge people for unsolicited messages. I may not have subscribed to some programmes but you send me the programmes and charge me for that highly. Let the ministry tighten their control, especially in terms of trying to regulate those activities.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, most of the computer packages on the computers that were given to secondary schools in Agago District are not working. I do not know whether the ministry has any plan to send teams to follow up and find out if these computers are functional and find remedies for them. Thank you.

12.39
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleagues have addressed the issue of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has been the richest media entity in Uganda but it has suffered from asset stripping in the past years. Its land was taken away and even its masts were hired out to private FM stations. Before we send Shs 32 billion to UBC, can the minister tell this Parliament whether the restructuring has happened? We would not want to send money to the same managers and boards that have mismanaged this institution.

Secondly, on the issue of the national backbone, how much of the country have we covered now? The minister responsible for switching off phones could help inform this Parliament.

There is the issue of disposing off old computers and other electronic waste. Many old computers are being - I do not want to use the word “damped” because you are the one going for them. Do we have a mechanism to dispose them because some of them are very dangerous to our environment? Those are the issues that I would like the minister to answer before we approve the Shs 32 billion going to the UBC. 


MR MAXWELL AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the issues that you have raised. I note that most of them are directed at the minister and he is here. However, I would like to respond to a few.

The disparity in the distribution of computers between rural and secondary schools is a matter that the committee has raised with Uganda Communications Commission. We asked them to submit a report, which I have laid before the House just now. The committee will consider it and make recommendations on how this disparity can be reduced. 

We certainly appreciate this initiative in which UCC, through RCDF, is providing computers in schools to the extent that ICT is now an examinable subject. Our recommendation, which I did not go into, is that Government should ensure that this initiative can be maintained by the schools. Uganda Communications Commission only provides the computers; it does not maintain or replace them and it does not recruit or deploy staff like teachers and technicians to maintain these computers. Therefore, the recommendation of the committee was that the Ministry of Education should take up that matter as ICT is now an examinable subject.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has a strategic plan, which I have just laid before the House; it has just been finalised. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has had historical problems since the merger of Uganda Television and Radio Uganda. They took up the assets of the former Radio Uganda and Uganda Television but also the liabilities - huge sums of money to the tune of about Shs 50 billion, which they have been struggling with. 

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has had staffing and governance issues that are being addressed by the ministry. A review report was commissioned and it had recommendations. We are waiting to see what Government will do with the recommendations that were made by that committee. 

Government has undertaken this year to invest Shs 20 billion to recapitalise UBC. As a committee, we do not think that Shs 20 billion is adequate. We hope that it will be given over time, maybe three to four years in the medium term. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is well poised as a national broadcaster to inform and educate the population but also to inculcate a sense of national values. That is why it is rightly placed under the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. Issues of land and other UBC assets are contained in the report; I believe the minister will make a response. 

In terms of the Shs 20 billion that we are appropriating this year, there are three key areas that have been identified which should address the immediate needs of UBC. The first is to restructure the corporation and to re-engineer its business process. This means reviewing the staffing needs - how it should deliver its business; paying off excess staff pension benefits and salary arrears so that it is a lean and efficient organisation. 

The second area is investing in capital equipment especially in radio stations; upgrading 11 radio stations that should generate revenue and aid in undertaking its mandate of broadcasting nationally. The third area is to improve on the content, especially focusing on local content but also aligning international content to local needs, so that it can compete and be able to generate revenue from broadcasting. 

The third matter I would like to respond to is about the share of the two per cent levy that the UCC collects from operators. At the moment, one per cent goes to the Treasury under the Finance Act, 2016. The spirit of that amendment was that the Ministry of ICT should not receive funding from UCC but rather from the Treasury. Therefore, the one per cent should go to the Treasury and should be appropriated to the Ministry of ICT for ICT development. The law says that the two per cent should be shared between the Rural Communications Development Fund and the ministry in ratio of one to one, or 50 per cent each. Therefore, the ministry was expecting a share of about Shs 3.5 billion this financial year. However, UCC had provided only Shs 2.3 billion on the understanding that the one per cent that was taken because of the Finance Act, 2016 was going to the Ministry of ICT through the Treasury but that has not been done. 

It was our recommendation, therefore, that Government should avail the full one per cent to the sector. There are a number of initiatives that the sector needs to undertake - development of ICT parks, business process outsourcing areas, a national postcode and addressing system so that the address of every building, site and business is known. It would ease business and communication. 

Those are the kinds of things that the ministry would like to do, including investment and training - the innovation fund, turning UICT into a centre of excellence. The one per cent from the Treasury, if availed to the sector, they would be able to undertake those investments. (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Chairman, I sit on the finance committee and I was there when we were discussing this matter of the one per cent which should be transferred from the Treasury. I am sure that in your engagement, you invited the Minister of Finance. I would like to know what his explanation was because one year has already gone and if this money is not transferred, next financial year the Ministry of Finance will do the same and it will bog down the work of the Ministry of ICT. What was his response? 

MR AKORA: I thought that I saw the Minister of Finance in the House but he is not here. The sector has engaged both the ministries of ICT and finance and the budget committee with a view to resolve this matter. 

The spirit of the amendment was that the one per cent would be availed to the ministry. If you look at the ministry budget last year, it was Shs 9.7 billion. This year it slightly increased because of the Shs 20 billion to UBC, which the ministry will pass on to UBC. The Shs 15 billion innovation fund is an initiative that again will be passed on to our young innovators. Therefore, there really is not much left in the ministry for ICT development. 

The priorities that I talked about in terms of development of ICT parks, business process outsourcing and turning UICT into a centre of excellence require big sums of money that the ministry needs. Therefore, the one per cent would finance those initiatives. I hope that we take this discussion further during the financial year with a view to getting the full one per cent returned to the sector in financial year 2018/19.

12.49
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to run through the issues Members raised. 

Hon. Nzoghu, the disparity is not deliberate, but when a school has electricity, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) will give it 40 computers for the laboratory. However, if it does not have electricity, like your schools and mine, because you are my neighbour, UCC gives 20 computers and the rest of the money is allocated for the purchase of solar power. That is how they balance it.

A total of 40 computers are given to the schools that are connected to electricity; 20 computers are given to the unconnected schools and the rest of the money covers the solar bit. We would have covered all schools, but like you heard from the chair, one per cent was taken away and it was never returned to the ministry. 

The Rural Communication Development Fund is not only for computers; we must intervene with masts where there are none. If hon. Fungaroo was around today, he would bear witness that in Obongi, there is a mast that was put up from this fund, but he still needs more and we must do more – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Honourable minister, I have got seven subcounties in my constituency and six of them have got electricity and even the seventh one is getting electricity this year. Therefore, the schools that I am talking about have electricity, but they have not received the computers. That is the information I am seeking from you. Why have these schools not received the computers and yet they qualify and have the necessary infrastructure.

MR TUMWEBAZE: My advice to members –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Besides the anomalies that have been raised by hon. Nzoghu, there is also the issue of ICT being an examinable subject and the issue of ICT teachers and technicians. We have computers in place alright, but the deployment of these teachers –[Mr Tuwmebaze: “It is not our mandate”]- Is it the mandate of the Ministry of Education? However, how are you harmonising that?

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the minister. I would like to give an example from Ngora. Uganda Communications Commission wrote to Ngora High School plus other schools in Ngora District and they were supposed to have an allocation of computers in 2014/15. However, up to date those computers have never been delivered. When I went to UCC, in their system it showed that Ngora High School, Mukura Secondary School, Okapel High School and Kobwin Secondary School all received computers and yet they have never. 

Therefore, I would like to get clarification in regards to these schools. I would like to know whether they will receive the computers because that was in 2014/15 and today we are talking about 2017/18 budget allocation for computers for schools specifically. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have got to manage your time.

MR TUMWABAZE: My advice to my sister from Ngora is that this is a question of investigation. If UCC is saying that they delivered and the concerned schools never got the computers, that would be an issue for investigation. I beg that after here, we get those details and investigate and find out who is playing games. Is it UCC or some people got the computers and diverted them. This is administrative. Let us know who is trying to cheat. However, I am happy you took a step to check with UCC. 

Maybe we should also take note that our role in the ICT sector with those rural communication funds is to connect the unconnected. Therefore, we believe the availability of computers is an enabler for connection. The framework for training ICT teachers and technicians is now the mandate of the Ministry of Education, because we will be going into human resource issues.

Hon. Akol and other colleagues talked about Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. One step we have taken on UBC, Mr Speaker, is that we put up a committee of experts, chaired by a veteran journalist, Dr Peter Mwesigye, and they gave us a good report. It analyses the engineering gaps of the corporation, the human resource gaps, content production gaps and areas of mismanagement which date back to the days of UTV.

Therefore, when we interfaced with the committee, we told them - and this perhaps goes to the question of my sister, the honourable member from Jinja - that we need money to retire people and pay their benefits. We also need money to hire people and upgrade equipment. We have a revamping plan in place and when we get the resources, I hope I will competently come back to this Parliament, maybe after one quarter, to present a report on the progress we are making. 

However, I also need to put it on record that UBC is highly indebted up to the tune of almost Shs 50 billion. These are debts that have accumulated since the days of UTV, their statutory obligations. My prayer to the Ministry of Finance has been, yes you are giving us Shs 20 billion but if you want the old debts to eat into this Shs 20 billion, it will be like jumping up and down in the same position without making a step forward. Therefore, we need to take note of that so that we struggle and get moving.

Hon. Tayebwa raised an important point. I wrote to you, colleagues, to give us information on areas that lack network. Mobile phone network is one basic requirement for voice connectivity, but it is also a form of data connectivity. I would like you to take interest in our budget; the Ministry of ICT is among the least funded sectors. We do not have money at all to even build two or three masts. What we have done now is to invite telecommunication companies, talk to them using our regulatory power, and try to see whether in the regulations we can condition these operators as they renew their licences to widen their coverage. However, you do that bearing in mind that you do not have to compromise their business plans. 

One thing we would like to put in place as a condition for licensing is that you must be able to cover the whole country, be it in the short or long term. However, the ideal situation would be if we had money, we would roll out these masts and then condition the telecoms to put their antennas there. However, we do not have that budget, honourable members. 

Hon. Kamateeka I agree with you that UBC should do all round programming, because commercial televisions will only broadcast what is commercially appealing to the financiers or advertisers.
However, we need a station that will tell all our culture, as diverse as the culture of all the people of Uganda is, and bring out the different geographical areas and sceneries. 

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation will have to invest a lot of money in content production. My brother, hon. Lubogo, said that for you to maintain that relationship with the audience, the key is content. Therefore, UBC must invest in content production that is appealing to people in different spheres of life. 

Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari talked of high costs of data; yes, our cost of data is high because we largely depend on mobile networks. The next step is that we are developing the digital vision and I will come and brief Parliament on this before we take what they call fibre to the home, so that you can access internet through another channel other than your phone, which is highly commercial, and then internet will be high. 

City authorities like KCCA cannot approve your house plan before you account for fibre connectivity the way you account for water and electricity. We are getting to such a direction and I hope by doing that we shall mitigate the cost of data. 

Hon. Lubogo; yes, the Ministry of ICT and its agency NITA will set out to do trial points for free Wi-Fi. We have a plan that public universities and public parks, where young people especially the unemployed gather as they look for applications online, there will be hotspots for free Wi-Fi. We want them to get free Wi-Fi and perhaps extend it to bus and train stations if they are up and running. 

However, before rolling out that, we had to do trial points. We did not have money to do that but we were trying to scavenge free internet from institutions. For example, the internet of this Parliament is used up to the time the offices are operational. Therefore, when you close and go home from 5.00 p.m. onwards, you cannot access the internet and yet you are paying for it. Thus, we are trying to use unutilised but yet spent on broad band to try out these points. 

People were complaining because they did not know this was a trial. It was a little bit slow because we did not invest much in it but still the response was good. We got a number of people using MyUG internet and it is going to give us a basis for roll out and for mobilising resources to take free Wi-Fi to universities and public places in the short and long term.

Hon. Genensio, I take note of your point. Honourable members, I also have the letters you responded to. Though many of you did not respond to them but I believe those who did not are covered. We have already started giving priority to the areas that honourable members communicated to us so I will engage the telecom companies. 

Hon. Franca, I will have to contact Bank of Uganda through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because Bank of Uganda is the one responsible for regulating mobile money. Hence, we need to know whether they have cleared the anticipated raising of fees by the telecoms. 

Unsolicited messages; honourable members, I have hope that this financial year, when you pass our small budget, we shall finally be able to put in place the communications tribunal. If we have this communications tribunal, everybody can put there his or her case. I therefore continue to seek your support on this in case we do not find any funds in the budget and we have to come for what you know as supplementary. 

Computers given to schools; we need a dialogue with the Minister of Education and Sports. When we give computers to these schools, they should own them as their assets because they run those schools and employ the managers of the schools. Our job should be to give the enablers and the rest is up to them. 

Hon. Ssemujju talked about mismanagement of UBC assets like land. Yes, there are so many reports such as the IGG report and this House’s reports. We are focusing on content and the TV. We are also planning to refer to Justice Bamugemereire’s report to look into the mismanagement of the UBC land and the question should be; should UBC continue managing land or it should completely get out of that business and focus on the core mandate? 

That has been the confusion; the station manager is busy protecting land and going to court other than quality assuring content for the listeners. Therefore, the revamping plan will bring out all this and distinguish what the TV and its radio stations should concentrate on. 

Another point is how we are -(Interjection)– just briefly, the Speaker is warning me. The Speaker has advised me to continue. Honourable colleague, we shall share in the corridor. 

There is an e-waste policy and NEMA is leading it. NITA-U as well as NEMA issued guidelines on how MDAs should dispose of their e-waste (these are used computers, even phones). Fortunately, there are investors who have promised to make good resources out of that e-waste but I agree with you that improper disposal will bring problems for our country. I thank you colleagues, and Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Information and Communications Technology on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received two reports which I commit to the record of Parliament: report of UCC and also another report on the plan of UBC. It came from the chairperson so I could not refer it to the committee. If it had come from the minister, I would have known the committee needed to look at it but since you already have it, I do not have to refer it to you. Let us suspend the House for a break of one and a half hours. We will resume at 2.30 p.m. The House has been suspended. 

(The House was suspended at 1.06 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.34p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kenneth Lubogo): Yes, Mr Speaker, I know the guidance. I will only try to plead with you that if it is possible, you grant me permission to read through some recommendations, at least five of them.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a Report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. It is after considering the estimates and ministerial policy statements that were presented to us by the two ministries: the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

The committee has considered and scrutinised the statements and we now report on the same. On page 45 of the report, we have got the table of figures. This report was uploaded and it has been on the network for some days.

We have got six votes and we have considered - 
Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
Vote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute
Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board
Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards
Vote 306: Export Promotions Board

We have got for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives expenditure items both on recurrent and development. These figures are in thousands. We have got figure for supply of Shs 13, 587,996,000 recurrent budget, and development of Shs 35,014,569,000, which gives us a total of Shs 486,000,256,500. We have got expenditure items, recurrent – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, at least say that the money is in billion

MR LUBOGO: Okay, it is in billion, fine. When I said that thousands and I read the figures then it means that at the end, you add three zeros. That is what it means. Let me re-read these figures.

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, recurrent budget is Shs 13,587,996,000 and development is Shs 35,014,569,000, which gives us a total of Shs 48,602, 565,000.

On Vote 022, we have got recurrent of Shs 80,538,784,000 and development budget we have Shs 6,239,248,000, which gives us a total of Shs 86,778,032,000. 

On Vote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute, the figure for supply in recurrent budget is Shs 5,870,867,000, and we have the development budget of Shs 8,322,620,000. This gives us a total of Shs 14,193,487,000. 

On Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board, on both expenditure items, we have a recurrent budget of Shs 10,660,155,000, and a development budget of Shs 553,303,000, which gives us a total of Shs 11,213,458,000. 

The next Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards, we have got for the recurrent budget Shs 27,899,000,700, and then a development budget with a figure of Shs 6, 179, 523,000. This gives us a total of Shs 34,078, 530,000.

Finally, on Vote 306: Export 	Promotions Board, we have for the recurrent budget a figure of Shs 2,846,423,000 and a development budget of Shs 396,281,000. This gives us a total of Shs 3,242,704,000. Those are the figures on the votes.  

Mr Speaker, considering my request, I beg to be allowed to just read a few recommendations here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not read them, just summarise them. You can use some two minutes.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to draw them from the main report which we all have. It is on page 22 of the report, which is Uganda Research Institute. The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 1.5 billion to acquire foundry machine which will facilitate them to do reverse engineering and save that institute from buying such equipment as mortars to drive the machinery.

I felt that it was necessary for me to read this recommendation to the House. On page 24, there is the recommendation on UNBS. The committee recommends that a sum of Shs 18.7 billion for construction of two laboratories, and then a sum of Shs 5 billion respectively be provided for the recruitment of extra staff to support standards enforcement.

This arose because National Bureau of Standards is only manning less than 30 per cent of the entry points of this country. Little wonder that we have a lot of sub-standard goods in this market. There is, therefore, need for recruitment of more staff to increase the capacity, and also to have laboratories for testing. We do not have even a laboratory for food to talk about.

On page 26, we have a recommendation on Export Promotion Board. The committee recommends that the Uganda Export Promotion Board be supported with Shs 850,000,000 to set up branches in the financial year 2017/18. The committee further recommends that UTB should strategize with district commercial officers to promote export awareness. You will appreciate that I am not reading the whole report and not all the recommendations are being read but just some few.

On Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), the committee recommends that Shs 200 million that is required for surveillance drones should be provided through relocation of the proposed expenditure items. Here, the recommendation is not calling for getting more resources but just reallocation from within the budget that has been provided to UWA. These drones are for surveillance of the parks, remotely controlled and send signals for easy tracing of the movements of animals, poachers and whichever information they deem necessary.

Finally, on page 40, the committee recommends that Shs 1.5 billion be provided to the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre to establish marina and to operationalise a tourism circuit on Lake Victoria as part of domestic and international tourism development.

The committee further recommends that Government should provide Shs 2 billon for accomplishment of the floating restaurant given the significance of this project to tourism in the country. Mr Speaker, with those figures and the recommendations I have read, I beg to report.

I have the minutes of the meetings that preceded this report and the original copy of the report. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the financial year 2017/2018.

That is the question for your debate, let us have some small engagements and we agreed that we deal with issues of clarification because we cannot manage a debate.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee. As an engineer, when I heard that they are planning to build up the capacity of the laboratory, I think they are matching orders because according to UNBS as you aware, we have very many fake things in Uganda. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the clarification I want from the chairperson is; are we building the laboratory next financial year because it is very pertinent?

MR TWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the chairperson and the Ministry for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to clarify on two things. I have tried to peruse through the report but I have not seen this being talked about. First, like any other district and constituency in this country Bunyaruguru County is faced with a challenge of wild animals especially elephants that invade families and communities along the national park. For the last ten years, the Government especially H.E the President has been promising a construction of structures or barriers to prevent wild animals from invading the communities. What is the position? I have not heard about it.  

Secondly, when I visited the landing site in my constituency I found one big challenge. There are communities staying at the landing sites; the fishing villages. The information I gathered was that these communities were supposed to be there to do their fishing but what is happening now, is that they are demanding for more land from the national parks. 

I am trying to find out from the committee and the ministry whether they are aware about that, and whether they are taking into consideration the possibility of opening the boundaries to ensure that people do not encroach on the land or to consider their request of adding them more land. I would like to have clarification on those two issues.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In their observation and recommendations, the committee points to a review of the liberalization policy, which I support. However, I seek clarification from them. I support them because of the indigenous industries being protected to protect the consumers from being exploited.

However, given the East African Community protocol that has removed trade barriers, now we have free movement of goods, labour and services. How are you going to strike a balance so that the regulatory framework for production and distribution chain helps to stop the exploitation of our consumers?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is also on the destruction by elephants, which affects our communities. We have ever raised this issue but I think at this point I wish to hear more from the minister and the committee about how they have planned to handle the plight of the community where elephants do the destruction not from the parks but from South Sudan. We have the case of Adjumani; the elephants cross from South Sudan. In Moyo, we have Dufile Sub County that is highly hit by this destruction.

Secondly, what compensation plan do you have? If it is not there, this problem has persisted for over ten years, we tell people. What is your comment about self-defense if we promoted it? You tell us not to kill the elephants but they are killing our people and now when they come, people have to run. Should we continue telling them to keep running?

Lastly, Madi sub region has good sites that can attract tourists but they have never been developed. Which plans do you have to develop these sites, or else put them on the map? Thank you.

MR GONAHASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing, I am interested in the issue of food security; you may wonder why? In the age of free market economy we are operating in, a lot of food is being bought and sold out of the country. This has worsened the current situation of having no food in Uganda. As a member of the agricultural committee I am concerned and I have been discussing this issue. But I am told it should be the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing which should handle the silos to protect grain from going out of the country. It should ensure that if, for example, you buy grain and you store it, and if need be, you can let it go on the markets at fair prices. Unfortunately, this issue falls between three ministries: Disaster Preparedness which should have the grain, Agriculture which produces and Cooperatives and Marketing.

I wonder whether by any chance you have considered the issue of constructing silos in this budget; if not, I hope some other ministry of Government is thinking about ensuring food security through construction of silos. I am waiting to hear what will come out of the other two ministries which have been mentioned as working out or deciding who runs the show of food security in silos. That is my concern. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KABAGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the chairperson and minister to clarify on the people who live in these protected areas. In Kisoro as well as Kabale and Kanungu, we also have the Batwa who have been living in these areas and have been pushed out of the forest. I want to know if the Government has a strategy of settling these people elsewhere. Thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  My constituency, Kyaka South, hosts what is known as Katonga Game Reserve which is at the border between Kyegegwa and Kiruhura districts. We are currently faced with an outbreak of foot and mouth disease on the other side of Kiruhura. As we endeavour to guarantee and protect our area, the animals cross from the game reserve and come to our farms. I would like to know what the ministry has in plan for us because we are not able to fight off those animals, yet they are spreading diseases to our livestock.

MR MUGABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Aware that tourism is one of the major contributing departments in terms of revenue collection, the clarification I am seeking from the committee and minister is on the tourism roads. I can give the example of Mgahinga where we have Mountain Gorillas and there is gorilla tracking. The distance from Kisoro to Mgahinga is around 14 kilometres. However, it takes more than an hour to access it.

Mr Speaker, in Mitooma District we border Queen Elizabeth National Park and the community had opened an access road. I don’t know whether it has been put into consideration. What plans do you have to open those access roads to the national parks as well as maintaining the tourism roads? Thank you.

MR SSEBIKAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am talking about the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). The presenter has a budget for UNBS but in my district and the neighbouring district of Kiboga, UNBS people extort money from traders when they are standardising their weigh scales. You find in Kiboga they are taking Shs 120,000, while in Ntwetwe they are taking Shs 100,000. In addition, the way they handle our people is not good. They mishandle them. I would like to know how they are trained and equipped with information and everything to relate with the public. 

The other thing is about phones. Recently, my sister bought a phone. When she was charging it, when she touched it, she almost died – it had electricity all over! I don’t know how these UNBS people are regularising things to be brought into the country without being checked. They are not up to the standard. 

Our people are going to die of substandard things coming from abroad. It is not only phones but even other things such as kits used for testing malaria. How are they working with the National Drug Authority to ensure that the things coming into the country are of the acceptable standards? Thank you.

MS NAKATE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the minister or chairperson of the committee. I don’t know what has been done to embrace dark tourism. This country seems to think that it is only the other types of tourism that are important. Look at Rwanda: the genocide sites are bringing in a lot of revenue. Here in Uganda, particularly in my constituency, we have dark tourism sites. The peace we are enjoying is because of Luweero. We have very many sites. Why don’t you bring these sites on board and develop them so that they can bring in revenue to this country? Honourable minister, throw more light on that issue.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the very good report. I have one observation. The committee observed that Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) has failed to provide quarterly reports to Parliament. Some of us have served on that board and at that time it was smart. What has caused this failure? 

Secondly, what are the plans to improve on accommodation in the parks? I am aware that some concessions were given to improve accommodation in the parks, including Katurum Lodge in Kidepo which was destroyed by Obote soldiers. What is the plan? The report is silent. Thank you.

GEN. KUTEESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last speaker raised something which is pertinent to me. I am in charge of military doctrine and was tasked to find a way of building the national military museum of Uganda. The aim of that museum is to show the connectivity of all our worlds from the beginning, not just yesterday or 1986. The military museum may be different from the one we have here. Now, I do not know under whose docket it falls. I doubt that it is under the defence docket. 

I want you people to advise on where I should go next. I have been given a task and I have done my research, but I don’t know where to address it. I am saying this because every nation we visit shows us how they came to become one. A vivid example is Algeria, which holds their history of resistance. 

The good thing about this is that whatever wars we have fought it is the blood of Ugandans that was shed. Ugandans are the ones who have been fighting. Therefore, what lessons have we learnt? That is the aim of that museum. I would like to be advised on whom to see because I have put everything in writing. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to get a clarification from the committee. Government had identified some industrial parks and one of them is in Oraba in Koboko and the international market. We have identified the land and it is already under survey. I would like to know from the minister when they will start developing these two important sectors so that we can start getting money for Koboko and Uganda.

Mr Speaker, Koboko is a very beautiful district with very good attractive tourist sectors. To the east, we have the mountains with the great lakes. To the west, there is the water flowing from the east in Uganda and to the west, it is neighbouring Democratic Republic of Congo; there is also a lake in Ludara. We have Salia Masala, where the three countries meet. They are really beautiful. Therefore, when will they develop these places so that we can get money?

Mr Speaker, I would like to request Members to visit Koboko so that they can see those beautiful places.

Lastly, the elephants in the park have become a nuisance. They are grazing along the roads. In nights, sometimes they lie on the road and when buses move, fatal accidents happen. What are we going to do because it is already a gazetted park yet the road passes through that park? What can we do to those elephants that are causing a lot of causalities in the park? Thank you very much.

MS KAHUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister about the agreement Government signed with specific investors to carry out businesses in the national parks. I am specifically referring to Murchison Falls National Park and the hospitality and management of hotels.

Mr Speaker, we have been made to understand that it is only specific people who got license from Government for 99 years, to carry out businesses in hospitality and management in the national park. In the agreement, it is also stated that until the 99 years elapses, no one is authorised to do business as far as the hospitality and management of the park is concerned. Can the honourable minister throw more light on that because the life span of Ugandans is between 40–45 years? Thank you.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for a job well done.

Mr Speaker, I seek two clarifications. One of them is about the many undeveloped historical sites that would boost tourism and business in this country. One is Nyero Rock Paintings and everyone knows about that. Unfortunately, up to now, it is a bush. There is no evidence that they are there. I am wondering when they are going to develop some of these sites because they will help in building the economy of this country.

Secondly, my good minister here is still promoting Rolex. Apart from Rolex, what other activities is the ministry promoting as a way of attracting more tourists to come to Uganda such that this country can develop tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to draw this to a close at some point.  We have many more reports.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request the honourable minister to clarify on three things.

First of all, why have you deliberately failed to tap affected communities, particularly the communities around the various tourists assets like Kidepo National Park, Queen Elizabeth National Park and Rwenzori National Park among others and get students, whom the community can appreciate as their very own and are supported by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, so that they can help to implement the conservation of our wildlife flora and fauna? 

Secondly, there is an issue of the local chapters, especially the local associations within the tourism areas. For instance, there is the Rwenzori Mountaineering Services and I believe there are other local chapters in other tourism areas. Therefore, what specific support in terms of manpower, equipment and finance, are you giving to those local associations that help the ministry to coordinate tourism activities both locally and internationally? 

Thirdly, we have the Uganda Tourism Board. It has been there for quite a reasonable time.  I have been looking at the list of the tourism board members for a couple of years. However, the selection is not tapping into some of the expertise that come from those particular areas, where communities can appreciate that they are part and parcel of the conservation efforts.

I would like to ask the honourable minister: Kasese has Rwenzori National Park; Queen Elizabeth National Park and it has Kibaale National Park. Basically, there are three national parks in Kasese. Leave alone the other tourism assets that are within the Rwenzori sub region. Why have you persistently failed to get a single member from the Rwenzori area to be a member of the Uganda Tourism Board? These people would be helping you to understand what tourism is in those particular areas. Why do you put someone who does not even know – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu. Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. Otherwise, we will upset the time. Please bear with me. Honourable member for Kasilo, one minute and please respect that. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Hon. Kiwanda has made tourism visible for the one year he has been in the ministry. We need to applaud him for that. It may not be much but we need to give him support. He has tried and we need to give him money so that the whole country is covered. Of course, I know there are challenges but these are because of finances.

Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from hon. Kiwanda, when we were in the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, we were looking at the tourist roads which we were told your office submitted. However, I was disappointed that in the entire Teso region, there was only one road provided from Ngora-Nyero, as if there are no other tourist destinations in Teso. Along Kioga region, Kaberamaido, the landing sites, Serere and Kasilo among others, there are roads in those places that you need to include in order to promote tourism in those areas. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 32, the committee reports that tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner for Uganda, generating $1.35 billion. However, on the first paragraph, the committee also laments that this Government has not made tourism a priority. If you look at the budget we are passing for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, it is less than Shs 100 billion and yet in the morning, we passed a budget for the residence of the President of Shs 255 billion. 

I would like the Leader of Government Business to tell this Parliament and country why they think the sector that brings us so much money should not be a priority, and a sector where people just go to dine and wine is to them a priority.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, every country decides its priorities. The other time, our President was in the Gulf States; Dubai selected three sectors what they call the three Ts: tourism, trade and transport. Their economy is now built on those three Ts and not oil anymore. Maybe the Leader of Government Business will help us understand what the three priority sectors for Uganda are. Every day, you are glorifying roads, energy and others, but the sector that brings in money is ignored. 

Mr Speaker, when you suspended Parliament, I told hon. Kiwanda that my wife thought that he was the full Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I asked him, what had happened to the minister and whether he had taken over the whole ministry. Therefore, I would like to join hon. Okupa to thank hon. Kiwanda. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have short interventions from the front bench and we close with the chair.

3.16
THE MINISTER,  OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am always brief. I would like to inform Members that there is a section of tourism, which we can all take up and it becomes very successful. This is community-based tourism. The way of life of our people is a tourist attraction. For instance, when you look at areas where the staple food is millet; what we call atap in Atesot, that alone is a tourist attraction. The way it is prepared, from the beginning to the end, is a tourist attraction. There are so many foreigners who would be interested in that. 

The way our people dress, especially the women; take for example, the Gomesi, where women wear six whole meters of a cloth; the way our women compose themselves is a tourism attraction. Honourable members, you do not have to wait for the minister. Just make your village a community-based tourism site and these people will come and flock there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the sectoral minister?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for raising very good recommendations. From the point of view of trade, there was an issue regarding food security - whether we have a plan for silos. Yes, we do. Recently, Cabinet passed what is called Grain Policy that starts right from the production, post-harvesting up to storage level. 

Therefore, in this, we have actually put aside some money. We are even going up to the villages or co-operative societies so that we improve some of those facilities so that we can store some of the grains especially during the harvesting period. 

Also, there is Warehousing Receipt System, where you can deposit grains. Even if there is no money, you are given a receipt so that this is sold later when the prices are okay and then you are paid. This way, we believe we can have some of the foods protected and also sold at the right time when the price is okay.

Secondly, there is the issue of - I believe the chairperson is going to comment on it - the liberalisation policy. Much as we have that policy, it does not stop us from having regulations as to how we handle trade under this broad policy even within the context of the East African Region. 

Mr Speaker, those are some of the issues that came up. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and honourable colleagues for supporting our sector. 

Thank you.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Members have raised a lot of issues concerning my sector and one of them is wildlife-human conflict. I cannot promise Parliament that we can do away with this problem just in one year. It is a problem we are trying to mitigate and see how we can reduce on the conflict. 

First of all, we encourage the communities around the national parks to engage in activities that are not in direct conflict with the wildlife. We now encourage communities to grow crops that are not edible, like tea. We have now created a buffer zone at Bwindi, where they had a lot of problems with the animals. 

We also begun on digging trenches, but some of the national parks are so big that the trenches may not cover the full expanse. Besides, the elephants are so clever, at first, Mr Speaker, when we used to dig trenches, the elephants would come and bury them up until we discovered that when you are digging the trench, the soil should be put on the side of the community instead of the side of the national park. 

However, some of the animals disturbing our communities are not from our national parks, but we own them because we own the whole of the wildlife. Wildlife does not have boundaries. 

Hon. Jessica was wondering why some of the wildlife is coming from South Sudan. It is because animals do not know about our boundaries. Some of them have families in South Sudan and they go to visit their families in South Sudan and after that they come back – (Laughter) – yes, because some of the areas we are dominating today used to be their ancestral homes. Of course, the animals are not given audience here; when we come here, we speak on behalf of the people and forget them.  

However, if you asked them, they would tell you that their grandparents lived in those particular areas. Now, what do we do to mitigate this? The human population is growing and the number of animals is also growing. We would like to do everything possible to make sure that we co-exist with the animals-(Interjections)-I have talked about trenches, but the most expensive part of it would be the electric fencing, which we have done at Ziwa Rhino Sanctuary. But even there, where we have electric fencing the monkeys still jump out and go in the communities. 

Really, what I can say is that wildlife-human conflict is not only in Uganda. We are benchmarking in very many parts and this problem is similar. However, we are doing everything possible to reduce this problem –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification that I seek is: you have said that you have encouraged the communities surrounding the parks not to grow food crops eaten by animals. Secondly, you said the monkeys and elephants are clever enough to fill the trenches and even jump over the electric fence. My question to you is: some of these crops, for example, maize are crops which can address the challenge of food security. I do not know whether your ministry has an alternative kind of crop which can help in that circumstance.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification. The issue of animals crossing to seek their relatives is a big problem. Unfortunately, you are only talking about communities that border national parks. However, in Amuru where I come from and Adjumani, these animals are crossing from as far as Ethiopia and coming in to destroy our crop; this is done every single year.

What strategy is in place? Year in and out, communities are calling for help; they want to know what the Government is doing to help them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please conclude; we have taken an hour on this and that is not right.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, we shall have a specific paper on this issue to do with the wildlife conflict. However, to answer this, we have engaged communities; I was in Agago among others districts I have visited to encourage communities to grow hot pepper. I have visited most of your districts and we are coming up with a programme for the young people especially those living around national parks.

We are also coming with a project of home-stay. Therefore, as a ministry, we have constituted a team to see how we can engage the communities around national parks to live in harmony with the wild animals. 

Mr Speaker, on the plight of the Batwa, we have a Batwa project- my sister hon. Kabagyenyi Rose is aware. We have the Batwa programme where we started with building houses for their community that we displaced from the forest especially from Bwindi and Mgahinga. 

The spread of foot and mouth disease, I will discuss this with my colleague the minister of agriculture. 

On tourism roads, the challenge is not only in Mgahinga; but we are not doing well in some of our roads leading to the tourist sites. This puts us at a disadvantage with our visitors. When the roads are bad, our visitors cannot access the tourism sites. We shall work with the minister of works to make sure that we improve on these roads. However, we are also trying to equip the Uganda Wildlife Authority so that they maintain the roads within and around the national parks. 

On the development of the tourism sites; in tourism, we have two major challenges, which are tourism development and tourism promotion. If you promote without developing, you cannot go farther that is why we have to add value. We are importing cable cars at Mount Rwenzori as tourism development. A feasibility study has already been done and we are moving well on this.

Mr Speaker, hon. Nakate talked about development of Luweero. Of course, the Luweero story is not the best but it is part of our history. As ministry of tourism, we look at this as a very big potential. We have already a programme; I have just met a team led by hon. Nadduli in my office and have designed a way to see how we can develop Luweero into a tourism site and develop other areas.

This month, I was with hon. Baryomunsi in Kanungu over the Kibwetere site, and we are developing it. Gen. Kuteesa asked about the museums; indeed, that museum is under my ministry.  After here, you can see me. 

Koboko tourism site, Murchison Falls - the honourable asked about the monopoly and the concessions that we gave to some of the national parks. Sometime back, we had some issues that very few of our investors were willing to invest in that area especially during the era of Kony - few investors were willing to invest in national parks like Murchison Falls National Park.

We gave out concessions which were only 25 years and I would like to inform Parliament that the concessions elapsed and we have opened up. We invite those that are interested to come and get a concession because we need a lot of accommodation in the national parks. Our target as a ministry-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, kindly wind up.

MR KIWANDA: Finally, I would like to thank the honourable members that we have worked with to promote tourism and I thank those who continue to appreciate the ministry. We would like to promise that we are still moving forward and together, we will promote Uganda. We are the best marketers of this nation Uganda. I thank you. (Applause)

3.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kenneth Lubogo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues for your concerns and the issues you have raised. Most of the issues have been responded to by the minister, but there are some three or four issues that I would like to comment on briefly. 

When are the laboratories supposed to start as asked by hon. Waluswaka. The recommendation we made was about funding so that we can get money to construct these laboratories. Therefore, they are going to be constructed immediately the funds are available.

On the issue of human-wildlife conflict, which the minister has also talked about; you recall that in the recommendations, we talked about acquisition of drones. This is to supplement what the minister mentioned. However, the intention of these particular gadgets is to cause quick and timely intervention when there are stray animals. Therefore, getting this will take shorter time to locate where the animals are and they will be herded-off and sent back to the parks.

Hon. Nambeshe on the issue of liberalisation vis-à-vis East Africa; liberalisation is not about East Africa. You were in this House a week ago when a report was passed addressing the issues of the influx of foreign traders in this country. Therefore, as we talk of reviewing liberalisation, we should bear in mind the fact that we are under a community and that means that the community is accepted on what we are talking about.

Honourable members, silos have been talked about. We have Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority; this became operational about four years ago but has only six staff. Four technical staff and two support staff. You expect it to do a lot of work. Among others, they are supposed to handle issues of commodity exchange, control of quality and so on.  Therefore, without supporting it, we may not have too much to talk about the silos. 

However, we are also aware that Government is mobilising on the revival of cooperatives and this can be one of the means of addressing these issues. The honourable member from Kyankwanzi talked about people extorting money. These are criminals because they are in conflict with the law. It is not an issue which is condoned by the institution. Some people may be doing that but I would like to say that we have many substandard items on the market like you have mentioned, phones, which are one out of many.

I have told you that Uganda has about 170 entry points and only 49 are manned. The others are free entries, how do we expect substandard goods not to come into this country? How do you blame the institution for not being effective? The drugs you talked about are a mandate of a different authority, which is the National Drug Authority.

Now, the dark tourism, did you call it so? This is a new terminology: “dark tourism”, which I believe is a very important idea and the minister has commented about it. However, it is not far away from the Namugongo site because it is equally an issue of a dark experience, where we had our people killed. 

As I wind up, I would like to appreciate the Leader of the Opposition for pointing out that despite the fact that tourism is the leading forex earner for the country, it is taking 0.1 per cent of the budget. It is a very competitive industry; without aggressive marketing, proper packaging and broadcasting, you cannot have a vibrant tourism sector. Government needs to address it very seriously. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and colleagues for the support. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question for adoption of the report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES 

3.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity once again. I have a very big report – there are many issues at stake. You all know what natural resources is all about! I wish I had more time so that we interact and coordinate on some of these issues. 

Mr Speaker, the sector, which I oversee has six votes: these are Vote 017 Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Vote 123 Rural Electrification Agency, Vote 019 Ministry of Water and Environment, vote 150 National Environmental Management Authority, vote 157 National Forestry Authority and Vote 302 Uganda National Meteorological Authority. 

Mr Speaker, as per your guidance, I will go straight to the summary of the votes. Subject to the above observations which I have not been able to present and the recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget estimates for votes: 107, 123, 019, 150, 157 and vote 302 as follows: 

Vote 107: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

I have had a few corrections and I will be very slow so that they are captured in this particular session - there were some mathematical mistakes.

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 42,366,592,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 1,864,550,191,000
    c) Total is Shs - 1,906,916,738,000

Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 30,818,357,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 461,642,258,000
    c) Total is – Shs 492,460,615,000

Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment 
    a) Recurrent expenditure is – Shs 23,018,930,000
    b) Development expenditure is – Shs 502,963,791,000
    c) This gives us a total of Shs - 525,982,721,000

Vote 150: National Environmental Management Authority 
    a) Recurrent expenditure is – Shs 18,999,271,000
    b) Development expenditure is - Shs 2,210,000,000
    c) We get a total of Shs -    21,209,271,000

Vote 157: National Forestry Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure is – Shs 22,362,443,000
    b) Development expenditure is - Shs 3,144,557,000
    c) This gives us a total of Shs – 29,508,000,000

Vote 302: Uganda National Meteorological Authority
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 12,594,556,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 17,037,000,000
    c) This gives us a total of – Shs 29,631,556,000

Mr Speaker, those are the figures although I would like to request for a minute to give a few salient issues as part of agendum that will benefit honourable members. 


We have the resettlement action plans of the Isimba Hydropower Project which is under the threat of litigation because the wraps were not effected; and we are recommending that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should complete the compensation of the affected land owners of the Isimba Hydropower Project in the next financial year.

China Water and Electric Corporation the EPC contractor for Isimba Hydropower, who is extracting sand and hard core stones on private land, should adequately compensate the land owners. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should report to Parliament on the progress of the resettlement plan. 

I am glad the high power tariffs was covered yesterday in the evening and I will not reiterate what had been agreed to yesterday. I would like to thank you Members for your contributions.

However, we would like to put it on record that we are recommending that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development with immediate effect should reduce power tariffs to affordable levels, and the reduction should apply to all end-users namely; extra-large, industrial large, medium, commercial, streetlights and domestic. It is very important.

We also recommend that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should put in place measures to increase demand of electricity with connection by removing prohibitive new connection costs and that has already been addressed from the minister’s report yesterday.

Thermal power generation

The committee observed that the Government of Uganda has maintained the licenses for the two companies of Electro-maxx which produces 50MW and Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant Company; it is a government plant to operate heavy fuel oil thermal power generation plant and sell electricity to the national grid.

Mr Speaker, the two companies are currently producing minimally 7MW each to the national grid. In the coming financial year, Government had forecasted to spend Shs 80.4 billion on the two plants, but has allocated a whopping Shs 95.927402 billion in the coming financial year for the same activity. 

The committee in its wisdom further observed that the seven year license initially granted to Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant Company expired in September 2014 and it has been renewed twice and expires on October 2017.

It should, therefore, be noted that the country’s current national generation stands at an installed capacity of 872MW and available capacity at an approximately 600MW against the national peak demand of 550MW. The committee observed that the country has excess capacity of 50MW every day and, therefore, should not continue to pay for very heavy costs to thermal generation plants whose generation tariffs is above US16 cents per kilowatt hour.

We, therefore, recommend that Shs 61.6 billion out of the Shs95.93 billion allocated to thermal generation plants be reallocated to fund other critical activities under the sectors of energy, minerals, water and environment as highlighted in the reallocation table 6 in the committee report. I will lay that on the Table. You may need to know why we propose to take away this money, but the fact is these thermal plants generate power and sell to Government, but Government again says gives these thermal plants another Shs95 billion for capacity – something like that, but they explained and we were not convinced.

Secondly, the licenses for the thermal power generation plants should not be renewed when they expire in October 2017. I think that we need to save this money to other very serious - because Karuma and Isimba will all be on board next year plus other many schemes which are on progress. I understand the power mix and that can be explained later on.

The audit of Bujagali Hydropower 

This is very critical honourable members. The committee observed that Bujagali power project is under an arrangement of Public Private Partnership under section 31 of the Public Private Partnership Act 2015; it should be audited annually by the Auditor-General and the report presented to Parliament. The committee noted with sadness that this has never been done, so you do not know the books of accounts, how Bujagali operates yet we are partners in the same.

Therefore, we recommend that with immediate effect, the Auditor-General audits Bujagali Power Project and reports be submitted to Parliament for Parliament’s scrutiny.

The energy fund is yet another bone of contention in our committee; it has been ignored by the ministry – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair. Would you like to lay the document you had requested to lay on the Table?

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you so much. I would like to lay on the Table the following documents: The original committee report, the minutes of the Committee of Natural Resources, documents of the new project which we have agreed to fund using our locally raised revenue that we cut from other sectors. 

You should have a share of this and the whole country will benefit, except for a few districts; over 85 districts. This is the 100 per cent water service coverage acceleration project that is Cap 100 in all villages of Uganda and I would like to lay them on the Table.

I would further like to lay on the Table a list of unfunded priorities and those which are underfunded. I wish to submit. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and thank you very much Chair of the committee. Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is for the approval and adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for Financial Year 2017/2018. 

Honourable members, I would like to seek your indulgence - it is not because I desire so, but we simply do not have time. I would like us to move forward. If we are going to ask questions or clarifications, let us be brief and have short engagements. The last report took one hour and it was not necessary for us to do that because we are now losing a lot of time.

Can we start now; going by the numbers, it will not be possible. Honourable members, if all of you would like to speak on this, it is not possible. Can I put the question – yes, I cannot accommodate all of you. Okay, I will only choose four members: hon. Mugeni, Eitunganane, Luttamaguzi and Ongom. 

3.51
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the well elaborated report. On page 6, honourable you talked about rural electrification where 474.3 kilometres of medium voltage lines have been constructed. May I know whether the new phase will begin for the new connections of districts where these connections have halted? I only need clarification on that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I need from the minister is that there is a directive by the President that all sub counties in the country must be connected to the national grid. May I know how far this has been implemented and which ones so far have been connected; some of them are holding key areas of service delivery like health centres IVs, which have got problems with drug storage and other services? Thank you.

3.52
MR LUTTAMAGUZI KASANA (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair for the good report. However, I have got a small observation to make in regards to areas that are endowed with natural resources - they should be seen differently from other areas, which do not have. For example, areas which are endowed with natural resources like Karamoja, which is endowed with a lot of lime and gold; Bunyoro, which is endowed with a lot of oil should have a special budget from the other areas. Therefore, in the budget it should be allocated differently and that is my small input. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MS ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to have a small clarification; there were some areas that were captured by Rural Electrification Agency (REA) in the newspapers. One of my areas was gazetted for February 2016, but up to date there is nothing that has taken shape. I would like to know what could have happened and there are other areas that have been surveyed by REA, but nothing has taken place in Lira District. I would like to know what happened. Thank you. 

3.54
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me to start by thanking the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee and the members of the committee for a thorough job. I also want to thank them for the support that they have given to my sector. 

There is definitely a lot that is going on. On the bulk of their recommendations concerning work in progress, we will struggle and strive to ensure, with your support, that all those recommendations are dealt with so that we can deliver the service. 

Responding the specific questions that have just been raised; Mr Speaker, our target is to increase the connection and the power access throughout the country. That is why the different programmes in Rural Electrification Agency are targeting expansion of the distribution network up to the level of access. Therefore, on the issue of sub counties in this term of office, we want to ensure that power reaches every sub county; there are specific projects, which are being packaged under the Rural Electrification Agency, to ensure that by the end of this term, at least all sub counties have access to electricity. 

We are moving further down to the connections; yesterday, I did inform Members that, as Government, we have come up with a policy of ensuring that we deliver connections to the premises of every Ugandan and then Ugandans pay for the electricity that they use. When we do this, we will be able to increase the amount of power that is being consumed. 

For now, you recognise that our generation capacity is more than what we are consuming. Therefore, for us to reduce the tariffs, it means we need to consume the power we are generating so that the price of electricity comes down. In addition to the industries we are trying to attract; doing this is going to help us consume the power that we are continuing to generate so that it can impact on our economy and also improve the livelihood of our people. 

Uganda is endowed with potential and rich in natural resources; you gave an example of Karamoja which is very rich in natural resources such as minerals. Our effort is to ensure that we attract investors, who are coming to join us as Government, so that we can harness and add value to those resources. 

Mr Speaker, issues of exporting unprocessed minerals was stopped. What we need to do is invite and attract investors that will join us to sink money in the exploration and value addition. This is in order for us to exploit those resources. Karamoja is one of the areas - as you recall, only 80 per cent of the country has been thoroughly explored, leaving out Karamoja. It was for the reason that at that time when the exploration was being done, the area was insecure. Now that it is secure, we are trying to secure funding so that we can have Karamoja also thoroughly explored. This will enable us identify the types, quantities and then add value and that will definitely help us a great deal- (Interruption) 

MS NAKATE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Over the years, we have seen so many discoveries of wealth in this country. 

Honourable minister, you are aware that we already have the Mining Act; the clarification I want to seek from you is what have you done about this Act? This is because when such wealth is discovered, a certain percentage goes to the person who owns the land and to the Government. Such areas have even been gazetted in some countries so that everyone benefits. Therefore, I just wanted to seek that clarification. Now that we already have the Mining Act, how are you working? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up. 

MS MULONI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my sister for seeking clarification. The minerals that occur on the surface and in the ground belong to us, as Ugandans. For example, if you are the owner of the land and we have identified that resource, the person who is going to do the mining must first of all access surface rights from you. This is because the land belongs to the people. 

Once they access that surface right from you and if they are licensed, they will exploit that resource from there. According to the Mining Act, there are loyalties that we levy and part of the loyalties go to the person who owns the area, to the district, the sub counties and of course the Government. That is what it is. 

However, we are experiencing challenges in acquisition of surface rights. Unless you acquire a surface right, you will not be able to access the mineral and that is where the issue of land comes into play. As Ugandans, we need to be patriotic and come up with a mechanism. That is why the Mining Act is due for amendment so that we can look at those areas that are a bottle-neck to the proper exploitation of those materials so that we can enrich our country. 

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee chairperson again for emphasising the issue of the energy fund. I hope my colleagues, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will take this seriously because if the energy fund is capitalised, many of the challenges that we experience in the sector will be overcome. Then we will be able to extend all these electricity lines and projects that you are talking about, which are being hindered by counter-part funding. 

I want to talk about the issue of thermal. As a Ministry of Energy and Minerals, our responsibility is to plan for this country and ensure that you have available, reliable, adequate and affordable electricity. In the planning, we are tapping into the natural resources that we have but also at the same time to ensure availability and reliability. 

There is what we call energy security; the energy mix. You look at all the renewable energy sources but you do not abandon even those sources that can come and bail you out during the time of need. When the drought is heavy on us, you have seen how rivers have dried up and the generation capacity goes down. Thermal comes in handy and therefore in our energy mix, we have thermal.
 
The arrangement that we have now is that the two thermal plants that are part of our energy security, one which is Jacobsen, a plant that is to revert to the Government of Uganda - For the period that it is in operation, our earlier proposal to the Minister of Finance was that let us pay off the loan that secured the plant so that it remains 100 per cent in the hands of Government. 

In the absence of that, we have to continue servicing that loan as it serves us. Therefore, colleagues, you need to bear in mind that thermal is part of our energy mix. Hence, we need to provide for it so that it is able to guarantee supply in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you once again for this opportunity. I would like to thank you members for the fantastic support you have given to the committee and the report accordingly.  

However, I want to emphasise one or two things; one that the energy fund is as per the law. A certain percentage of this money should be allotted to the energy fund from the national coffers. I am not very clear on what percentage but it is there and –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Government’s efforts to realise power for every sub county in this country, there is a mega project of Karuma which came in a public domain in as far as the construction faults are concerned. I thought that the chairperson and the honourable minister would update this Parliament as to how far the correction of the construction faults have gone.

Before we approve this budget, the honourable minister should be sincere to this country. You know the amount of money that is going to be sunk into Karuma Project. It is a loan and we must have value for money. Would it not be procedurally right for the honourable minister to do due diligence on this and update the country, Parliament and citizens at large? The minister needs to give an update on whether those faults in the Karuma Project are corrected or not. If they were corrected, we need to know how and when it was done. If not, why have you not corrected those faults?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there will be a day when that will be handled. What we are dealing with right now does not concern that matter directly. Let us deal with the matter before us and then we will have the time to deal with that issue later.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much. There is a detailed report. Given time, it will be presented. The energy fund – we need to emphasise that and the issue of rural electrification connections. That is something that each and every one of us should be fighting for. That is why we got that money from the thermal power to ensure that there is more money for the Rural Electrification Agency (REA). (Applause) the Rural Electrification Agency is for you, me and everybody. 

Finally, I would like to thank my Members – thank you, Members and Parliament in particular for the support. God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson and Members for the interest in this matter. It is very important, but as I keep explaining, we have a problem with the time-frame that we need to deal with these matters. 

Honourable members, I now put the question for adoption and approval of the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018 for the Ministry of Energy and those related sectors. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

4.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Denis Sabiiti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report on the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial Budget policy statements and proposed budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018. Let me go to page 4 that is the introduction. Since I have a short time, I do not need to read through it, but this report consists of six votes:

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission.
Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport
Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority
Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund
Vote 500: Local Governments, which consists of two activities

Mr Speaker, I do not know how to proceed, maybe I go to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to conclusions and the recommendations. 

MR SABIITI: Conclusions and recommendations - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, go to the figures.

MR SABIITI: I have got to summarise it. Page 38 is just a summary of the votes I have just read. Permit me to state that after interacting with the Budget Committee, I was advised to include all the arrears in the votes and the figures that appear on ipads on paged 38. There was another page which was subsequently uploaded on the system, which I am going to read.

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; recurrent expenditure is Shs 24,940,626,000. This recurrent figure has arrears of Shs 232,594,000. The development budget has Shs 99,434,883,000 and the total vote is Shs 124,375,509,000.

Now, let me go to the next vote, which is the last under Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that is Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission – Recurrent budget is Shs 1, 232,628,000 and it has arrears amounting to Shs 81,336,000. The development budget for the Uganda Land Commission is Shs 14, 788,999,000. The total for this Vote is Shs 16,102,963,000.

Vote 106: Ministry of Works and Transport – The recurrent budget is Shs 48,408,000,000. It has arrears amounting to Shs 350,212,000. The development budget for the ministry is Shs 427, 133,828,000. The total is Shs 475,892,040,000.

Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority – its recurrent budget is Shs 100,374,020,000. The recurrent budget has total arrears of Shs 31,349,918,000. The development budget is Shs 3,518,342,325,000 giving a total budget of Shs 3,650,066,263,000.

Uganda Road Fund: recurrent expenditure is Shs 414,973,228,000. The arrears on this vote are Shs 30,314,000.
Development budget is Shs 2,470,000,000.
Total is Shs 417,443,228,000

Vote 500: The figure is on page 29 of this report and this one consists of only two activities, that is the low cost sealing and PRDP II and the total budget is Shs 2.84 billion.
Mr Speaker, I move to the observations-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay the documents on the Table?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the report of the committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings of the committee held during the discussion of these policy statements. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, I propose for your debate for the adoption or approval of the report of the sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018 on those sectors that the chairperson has very eloquently outlined to you. That is the question for your debate. Debate starts now, and we understand the framework.

Therefore, we are going to ask six Members to speak on this, we shall give them same time, and the issues are those of clarification. We start with Buliisa, Kioga, Bunyaruguru, and Bubulo West.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson committee on physical infrastructure for the report. However, I have two requests to make: one to the Ministry of Works, Transport, to the effect that we need to integrate planning. We are doing a lot of roads but in the places where roads are done water for production is not done using the same road equipment that brings a future need. Can I request that the Prime Minister and the ministries synchronize that so that we do not spend money unilaterally just for roads; there are other needs related to that area.

Secondly, this is a request to Government and Parliament; can we up scale the budget for the land sector? For the 11 years I have been here, we seem to be focusing on amendments on the law as if that solves the land problems in this country. 

In my assessment, the land sector is the most underfunded in this country yet the roads need investment, agriculture needs to develop and so do the industries. All these must be on developed land. The land sector needs to be developed across the board in terms of systematic demarcation, land planning, physical planning and urbanization. However, I have not seen this in the last 10 years in Parliament. 

I would like to request that we seriously think in terms of spending the trillions we put in energy, roads, if we can put them in the land sector, then you can talk of becoming a middle-income, landing banking for agriculture development, urbanization or ending slums. Otherwise, without sorting the land problem, I see this country is not heading very far. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we agree in the next budget; I know it is not possible in this budget. In the next budget, can we look at the land sector as a priority? We think seriously, discuss it and agree on how best we can move as a country. Thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ferries form part of the public transport and they go a long way in fulfilling the indispensable social economic values and in a very substantial manner.

If I may draw your attention to item 10.3 in the report: provision of ferries, Mr Speaker, the third line is talking of Bukungu-Kamuli-Kagwara. However, if this is the famous BKK Ferry that we have been talking about, then it should be Bukungu-Kaberamaido-Kagwara.

I think the records should have this right. However, on the same paragraph we are told that Shs 15 billion has been allocated for specialized machinery and equipment including ferries and related services for Financial Year 2017/2018. However, when you look at annex 1, on page 39 on improvement of ferry services, you will find that they have allocated Shs 17.243 billion. I do not know because this gives us a difference of Shs 2.243 billion. Which one of this is the right figure that is going for the ferry?

Mr Speaker, in spite of the significance of the ferry, in areas where water transport is very important, you see that the budget is coming down. The budget for Financial Year 2016/2017 was Shs 29 billion, but next financial year they are allocating Shs 17.2, giving a fall of Shs 11.7 billion. I do not know how this should be.

However, as I conclude, Mr Speaker, the BKK project is a project that we have been advocating for and it is my hope that the originally surveyed route is maintained because the original plan was that we would also have a route from Bukungu going to Muntu in Amolatar District.

Lastly, in 2007, ten years ago, there was a presidential directive to the effect that a ferry should be constructed connecting Amolatar district to Apac. Mr Speaker, I laid that letter sometime back on the Table in this Parliament. It is now ten year down the road and this ferry is never planned for. Can we probably have it planned for in our next budget?

MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the minister responsible for works and the chairperson. In Rubirizi District, we have a road that links Ishaka, Bushenyi Municipality to Kazinga channel. That road has been on the programme for a long time but when you look at the achievements of UNRA, in the report and the proposed activities, there is still no any budget allocation to it. Now the road is in a very sorry state; to cover distance of seven kilometres you need to travel one and half hours. On some stretches in the national park, the road has become completely impassable. We would like to know from the minister what the status is. We get problems when we are in the constituency and we don’t have answers.

Secondly, we have roads in the national park that link the fishing villages to the main highway. I am happy the minister in charge of tourism has talked about it. However, I would also like to get a statement from the committee chairperson as well as the minister - in terms of the plans they have for them. Those roads are in a very sorry state.

Mr Speaker, in the district of Rubirizi and specifically my constituency – and I believe it is happening in other areas also – we have key roads that link the district. We expect trade to be boosted when these roads are opened up. However, you find that the districts do not have enough funds to maintain these roads. 

The other big challenge we have, Mr Speaker, is that recently we had in my constituency and the district a programme called Community Agricultural Infrastructure Programme (CAIIP). In Rubirizi District, they constructed 399 kilometres of road. After handing over to the district, the district is now stranded without a budget to maintain them. 

My proposal, as I conclude, is that the committee can provide a budget to these key service sector roads like those in the national parks, inter-district roads and also increase budgets to cater for the maintenance of the roads that were handed over to the district by CAIIP. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.25
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for a good report. I have three brief concerns. The first one is that in Kamwenge District where I come from, I am the chairperson of the district roads committee. I would like to get a clarification from the chairperson regarding their view on the mode of maintenance of district roads using force on accounts by district engineers. I have an issue with it.

Secondly, I am very concerned that there are a number of critical, yet unfunded priorities especially in the Ministry of Works and Transport budget. One of which is that there is no money allocated to maintain the new road equipment that we are about to get from Japan. I am wondering who will take responsibility once we have got these equipment and they break down yet there is no money to have them repaired.

The other concern is that there is no operational cost provided for the East African Flying School in Soroti. I wonder what quality of pilots we are going to produce if we have not allocated money for things such as fuel for the aircraft as well as maintenance. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed on this. Can I have Bubulo and come to the Leader of the Opposition.

4.28
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report. However, I wish to seek clarification on the compensation of the land owners on the road from Mbale to Lwakhakha. I don’t know whether it has been included in the budget. A month-and-a-half ago, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) officers called and told me that they had little money for compensation and they could not do all the compensation for the land. They were requesting me to talk to my people to avail the land so that they could start the work.

I told them that it was difficult for me because they – at the initial stages – made the people stand on their land before they took photographs and promised compensations. How do I go back there as a politician and start asking them to give their land? This financial year which is ending, people have not been compensated. Is there money budgeted for compensation? This land has been on hold for some time and the contractor is already on site. Is the money in the new budget?

4.30
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): The committee reports that as a country we do not have a national physical development plan, can the minister tell this Parliament why they think this is not a priority in this Kisanja hakuna mchezo?

Secondly, recently we deferred processing of a loan for UNRA because of the many issues raised in the report of the Committee of Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). 

Mr Speaker, maybe we can get guidance from you. We are now appropriating money for a sector for which we refused to pass a loan because of the problem we have been following in the committee of COSASE.

Finally, we have just thanked hon. Kiwanda because many of us read newspapers and watch TV every day and he is doing a lot of work. Can the minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development tell this Parliament why we should have confidence to give them money when every day we are reading about them fighting? (Laughter)

4.31
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with the concern from Buliisa. The MP noted the need for increase in the budget allocation to the sector as the sector is a major factor of driving this country into the middle income economy status. He also asserted that amendment of the law might not solve the problem without this. 

I agree with him and we are putting all our efforts into justifying why our sector should be prioritised. Because of that justification, this financial year Government increased funding for the office of the Chief Government Valuer and has pledged to increase more funding. Of course, the efforts of Parliament in adding their voice in this matter is welcomed.

On the issue of the national physical development plan, under the National Planning Act, this country was declared a planning area. We have started working on the framework. The Albertine region is already one of the sub-regions that are prioritised under this programme. We are also already working under our directorate of physical planning to actualise the overall national physical planning. At an appropriate time, we shall bring an update to this House on the progress.

On why we should be given money when we are fighting, I am not aware of the ministers who are fighting in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. (Applause) We are working very well together and everything is running smoothly. The ministry is doing everything to make sure that we move forward. Thank you. (Applause)

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I was asked to stand in for the ministry because colleagues from the ministry are on other assignments. I have taken note of most of the issues raised by colleagues and what I will do is to convey them to the ministry, and we shall give answers to colleagues at a later time.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, this sector is going to receive almost the biggest amount of money and it has more than one minister. For him to think that Parliament will appropriate in their absence, we raise questions and someone is only volunteering to carry the message to them is a shabby way of doing things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct.

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Denis Sabiiti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the need to integrate projects, yes, this is very important. We have pointed it out as an observation and made recommendations in the report because it is a serious problem. We have proposed that this body should be in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

Physical development plans have not been in place because of low budget allocations and we have stressed this. The fund for land acquisition is very little and we have stressed that it needs to be up scaled.

Regarding the BKK ferry, the figure has been changing and currently, the figure I can competently talk about because I have received a letter for a request for corrigenda for BBK ferry amounting to Shs 41 billion. I think that will take care of it.  

The honourable member for Bunyaruguru, particularly for the roads I have mentioned, the ministry is receiving equipment from Japan and each district is going to get this equipment, which is going to be used. We have made a recommendation in the report that a certain amount of money - about Shs 16 billion - be availed for maintenance of the equipment because part of the fuel is catered for in the Road Fund. When you receive that in July, the roads will be attended to.

For the tourism roads, if you check –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Chairman, I need clarification - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, please.

MR SABIITI: Can I continue? For the tourism roads, all the roads that were submitted by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities are being handled under design. That is under the transport corridor and it has been allocated Shs 311 billion. Therefore, all those roads will be taken care of. 

For Kamwenge District, I think it is the same problem. This equipment is coming and maintenance is surely catered for and we shall make sure that it is catered for - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, we come to this House as representatives of the people. In the previous statement, which the minister made to this House, Ngora District that I represent has Aleles Bridge, which was budgeted for twice. The minister came to this House and clarified that Aleles Bridge had been allocated sums of money and that it had already been worked upon.  

Mr Speaker, we demystified that because nothing was done. Today, we are requesting for approval of a budget of the physical infrastructure sector. Aleles Bridge, a place which I represent in this Parliament, is still not catered for in this budget of this financial year. 

Mr Speaker, we are debating this report for approval of this Parliament but the ministers are not in the House. Therefore, are we moving rightly, Mr Speaker? 

Mr Speaker, is it in order for us to keep raising issues in this House, which are not given due attention? Aleles Bridge is not in the budget and that is my interest because I represent Ngora. I need to be guided in this area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that point of order is not directed to anyone in particular and so I cannot rule on it.

MR SABIITI: Compensation of land for the Lwakhakha-Mbale road. For that, there is an allocation in the budget of the Financial Year 2017/2018. As soon as we get out of the plenary, I can give you the exact amount of money that has been allocated for compensation.

For the national physical plans, I think I have explained that we tackled it competently. It is because of consistent lack of funding of the Lands, Housing and Urban Development sector that has crippled this exercise and it is impacting the whole development of the country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and honourable members, for the interest you have put in this. We understand the situation you are facing so let us go with it like this for now. 

I will put the question for the approval of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

4.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for Financial Year 2017/2018. 

I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee’s proceedings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, allow me to present the executive summary of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

The report covers the following institutions:

Vote 018; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the statutory bodies, which receive subvention from the ministry namely: 
    a) Uganda National Cultural Centre, 
    b) National Library of Uganda, 
    c) National Youth Council, 
    d) National Women Council, 
    e) National Council for Persons with Disabilities, 
    f) National Council for Older Persons, 
    g) National Children Authority and 
    h) Industrial Court.
Vote 124; Equal Opportunities Commission
Vote 501 to 850; Local Government

Mr Speaker, table 3.1 shows the overall sector and vote budget allocations for Financial Year 2017/2018. The committee observed that the overall budget for the social development sector for the Financial Year 2017/2018 has decreased by 17.16 per cent from Shs 178,332,000,000 to Shs 151,511,000,000 on account of reduction of expenditure on consumptive items by Government.

The recurrent Budget and non-wage has increased by 66.58 per cent and is projected to increase in the medium term while the development Budget for Government of Uganda has reduced by 29.77 per cent as shown in the table 4 above and it is further projected to increase in the medium term.

Donor support for the ministry 

The overall donor support of budget to the social development sector is expected to reduce by 5.8 per cent in the Financial Year 2017/2018. The Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) support from DFID and Irish Aid, which is the major donor support, is expected to reduce by 8.2 per cent. However, this is in line with the donor commitment for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

While the Orphans and Vulnerable Groups overseas, which had an approved budget of Shs 0.229 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017 is expected to increase by Shs 721 million to Shs 2.455 billion in the Financial Year 2017/2018, the alternative care is expected to increase by 248.8 per cent from Shs 0.172 billion to Shs 0.600 billion respectively. However, other donor support in the areas of regular gender based violence, Joint Programme Gender Based Violence, Joint Programme FGM, Irish Aid-Culture and Family, Swedish-Culture and Family, Swedish-Youth and Sexual Reproductive Health and others will not have support in the Financial Year 2017/2018 due to hard economic times in their country.

Madam Speaker, that table was explaining what I said. I move to observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I propose you go to page 34 and then you come back and deal with some specific recommendations that you want.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, subject to the observations and recommendations that will be mentioned in this report, the committee recommends the approval of the budget of the Social Development Sector for the Financial Year 2017/2018 as follows:

Vote 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 44,115,885,000
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 118,078,738,000
The sub-total for this vote is Shs 162,193,623,000

    a) Wage - Shs 3,606,000,000
    b) Non-wage – Shs 40,509,885,000
    c) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 44,115,885,000
    d) Development expenditure – Shs 118,078,738,000
The total is Shs 158,588,623,000.

Vote 124 – Equal Opportunities Commission 

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 6,100,745,564
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 300,000,000
The sub-total is Shs 6,400,745,564

    a) Wage recurrent - Shs 2,966,807,972
    b) Non-wage – Shs 3,133,937,592
The sub-total is 3,433,937,592

The total budget for the Social Development Sector 

    a) Recurrent budget – Shs 50,216,630,564
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 118,378,738,000
The sub-total is Shs 168,594,368,564

Votes 500-850 - Local Government 

The total is Shs 7,640,000,000.

Off-Budget support for Ministry of Gender is Shs 63,808,107,538.
Off-Budget for Equal Opportunities Commission is Shs 152,551,000.

Mr Speaker, the grand Budget for Social Development Sector is:

    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 57,856,630,564
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 182,186,845,538
The total is Shs 240,194,987,102

Mr Speaker, I beg for approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any specific thing you would like the House to attend to before you close?

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, maybe the most contentious issue is that the sector experienced budget cuts. The total budget cut was Shs 32,276,106,455. This being a social development sector, we have also been informed that the Shs 9 billion has been returned to the sector out of which, Shs 7 billion is going to Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) and Shs 2 billion to Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). This leaves a funding gap, Mr Speaker. 

The recommendation of the committee is that the budget for the Social Development Sector should be exempted against any budget cuts in accordance of Article 32(1) of the Constitution, which states that, “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition, or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.” This is a constitutional mandate that cannot be violated and I pray that this House lifts the cut on the sector.

Mr Speaker, because everybody is waiting to hear about SAGE, the committee’s concern is on the Government’s reluctance to provide counterpart funding for the secured donor support, especially to SAGE that has been hit most due to clause 16 of Memorandum of Understanding. The development partners will base their actual support on the progress attained in the implementation of the programme, including counterpart contribution by Government of Uganda.

The Government’s contribution to this programme is supposed to be Shs 29,150,000,000 this financial year. However, the committee observed that only Shs 17.59 billion for counterpart funding has been provided for in the budget, leaving the funding budget of Shs 11.65 billion.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides a funding gap of Shs 11.65 billion as counterpart funds for the SAGE project to rollout smoothly.

On non-payment of SAGE beneficiaries, the committee recommends that releases for payment of the beneficiaries should be done promptly to avoid accumulation of arrears, to prevent the older persons from acquiring loans to cater for lack of releases and avoid misuse of funds by the beneficiaries when they get a lot of money at a go.

On non-registration of eligible SAGE beneficiaries - I am not reading observations, Mr Speaker - the committee recommends that the National Identification Registration Authority should conduct a special registration exercise in all the districts countrywide, targeting the oldest persons so that they can benefit from the grant.

Roll out on SAGE. Mr Speaker, we are recommending that the rollout of the programme should target the oldest persons in the country while those who are already benefiting should continue receiving their grant so as to maintain harmony. However, for the rest, the rollout should start with the oldest person per sub county across the country.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request you to allow the minister to lay on the Table and present to this House a current statement on the Government position on SAGE. There are so many areas that would be of interest to the House but I will stop here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, what the minister would like to say about SAGE might inform your debate. Can we hear what the minister has to say so that it forms part of our debate? I am saying this because I am in possession of a letter that was written today and copied to my office. That is why I need the House to access it and we see how to proceed.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Peace Mutuzo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

The proposed re-designing of the Social Assistant Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) programme 

Mr Speaker, as you have been briefed, SAGE implementation is yet to secure a full funding commitment of Financial Year 2017/2018 of Shs 29.15 billion. Only Shs 17.5 billion has been reflected in the MTEF leaving a shortfall of Shs 11.65 billion.

In addition, the beneficiary payments in Financial Year 2016/2017 are in arrears to the tune of Shs 3.73 billion. During consultations on the Budget, His Excellency the President recommended that SAGE stays in 40 districts in the next Financial Year 2017/2018 and takes over two districts from development partners as per Memorandum of Understanding requirements.

His Excellency the President’s directive of staying in 40 districts currently covered by SAGE in Financial Year 2017/2018 has the following implications:
    1. A total of 143,268 beneficiaries will be covered in the 40 districts. The immediate beneficiaries that will be affected will be 7,900 older persons from five districts of Dokolo, Mubende, Kasese, Sheema and Ssembabule who were scheduled to come on board in Financial Year 2017/2018.

Government has to takeover beneficiary payments of Shs 8.81 billion in the two districts of Kyenjojo and Nebbi in Financial Year 2017/2018. Government has provided Shs 3.73 billion to clear the outstanding arrears in the beneficiary payments.

Therefore, to implement His Excellency the President’s directive, the ministry requires an additional Shs 12.51 billion in Financial Year 2017/2018. Given key considerations, including the President’s directive to defer the rollout due to insufficient funding, the growing demand by stakeholders to have the programme implemented in the entire country and the need to maintain the development partner’s support and working relations, the ministry is proposing to redesign the programme as follows:

    a) In Financial Year 2017/2018, we propose to maintain the current beneficiaries in the 40 districts.
    b) To immediately start to redevelop detailed plans to cover all senior citizens aged 85 years and above in the remaining districts across the country with an aim of making payments to new beneficiaries starting Financial Year 2018/2019. 

This proposal will increase coverage of the SAGE programme to 235,028 beneficiaries and the cost will be Shs 89.05 billion annually. To finance this plan, the Government of Uganda will need to provide Shs 27.71 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019, Shs 42 billon in Financial Year 2019/2020, Shs 48.86 billion in Financial Year 2020/2012 and Shs 80.63 billion in Financial Year 2021/2022 because then, Government will be fully responsible for managing SAGE of its own without support of development partners.

This implies that Government of Uganda has to provide additional funding of Shs 10.21 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019, Shs 24.51 billion in Financial Year 2019/2020, Shs 31.36 billion in Financial Year 2020/2021 and Shs 63.36 billion in Financial Year 2021/2022 to replace development partner support, which will have been phased out.

Development partners’ funding is expected to decline to Shs 47.7 billion, Shs 40.19 billion and Shs 8.19 billion respectively in the subsequent three years. The proposal would fully absolve the current development partners’ funding allocations, which is relatively cost effective with a cost of transfer ratio of 21 per cent and will therefore appeal to development partners.

The development partners will have to provide Shs 61.34 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019 to cover beneficiary payments in 10 pilot districts plus SAGE operational costs. This proposal will enable faster extension of coverage to the entire country and promote fairness. In order to reduce the social risks associated with rising of the age of eligibility, it would be prudent to maintain Social Protection Grant beneficiaries already covered by the programme. This is critical for securing development partners’ support for the proposal.

The purpose of this communication is to update you on the funding position of the SAGE programme and to request your support for the emerging proposal to extend programmes across the country. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.03
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and the minister for providing the statement. However, I seem to be at crossroads, especially on SAGE because a commitment was made in this Parliament that has the people’s representatives. We even took the message and relayed it to the elders in our respective constituencies. 

In lieu of the statement presented by the minister, it sounds very disappointing. However, may I find out from the minister because I am at crossroads - we had a plan for rolling out and she has mentioned five districts that were earmarked for FY 2017/2018 that will be affected. There were districts earmarked for 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. If the counterpart funding on the side of Government of Uganda could be availed, we would have the programme rolled out to the entire country.

If the resources cannot be availed, will the earlier on programme for rolling out - because I have in my possession a letter written by the then Minister of Gender, hon. Muruli Mukasa to the elders of Alebtong District telling them that in Financial Year 2018/2019, Government of Uganda with support from our partners will start giving some token to our elders. Will that letter still stand? Are we still in your programme for rolling out SAGE for 2018/2019 or not? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.06
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grieving - I do not know whether these people who are not benefiting in this programme will still be alive when you postpone this programme.

When you talk about people of 88 years who are supposed to benefit, is this programme meant for particular people because soon our President is making that year? (Laughter) Is it meant for other people as well?

Mr Speaker, my prayer is if they cannot roll out this programme to each and every part of the country, we should not pass the budget. We should cancel all other districts that are benefiting. We also have aged people who are miserable –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give is if every old person in the country cannot receive this money, either the honourable minister stops the entire programme or every old person in this country gets Shs 50,000 at the end of the year. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are rules that we use in this House. You cannot give information on information. The Member was still giving information. Had you finished?

MR WALUSWAKA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then why did you sit?

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is because of the importance of this matter that everybody -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules still stand firm on these issues.

MR WALUSWAKA: Honourable colleagues, if it is not okay to scrap the programme countrywide because others are not benefitting, let us roll out the way Government does with LCs. They should pay every old person of 60 years and above Shs 30,000 at the end of the year. If the people of Omoro -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information. When you start using “if” and “but”, you are now debating.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, we are seated on a time bomb. For the districts that are not benefitting, when our old people hear that a certain district is receiving this money, for example, the nearby district of Kyegegwa, they will think that their honourable MP is not working. It is as if you are not supporting the Government. I pray and request honourable members that even if your district is benefitting, if this project is not rolled out countrywide, we should either scrap it or reject this budget. Thank you.

5.10
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support my colleagues who have made statements on the status of SAGE. I was here in the last Parliament when we passed this programme. The non-committal of Government to cover the entire country cost many MPs during the elections. I would like to inform this House that there is no meeting, which you can address in your constituency without being asked that question. Masindi has been yearning to benefit from this programme but greater Masindi and some districts within the region are not reflected anywhere. 

I would like to amend hon. Mbwatekamwa’s proposal that if the Government does not have enough money, let us centralise all the monies and pick those who are 80 years and above so that every district benefits. We need equitable distribution of resources. As we speak, we are violating our Constitution, especially in regard to equitable distribution of resources. Some districts are benefiting while others are not.

Mr Speaker, I support the Members who have spoken and at an appropriate time, when we are passing the budget, I would like to propose that we remove the SAGE programme from the budget.
 
Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the women councils. These councils have been in existence together with those leaders who were elected 10 plus years ago. They have never been re-elected and some have died; others have changed residences.

Honourable minister, do you intend to dissolve the women councils? If you intend to retain the women councils, when are you going to organise these elections? Mr Speaker, with those remarks I support my colleagues. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have guiding rules on how you support a Member who is making a point that you are in favour of. We use foot stamping or you hit the back of the seat in front of you. Clapping is strictly prohibited and that includes clapping of seats or any object that is around you, using your hand. Kindly, let us observe the rules and cheer Members in the right way. Let us remain orderly in the House. 

5.13
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to add my voice to that of all the other Members who have advocated for the scrapping of SAGE. I am saying this because if it is not rolled out throughout the country, why should we have it? The people in Sironko have heard that some districts are benefiting from it and they are wondering what it is. 

When the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development visited the Elgon region, she did something else while the people of that region had expected that she had gone to rollout this programme in Mbale region. 

Mr Speaker, my other concern is about the Youth Livelihood Programme. You will realise that monies are sent but there is no monitoring and evaluation, no assessments or reviews. Mr Minister, in your wisdom, could you please help and guide this House on how you just send monies without follow up? What are you doing to this country? Is this justice? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.15
MR GEOFREY DHAMUZUNGU (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support hon. Mbwatekamwa with an amendment, that if we cannot rollout SAGE to all the districts, let us reduce on the money from Shs 25,000 to maybe Shs 15,000. If it cannot be done monthly, let us find how much money we need to rollout to the entire country and we can give it after six months or yearly, as long as we are giving it to the whole country. 

I am also a product of failure by a former Member of Parliament. I beat him because he failed to advocate for SAGE in the district and I would not like to also fall victim. Therefore, I propose that we should find a solution. (Laughter) 

I come from Buyende and our neighbour, Kamuli is benefiting from SAGE. My voters are asking, if the Kamuli people are benefiting from SAGE, why not Buyende? People are even regretting why they left Kamuli and became a district. I support it with that amendment. Thank you.

3.17
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not in support of scrapping SAGE. However, I am looking at the SAGE programme from the perspective of the donors that come in. We attended a workshop and we were told that we have donor funds to a tune of around $ 600,000 at stake if the Government does not provide counterpart funding.

Mr Speaker, my request to the Government is to ensure that we get the counterpart funding to attract that money, from the perspective of the multiplier effect it will have on the economy – (Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member and the House that Government took on SAGE programme after a serious feasibility study and analysis on old people. However, instead of supporting scrapping off because other districts are not benefiting, there are ministries, for example, the Education Ministry, that receive a lot of money from Government. They do not utilise this money and it is, in most cases, returned to Treasury.

Mr Speaker, we would focus our minds there because most Members are saying that they are losing elections because their districts are not benefiting from SAGE, which is true. However on the other hand, what will happen to those Members from districts that are benefiting from SAGE, if it is scrapped. Won’t they get the same problem? 

Therefore, instead of Parliament taking a decision, which is not fair to the elders, let us find out how we can get money –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you aware that you rose on information?

MR AYOO: This is the information, Mr Speaker. That we get money from other sectors that are not utilized it and we rollover and have all the districts benefit from SAGE. Thank you, honourable member and that is the information I would like to give you.

LT COL BYEKWASO: Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I was saying that we should encourage the Government and entreat it to provide counterpart funding so that we get that money. When you look at it from the perspective of the multiplier effect, this money that they are holding in arrears is around $ 500 million. Just image that within the population and what it can do. 

Therefore, I support those who say that maybe we should not pass the budget until Government has provided the Shs 11 billion for us to attract the $ 600,000. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.20
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by associating myself to the views raised by my colleagues regarding the SAGE programme. 

Recently, the media released a list of schools that were to be rehabilitated by Government. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you that the members of Teso Parliamentary Group are seriously under attack because schools in Teso were not included.

Mr Speaker, I have used the above as an example to relate to SAGE, which is also selective in the district application. I have learnt from my colleagues who are on the Committee of gender that the proposal had been that the age bracket of the beneficiaries is raised so that all the other districts are included. Otherwise, at this current application, Ugandans would like to see that the Members who sit in this House talk towards equitable distribution of resources.

I would like to comment on one more aspect from the ministry; the issue of the Youth Livelihood Project. Whereas we are trying to appropriate money towards empowering the youth in this House, it is reported that what Parliament receives as reports regarding the Youth Livelihood Project is not what reaches the districts. We need a forensic audit into the operations of the Youth Livelihood Project so that we are able to tell whether what we receive as Parliament is exactly what the youth get on the ground.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is important that whether it is the women under the women Empowerment Project or the youth, we need to train these people on basic entrepreneurship and skills on how to utilize this money economically and viably. Most of the time the money is disbursed but these people cannot put it into production use because we do not emphasise the element of impacting skills in them. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.23
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the contributions so far made and I agree with them. My concern is about the Youth Livelihood Programme. 

When you look at page 13 of the minister’s report, it shows that in financial year 2013/2014, Shs 116 billion was disbursed to the youth programme. To date, only Shs 8.9 billion has been recovered. That shows that the recovery is only about 7 per cent and it means that this programme is failing or it has failed. 

A few people discuss and create their own groups to swindle money. Therefore, this programme must be revisited. We need to find appropriate steps of safeguarding it from being misused by the staff and mismanaged by officials. We need to stop the creation of empty groups because we are losing the objective of the Youth Livelihood Programme. 

When you look at different districts, you will find that those who benefited do not belong to that district. I come from Lwengo District and very few youths have benefited from this programme. At the same time, this programme only benefits a certain class of people. They talk about graduates but you find that the school dropout percentage is very high and they are not benefitting from the programme. I wonder what sort of livelihood programme this is if it cannot benefit Ugandan youths. 

5.26
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank and commend the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender for the report well done. It is very clear from the discussions here and even before that Members are very passionate about the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) Programme and its roll out because it was a resolution long made in this House and I remember that you were the one steering the House at that time. 

From what has been said, the issue of national roll out of SAGE is in line with inclusive development and the commitment to equitable resource allocation and equal opportunities. It is very absurd that we can run a programme that excludes most parts of the country. It is very painful because much as you may want to talk about it in another area, you cannot talk about it because you might talk about it in a place where people are not benefiting. However, even as you talk about it, you are also worried that tomorrow, you might not have it. 

Mr Speaker, we might say that we should scrap it but the impact it has when it is not extended to your community maybe worse when it is scrapped because it has far reaching implications. 

Mr Speaker, the National Budget Framework Paper 2017/2018 to 2021/2022 clearly states that counterpart funding should take the first call on the National Budget. I do not know why we seem to be making ceremonial statements for formality. I would really urge this House that Government committed itself to the development partners to provide Shs 149 billion to counter fund the Shs 308 billion that the development partners are giving. Therefore, it is incumbent upon Government to provide that money. 

We are not asking for money outside what Government has committed itself to do. I think this Government should be fair to its citizens; it should make a commitment and live to that commitment. It is unfortunate that we make a commitment, come on the Floor of Parliament and make strong pronouncements but when it comes to implementation, we renegade. 

It is also very painful that year in, year out, when we are discussing budgets, it is as if the Members of Parliament are the ones who are a problem and yet it is the Executive that makes the commitments. We are not there when you are signing the Memoranda of Understanding. As leaders and representatives of the older persons, what we want is this money to be provided. 

Mr Speaker, my conclusion is that while we were approving the National Budget Framework Paper 2017/2018, we adopted a proposal to close the gaps on funding of the SAGE programme and the Shs 11.65 billion is supposed to be provided for in the Budget. Since the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not provide for it and yet we adopted that it should be provided for, I therefore agree with hon. Mbwatekamwa that the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not approved by this House until that money is provided for. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these matters are important but I have a practical problem in my hands that we need to be able to accommodate and that problem is time. I have just been reading the minister’s statement because the letter was brought to me while I was already here. I have also listened to the presentation from the chairperson of the committee and it looks like the key issue that this House has to take a decision on is the issue of SAGE. The others are challenges of implementation and the Youth Livelihood Programme but the House wants to know more about SAGE. 

From the letter that the minister has read here, three situations have arisen. One is that there is a presidential directive on this particular financial year, which the minister is trying to abide by and that will affect five districts because there was supposed to be a roll out to five more districts. They include Dokolo, Mubende, Kasese, Sheema and Ssembabule. 

The second one is the issue of the two districts that the donors are going to withdraw from in this financial year. Therefore, there is need for this Parliament to raise that money. Those districts are Kyenjojo and Nebbi.

The third problem that the minister highlights is that there are arrears. This is her sector so I am sure she is as concerned as we are because she is the one who is supposed to implement this programme. Some of those already benefiting from the programme have also not been paid.

These are the three situations that the minister has outlined. The President has made a directive and the minister has outlined the implication of what the President has directed. What I have seen being proposed here, both from the committee and also from the minister’s statement, is for this House to support the ministry to deal with the status quo as it is now, based on the person who proposes the Budget, who is the President. 

The minister is proposing that in the next financial year, citizens from 85 years upwards be taken on countrywide –(Interjections)– Honourable members, you have not read this letter; you have only listened to the minister. I am trying to summarise the issues so that we can decide properly because some of the statements that are coming up are completely out of context. Can I guide and then we see how to take a decision on this matter so that we do not spend a lot of time on it? 

The proposal that the minister makes here is that in the next financial year 2018/2019, the whole country be covered, which discussion will start immediately we finish with this Budget. That is what the minister has proposed and that also supports, in part, what the committee has recommended. Therefore, that is the decision point for us. Let us not go into things that are not required for us to take a decision on. 

I will only ask people who are going to speak on this specific issue so that we dispose of the issues on SAGE but to say that we stop it or not stop it - that is the discussion that we can have but let us be guided on what we are going to say, honourable members.

5.35
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have issues to raise on the proposals made by the minister. Honourable members, there is nothing like greater or lesser old age. Old age pains and we all shall get there some day. There is no classification as being badly off in old age or even better off. As long as you get old, all of us feel the same way. 

Our Constitution prohibits discrimination of any kind. If we raise the age limit; if that is the proposal and we go by it, next year the age limit will be raised to 85 years and that is discriminative to Ugandans. It is oppressive, exhibiting social injustice, causing social rejection to the older persons and it is a mockery to the Ugandans that we promised to pay. 

Mr Speaker, what we are advocating for today; this afternoon in this House, is not a new fund or programme. This House, in the last financial year, appropriated funds and we are only advocating that those funds be provided for the SAGE programme – (Interruption)

MR SSEBIKAALI: Mr Speaker, when a person becomes 65 years old, the immune system of that person is compromised and that person becomes like a child. He or she becomes sickly and is in hospital on almost a daily basis. Therefore, by saying that the age should be increased from 65 years to 85 years - I do not know whether you want people to benefit when they are going to the grave.

I would suggest that, that grant should remain at 65 years when people can move to the place where they are picking it from rather than when they are going to the grave. That is the information I would like to give because the mortality rate of the elderly is higher than we expect. Thank you.

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you for the information. This Government committed itself to the people of Uganda to provide the SAGE fund. We are seeing our partners pulling out because we have failed to commit ourselves to the Memorandum of Understanding that was signed by this Government. 

Therefore, I would like to move that the funds that were provided for in the last budget be given to the SAGE programme so that it continues without discrimination according to age. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.38
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. I am also in favour of national coverage of the SAGE programme. I would like to differ from those who are raising the age limit. I would like to ask how many people you think will attain the age of 100 years or 80 years, unless you are a salary earner who can afford to go abroad for treatment when need arises. 

What I have seen is that the majority of people in the village start catching non-communicable diseases at an early age of 65 years. Therefore, I would like to support the view that we start with - I actually wished that it could start with Kabale but I would generally wish that SAGE becomes a nationwide programme.

My concern is, if you cannot shake the hands of your parents, who do you think you will shake hands with and be satisfied? Last time we had a debate here, people’s hands were shaken and yet they were salary earners. Among the Bakiga, we all agree that someone who gives birth to an important person has built a nation. If we want to achieve this, we need to start with the elders and we should – (Interruption) 

MS ALYEK: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me way to make a comment. 

According to the Human Rights Commission Report, which I am holding here, the 19th Annual Report to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, 2016 on page 187 states, “Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should roll out the SAGE programme to all the older persons in Uganda above 60 years and should ensure that it provides a comprehensive programme to the entire public on the roll out plan. In August 2016, the Government decided to roll out the SAGE programme, allocating Shs 9 billion for the financial year 2015/2016 and committing Shs 149 billion for the next five years. 

The goal is to reach 55 districts by the year 2020. The Government plans to roll out the programme in a phased manner starting with 20 new districts between 2015 and 2016 and adding five new districts every subsequent year.” 

Therefore, Government had already committed itself in rolling out this programme and had already committed Shs 149 billion in this respect.

Regarding the issue of increasing the years to 85 years, sincerely, the life expectancy in Uganda has not yet reached 85 years of age; we are still at 53 years – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating.

MS NDAMIRA: Thank you, my sister. Mr Speaker, my worry is that the donors may walk away. If you can be smeared with Vaseline and you cannot extend it to the whole body then what is the essence of smearing? Uganda should now rise and it is us, the Members of Parliament, to ensure rolling out of the programme countrywide if we want to achieve the set objectives. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the chairperson to summarise the recommendations from the committee? Please summarise what the crux is on the issue being debated; on the roll out programme so that we can take a decision. We cannot go on anymore. What did the committee say about the SAGE roll out programme because that is the report we are debating or adopting? If we adopt that then all these issues are settled.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, the committee observed that Shs 17.59 billion for counterpart funding has been provided in the Budget leaving a funding gap of Shs 11.65 billion. If Government released Shs 11.65 billion, for instance, we will be able to move on in the next financial year stably as we plan for the following years.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides funding for Shs 11.65 billion as counterpart funding for the SAGE project to roll out smoothly. 

On non-payment of SAGE, the committee recommends that releases for payment of the beneficiaries should be done promptly. Mr Speaker, like you rightly said, the releases were not up to 100 per cent; there was a short fall of Shs 3.5 billion. This means a lot to the older persons. 

Therefore, prompt releases are important to avoid accumulation of arrears and to prevent the older persons from acquiring loans to cater for lack of releases and avoid misuse of funds by the beneficiaries when they get a lot of money at ago. 

Recently, Government paid some older persons three months lump sum. I do not want to say on record what happened but the one elder who was used to receiving Shs 25,000 now received three months lump sum - I do not want to say what can happen.

There is also non-registration. However, in the circumstances prevailing, the mood of the House is saying that we should pay all older persons. Mr Speaker, this country committed itself to rolling out nationally. They invited us, as Members of Parliament, to tell us the road map for rolling out and we all attended. I remember the entire boardroom was full of Members waiting for the rollout programme. 

In the campaigns, we promised older persons that we were going to rollout but I am requesting Members - you know it is both ways; it is painful but realistically, the money is not available. I want those who are saying that we find money as a must, to also indicate where to get the money. If we are cutting - (Interjections)- I want you to help the committee and propose where the money should be got. If you want to cut some other budgets, mention them here and now so that we know that we shall raise money from here for rolling out.  Help the committee; do not leave us in suspense because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what had you recommended on how we should move?

MS KOMUHANGI: I recommended that we exempt the sector from budget cuts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please help us. What have you proposed on the rollout programme?

MS KOMUHANGI: We said that we should retain the districts that have been benefiting because if we withhold them, the agitation will be too much. Then –(Interjections)– Listen, honourable colleagues. In the next financial year, we would then rollout to all districts beginning -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. One way or another, we are going to have to take a decision on this and that decision time is now. Whatever you are going to say is basically on the same issue. Please, I have a time constraint in my hands and it has not been caused by me but by you people who are in the committees. Therefore, I have to manage the time the best way I can, including sometimes looking unreasonable in your eyes but I have to do that if we are going to make progress.

I have to do the bad job of taking some decisions so that we can move because this matter has taken us a while and we have five reports to finish today and all of them are important. Therefore, we need to take a decision on this so that it can pave the way on how we move with the rest of the business that is remaining. That is the challenge that I have in my hands. 

Therefore, if 15 Members want to speak, I do not have the time. That is why I was asking the chairperson to summarise for us what the committee recommendations are so that we can adopt the recommendations and move on, if the recommendations are satisfactory.

Therefore, this is where we are from the report of the committee. Both the minister and the committee are proposing that the national rollout programme starts from the other financial year. Both of them are all saying that the challenge that is being faced currently should be dealt with comprehensively; to deal with the beneficiaries that are benefiting now and also those that the donors are going to pull out from this year.

Therefore, the status is that for this year, we adopt a situation that normalises what was already happening and then both of them agree that in the next financial year, we discuss the national rollout plan. That is what is before us.

Therefore, if you want to change this, I want a clear proposal of how we want to change it and bear in mind the constitutional implication of what you are going to say; of what we can do to a budget as Parliament and what we can do to figures that have been submitted. When the Speaker is speaking, usually honourable members sit but this seems to be an unusual situation. (Laughter)

Therefore, honourable members, I need you to help me here. We cannot change the Budget upward. We can do whatever it is within the Budget. We can reallocate and that issue is going to be examined in detail by the Budget Committee and the figures will come back to us with recommendations for reallocation and things like that. 

Can we finish with this report, because what we are trying to do is to finish so that the Budget Committee can come to the House with the figures that we are going to approve and supply for appropriation? The very many words we are using here will not help solve the situation. We will end up making mistakes that we are not supposed to make and as presiding officer, I will not allow this House to make any mistake of for example saying, we increase money when we do not have it. That would be unconstitutional and I cannot sit here and preside over a discussion of that nature. It would be embarrassing to me and I would not want to do that.

Therefore, let us have it this way. We can adopt whatever the committee has said and we can recommend that as far as Parliament is concerned, we want a rollout programme now and then the details can be discussed. Whatever the financial implications are, the Budget Committee can come and advise us. Is that okay? This is so that we finish with this and we move to other business. Can somebody propose that amendment to this rollout programme?

5.53
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a proposal to amend the report of the Committee on Gender that we rollout the SAGE programme nationally effective FY 2017/2018. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the proposal? If that is the proposal, then you can work out the details of the implications to see whether it is capable of being implemented or not and that will be at another level. Can I put the question to the proposal?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018, as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report, as amended, adopted.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN COOMUNITY AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Tonny Ayoo): Mr Speaker, I wish to present the report of the Sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2017/2018.


Vote 021 – Ministry of East African Community Affairs

Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that the budget proposal in the table provided be approved by Parliament for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2017/2018. The estimates are as follows:

Recurrent expenditure

Wage – Shs 1.086 billion;
Non-wage – Shs 27.928 billion;
Pension and gratuity arrears – Shs 31.342 billion; and
Development – Shs 0.538 billion.
The total is Shs 60.893 billion.

Mr Speaker, I wish to highlight a few areas of concern. The committee noted that Uganda assumed the rotational chairmanship of the East African Community with effect from May 2017. So, Uganda is expected to host and preside over the Summit of the East African Community heads of State, the Council of Minister’s meetings and the other related meetings in the next financial year 2017/2018.

The committee, however, noted that sufficient budget allocations are required across the sectors to enable Uganda effectively Chair the East African Community. The committee was informed that Shs 3.92 billion has not been provided for in this financial year’s budget estimates to host the East African Community Summit of heads of State and coordinate MDAs to chair the meeting. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government provides the Ministry of East African Community Affairs with Shs 2.42 billion required for coordinating activities of the East African Community chairmanship and Shs 1.5 billon for hosting the East African Community Affairs Summit.

Mr Speaker, the committee also noted that the implementation of parliamentary recommendations on the Budget Framework Paper was not considered in this budget. Funds amounting to Shs 2.75 billion were recommended to be provided to the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to bridge the funding gaps for public awareness and sensitisation in this financial year. Also Shs 10.97 billion was recommended to be provided for the ministry to clear arrears at the Inter-University Council of East Africa. Further, Shs 4.22 billion was recommended to be provided to the ministry in order to avoid supplementary expenditure haggles due to the poundage loss.

Mr Speaker, the committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide funds to the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to enable it carry out the following key activities:

    1. Sensitisation of the population on the integration;
    2. Acquisition of land for construction of the ministry’s headquarters; and
    3. Facilitation of the mandatory hosting of the East African Community heads of State summit.

Therefore, the committee proposed that Shs 67.563 billion be provided for by Parliament to enable the ministry perform its mandate of ensuring that Uganda benefits from the integration of the East African Community.

Mr Speaker, finally allow me lay on Table the minutes of the committee meetings that were taken while we were processing this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on table this report of the Committee on the East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the details of the report. Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, this is the report of the committee. It is straightforward and the recommendations are clear. I now propose the report for your debate. 

I propose that the report of the sectoral committee on East African Community affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2017/2018 - that is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. Let us have short interventions, if any and debate will be one minute for each contributor.

6.02
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs. When I was reading through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs report, I found out that in Kenya they want to put a law where non-Kenyans will not be allowed to own any property in their country. 

Therefore, as the Chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs and the sector minister, what are you going to do about the properties Ugandans own in Kenya? Is it just in words – promoting the East African Community – yet we cannot cooperate by allowing Ugandans own property in other East African countries? Thank you.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to be reading newspapers while Plenary is going on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not noticed any minister reading a newspaper. However, if there is such a minister reading the newspaper, please take the newspaper as far away from you as possible. (Laughter)

6.04
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the good work done. 

However, I would like to make a few observations. One is that as the East African Community is progressing on the part of integration, how many Ugandans are aware of the current opportunities available through the efforts that we have planted on the ground?

My issue is that the current budget you are fronting needs to be amended. We should remove 10 per cent of the money that you have proposed for hosting the heads of state summit among others and inject it into sensitisation. This is because we should be benefiting - otherwise, we will be wasting a lot of time doing things for East Africa yet people do not even know the opportunities that are available. 
Therefore, chairperson and members - (Member timed out.)

6.06
MS JANET GRACE OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report presented.

Mr Speaker, in 2014, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, launched the teaching of Kiswahili among the business communities. The chairperson of the committee and I attended that launch too. However, since then nothing has been said about this programme. Mr Chairperson, has it been abandoned? What is the way forward? Thank you.

6.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Budduda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. However, on the outstanding pensions and gratuity for the staff of the defunct East African Community - it has taken too long and Government definitely should know about the seven per cent interest it attracts. 

Mr Speaker, many of these people have died without accessing their benefits. This ought to be given priority in this budget so that those who worked and deserve this outstanding pension and gratuity be cleared. Thank you.

7.08
MS AKELLO LUCY (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson for the report presented.

Mr Speaker, my issue is in regard to popularising the East African agenda to Ugandans. My biggest question is that as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is struggling to find money for Jumuiya ya Afrika Mashariki Utamaduni Festival (JAMAFEST), which is the cultural festivity that brings together the East African countries together, is it possible for East African Community to donate part of this money to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, such that we can also host the JAMAFEST? That is important because as we speak there is no money for us to host it in Uganda.

6.09
MR GUSTAR MUGOYA (NRM, Bukhooli County North, Bugiri):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine goes to the area of sensitisation. I have been privileged to go to Tanzania and noticed that majority of our brothers and sisters in Tanzania, including civil servants, do not ably understand the importance of the East African Community. I would like to give two scenarios: when we passed through Mutukula border, they asked us, “Kwanini muliingia inch yethu usiku?” meaning, why are you entering our country at night?) We thought the struggle was over and tried to explain but they said, “Usiongeye nasis kwa Kingereza yenu” meaning, do not talk to us in English language. “You must only speak Kiswahili,” they emphasized. That was also problematic.

When we went to Mwanza – and with our usual style of feeding, we requested them to give us rice and matooke. They said, “Kwanini onawomba kila kitu kyokyote? Watanzania watakula nini?”  Which meant, why we were ordering for many things - (Member timed out.) 

6.10
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the report, Uganda should be preparing to take the chair of the Community and that means we should prepare on all fronts. 

First of all, Kenya has term limits. Second, Kenya has an independent electoral commission and third, Kenyans are changing their leaders. I think it will be pertinent for us as a country, as we prepare to take the chair of the Community, to ask and evaluate ourselves along those lines.

Finally, there is the issue of representation in the East African Legislative Assembly, where we in the Parliament of Uganda must also work out a clear mechanism of ensuring that the political parties, which are represented in this House actually have - (Member timed out.)

6.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Tonny Ayoo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the key issues that have been raised by the honourable members is about sensitisation and awareness creation among the citizens of Uganda.

I wish to take Members to page 11 of the report where the committee notes that the level of awareness and participation in the East African Integration process has remained low among various stakeholders over the years. As a result, the sensitisation campaign has not been able to address and inform the needs of unique stakeholders like farmers, industrialists, traders, students and all these other groups. That is why we are asking for additional money so that the ministry can conduct research to inform us about the stakeholders’ needs, with the view of stimulating their interests and participation in East African Community Integration activities. That is why we are pleading to Parliament that the budget sensitisation, which is about Shs500 million has a gap of Shs275 million - we cannot go out and do sensitisation when the money is little. 

However, Mr Speaker and honourable members, when you look at the table in which the money for sensitisation is indicated, you realise that we have given a breakdown in the report of Shs 2.7 billion.

Mr Speaker, there was also an issue to the extent that Kenyans are planning to stop Ugandans to settle there and acquire properties. 

However, under the East African Common Market Protocol, partner states are supposed to harmonise their laws and allow free movements of persons and free establishments of business in other partner states. However, there are countries that still have individual interests against the interest of the integration. This process is usually done through negotiations and building consensus. So, what I can say is that while we are in the process of reaching there, we have not yet.

On the issue of teaching Swahili, we are supposed to by now have had the Swahili syllabus in place – it is supposed to be done by the Minister of Education and Sports and National Curriculum Development Centre so that we can rollout teaching of Swahili. But as you know, most of the activities of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs are implemented by various ministries and departments of Government although Ministry of East African Community Affairs does the work of coordination.

Mr Speaker, the issue of Ugandans going to Tanzanian at night and being asked to speak Swahili still puts us at the same point that we need to teach that language to Ugandans. 
However, like the honourable member said that when he went to Tanzania and asked for rice, posho, and beans, Tanzanians asked why he wanted to eat everything - those could be issues of food crisis. 

Recently in Kenya, there was a decision that a person was to buy only 2kilograms of posho from a supermarket. No one would be sold more than that because they were trying to ration yet for us here, we take what the stomach can contain. Those are some of the challenges, Mr Speaker.

On the issue of chairmanship and having an independent Electoral Commission and changing the syllabus, Mr Speaker, that is the responsibility of this Parliament to come up with a proposal on how they would like Government to be run and Government takes it up and that will change. 

Otherwise, East African Community is demanding that so many things also need to be harmonised including things like terms of a Government. It is five years in Kenya, seven years in Rwanda and five years in Uganda. Therefore, we are supposed to harmonise all of them, most especially, when we are getting to political federation. Anyhow we are still trying to move there as discussions and negotiations towards a political federation go on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, what do you say on the arrears for the former workers of the East African community?

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under the decentralisation system, accounting officers submit their verified pension arrears to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before we consider them. 

The Ministry of the East African Community Affairs submitted their verified arrears and we have provided Shs 34.7 billion to cater for that expenditure. We hope this will go a long way to solve it. 

Finally, I think the chairperson has answered the issue of change of leaders. However, Mr Speaker, it is unity in diversity, but not uniformity at the moment. I think we are in the East African Community for particular interests namely security and prosperity; we do not have to be uniform in each and everything. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2017/2018. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

6.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table, the original copy of the report and minutes of the committee meetings. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the committee report has been uploaded on Members’ iPads, which includes an executive summary and an annex showing the list of town councils.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, the Committee of Public Service and Local Governments is responsible for the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Local Government, Public Service Commission and Local Government Finance Commission and all the local governments in Uganda.

The following issues are for the interest of Parliament. In terms of pension, we carried out a pension census and the arrears of pension amounts to Shs 1.2 trillion, but we are only able to provide Shs 120 billion in the budget. 

Therefore, the committee is requesting the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Public Service to advise Parliament on an appropriate schedule to settle these arrears. 

There is a National Record Centre and Archives, which we have constructed just next to Ministry of Health. It is a very good structure. It is complete, but it requires a few other things which will cost Shs 7.2 billion. The details are given on page 4 of the summary.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of hard-to-reach areas allowances, the issue is that when such allowances are paid but subjected to a tax, its objectives are negated. The committee is advising that the law should be amended so that these allowances are not subject to tax.

On the misuse of public vehicles, the committee would like to report that this continues by non-entitled officers. Public vehicles are abandoned in yards and garages over little money for minor repairs. We are telling the Ministry of Public Service to work with police to ensure that misuse of public vehicles comes to a stop. The rest of the advice and recommendations are given at page 5.

On district service commissions where districts are not able to have operational service commissions, the committee recommends that we change the law so that the Public Service Commission takes over the functions of such districts for a stipulated time period.

Salaries and wages disparities

On these we agreed, as Parliament and as Government, to have a National Salary Commission. The Minister of Public Service is here and could tell us how far they have gone, but the committee is concerned that nothing seems to be moving on.

On page 7, we have a Civil Service College in Jinja, which is again an achievement of all of us. However, a number of our officers are going abroad for courses, which are at this college. We think Government should increase utilisation of this facility.

Mr Speaker, we have, under the Public Service Commission, a number of gaps for funding as indicated at page 9; it comes to Shs 436 million. The committee found this quite plausible and we presented them to the Budget Committee. Good enough that committee looked at the resources of this sector and said they can handle it within that framework. 

However, under the Public Service Commission on page 10, we observe that there is a low ratio of female to male in the Public Service and we, therefore, urge Government to review the Public Service recruitment policy to provide for at least a third of those recruited in Public Service to be women.

Under Ministry of Local Government on page 11, we see again the funding gaps. Mr Speaker, in the budget Framework Paper, we agreed that there should be honoraria of Shs 12 billion for sub-county councillors, which is not in the final estimates; we need it. 
We also agreed to revitalise the offices of parish chiefs. We had already secured the Shs 16 billion for the elections of LC Is and IIs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development instead said we needed it for posho and beans. Anyhow we need it now so that we can have elections for these councils.

Something important, honourable colleagues, is about urbanisation. Government is proposing, as part of the steps to ensure middle income status, to move a bit stronger on the issue of urbanisation - fiscal planning for the small towns, creating these town councils and so on including operationalising the , which were already approved in the last Parliament. We have therefore, proposed creation of new 91 town councils and the list should be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can you go to the conclusion now?

MR MAGYEZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. You also see the new regional cities, which we are proposing should be operationalized, come 2018. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have an issue from local governments regarding their budgets. Over the years, their budget has been declining proportionately to that of other ministries. I was in Local Government and I have seen the decline from 34 per cent, and this year we are talking about 12 per cent. The Ministry of Local Government is saying this should be reversed. We are proposing at least a minimum of 38 per cent of the national budget to be decentralised to the Local Government. The figures for budget as required are on pages 18 and 19 of the report. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, put those figures on report.

MR MAGYEZI: For the records:

Vote 005 – Ministry of Public Service – Shs 25.945 billion;
Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government – Shs 271.041 billion;
Vote 146 - Public Service Commission – Shs 6.534 billion;
Vote 146 - Local Government Finance Commission – Shs 5.663 billion;
Votes 501-778- Local Governments of Uganda – Shs 2,735,602,000,000.
These figures are as we harmonised with the Committee of the Budget. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can I propose the question for your debate. I proposed the question for the adaption of the report of the Sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Governments for the ministerial policy statement and budgetary provision for the sectors covered for the financial year 2017/2018. That is the motion for us.  Honourable members, can we have short interventions on this? 

6.24
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been listening to all these presentations the whole day and there is one general trend I see - we do not have the money across the board. When it comes to the local government report, we have suffered from what I call populism. We have created too many institutions that we cannot support. We have too many districts, sub counties and we are now thinking of new cities and town councils.

I would like to request that as Parliament of this country, we start looking at what we can finance effectively. Otherwise we are going to create so many lame dark cities and institutions and we will not be doing any good to this country. 

We are in this House to contribute to the wellbeing of this country and it is our business, for the next four years, now to tell ourselves the truth.
There is no way, you can have an arrears of Shs 1.3 trillion but and you can only raise Shs 1.2 billion. I don’t know how we can ever go beyond that. 

I am looking at the districts that do not have service commissions yet they cannot work without them - to centralise the appointment of district staff is a fallacy because one is that they are too far and so may picked people who may not be good enough for the job.

All I would like to say is: can we start thinking and possibly stop this idea? It is good politically to have a new district somewhere but we do not have the money to support it. It is very nice to have all the new sub counties – I think we have got seven sub counties in my home district but which do not have facilities and staff. 
So, Mr Speaker, I would like to advise that –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I don’t cut contributors off; I only set the time – two minutes and two minutes are two minutes. (Laughter)

6.27
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the committee for good job done. 
My concern is about pensions. I have seen people who have served this country but have died without getting their pension. I would like to ask whether the ministry has tried to come up with some measures to enable such people get paid their pensions earlier enough. I am saying this because it is embarrassing to see someone dying without getting treatment when he has his money somewhere. Therefore, I pray that something be done to rectify that situation.

My second point is about the councillors. These do a lot of work at the sub county level. All development is felt at the sub county level. Right now, we are sending a lot of money to the sub counties. It will be unfair if the councillors are not given some allowances. Therefore, I would like the ministry to make sure that the money as requested for is actually got and some of it given to these councillors. I thank you.

6.28
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for a well-thought out report. The chairperson of the committee talked about Local Council I elections. I did not get the next word she mentioned about the LC I election.
 
However, I would like to know from the minister of finance - do we have a budget for LC I elections? If so, when are we having these very important elections?

Mr Speaker, I am asking about these elections because we have had a lot of problems in the communities. We have problems of insecurity, land wrangles and many other issues that used to be solved at LC I. Right now the villages are in chaos. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the minister when these elections are going to take place so that our communities can live in harmony again. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.30
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is on hard to reach allowance. We would like to thank the committee for bringing this up. This allowance has been thought about to help people working in those areas rent houses and manage feeding expense but when you tax it, what is left behind?

I would like to find out from the committee and the minister - we have been talking about this issue of hard-to-reach allowance and the people benefiting from this type of allowance. What are the criteria used? You said it would be reviewed. When is it coming on board? 

Second, I would like to talk about what you have said about the town councils that are coming on board. Why do we, as Government, deceive people that we are setting up these town councils yet we have not proper budget? You are aware that when you go down there, the staffing levels are so low and you again incapacitate them more by creating a town council without staff and funding.

I would also like to respond to the committee recommendation that much as you are talking about these town councils, we have also districts that have never received start-up capital. Kween District was created seven years ago. However, we have been following up this money to the tune of Shs 100 million for start-up to no avail. When are we receiving it, honourable minister? I thank you.

6.32
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make some few remarks. On the arrears of Shs 1.2 trillion for the pension that the chairperson talked about, we need to look for this money because these people have worked for this Government and retired; they are now in old age and need this money. We always see deductions being made on our salaries for pension, and once I retire, I expect this money on my account immediately because I see deductions.

Mr Speaker, on the issues of public service commission taking over the job of interviewing the applicants in some districts, I think this is about abusing the policy of decentralisation. 
The various district service commissions are set by district councils comprising people who should have worked and have gone through service at the national level. Therefore, when you say that interviewing some applicants will be taken over by the public service commission, then we are usurping the powers or authorities in the districts and so abusing the decentralisation policy. 

Therefore, I propose that we maintain the district service commissions to proceed with the task of interviewing applicants and in case they are unable, they can ask for technical assistance and guidance from the mother ministry –(Member timed out.) 

6.34
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson for the well sorted report with very strong recommendations. 

I would like to particularly talk about the issue of funding to local governments. As presented, you have seen the downward trend so far up to 12 per cent, as you stated and this is a very disastrous situation. 

Parliament should ensure that this recommendation is particularly implemented because we adopted decentralisation long time ago and it is only prudent that we continue or implement those recommendations. Implementation of Government programmes at local levels particularly by local Governments makes delivery of services to the people much easier and cheaper. 

Secondly, I wish to comment on the issue of payments to the pensioners. It is very disastrous if we do not provide money for these old people who have worked, retired and expect what is due to them. Thank you.

6.35
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was in the Local Government Accounts Committee in the Ninth Parliament, we moved around the country and to most districts. One of the issues we realised was that in most districts the staffing levels was below 60 per cent. That means we have most of the manpower gaps in many districts because they have not realised that their staff establishment as they are supposed to have.

To me, Mr Speaker, instead of creating unnecessary districts, Government should first focus on filling up the gaps within the existing districts so that we get to know what is done. Once we are done at that level, we can then proceed to the next stage.

Secondly, on waiving taxes - yesterday we waived tax on Bujagali of over Shs 1 trillion but we are busy taxing the small allowances of teachers who earn just Shs 30,000 or 40,000. Why the double standards? Why should we waive a tax on a serious investor but we go to tax people who are earning little money? Can we develop without taxes? The answer is no. can we increase workers’ salaries without taxes? The answer is no.

Therefore, which way should we follow and have a mechanism of making sure that we identify and strengthen the tax revenue sources so that we are able to have our roads, schools and the hospitals that we are talking about. Otherwise, even the said programme will be hard to realise as long as Government will not raise taxes. 

Finally, I know that the district service commissions in most of our districts are not functional just because they are not fully constituted. The district – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the ministers contribute and then you close; it is your report.

6.38
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman for this report, and the contributions which have been provided by members.

Mr Speaker, the creation of districts is part of our Constitution but it is also demand driven; it is not just a question of being populist. 

There are a few challenges but the measures put in place, I think, are going to eliminate these challenges and these new entities, which have been created are going to be strong and vibrant.

There is still a funding gap on the issue of pension but we are working very closely with finance and once we see the total commitment that has to be paid; then a schedule is going to be worked out to make sure that everybody who has to receive pension gets it since it is a right. The ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have taken the right path. 

On the issue of taxing allowances, the law is quite clear about it and probably we should take some action like we did. Once that happens here then the question of allowances being taxed especially for councillors will be out of the way. 

On the criterion used for the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas, is as the words speak for themselves, the place must be hard, very difficult and with very poor infrastructure. And once that place fits that category then it is declared as hard-to-reach.

Of course we are also now seriously trying to revise the criterion and probably areas, which were once thought to be easy to reach or stay; once we have made this refinement of what qualifies to be hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas and of course people working there will enjoy the benefits, which go with such areas. Thank you very much. 

6.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. Rwakimari asked how much we have provided for the LC I elections. I would like to state that we have made a provision of approximately Shs 16 billion and now that this has been provided then that election should take place sooner than later in the new financial year.

The other issue was about the percentage of the contribution of our budget to the local governments. Yes, it is not yet at the level, which we want but I think we should also look at it in the context of other services that go there like CAAIF, NUSAF - all these programmes should be consolidated to get a clear picture of how much is going to the local governments.

I am very glad that Francis is attacking the decision of creation of new local government units. However, I do not think that if the Ninth Parliament took that decision we would be benefitting from your good contribution in the House. Thank you. (Laughter) 

MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable ministers for you responses. Indeed the district had seven sub counties and it is on the basis of this that a new county was created and that is why the honourable member is here.

However, I would like to say that the policy on decentralisation is a constitutional matter. So, this frustration of too many local governments - and there is procedure established there. If the local governments follow - the only remedy is to maybe amend the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 12 billion for councillors is devoted to the LC III councillors. So, we would like to confirm that this money is not for the district but for the sub-county councillors. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has clarified that the Shs 16 billion for LC I elections is in the budget. 

Mr Speaker, I have examined the budget of the Ministry of Local Government and got to notice that that money is not there. I have also talked to the Electoral Commission and got to know that that money is not there. So, I believe it is with the ministry of finance.
So, I would like us to have it clear that Shs 16 billion for LC I and II elections is with ministry of finance, please transfer it to the Electoral Commission.

About the new town councils not having staff and there is no money and that we should wait – the honourable member for Kween, Uganda is one of the countries with the highest rates of urbanisation at the rate of 5 per cent per annum and so we cannot wait - you have seen what is already happening - poor towns, congestion, traffic and hygiene and so it is not possible to say – (Interruption)

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee. I would like to find out why a proposed town council called Kiru, being created out of Abim is missing in the list because we are in possession of a copy of the instrument from the former Minister of Local Government where Kiru had been included. Who has excluded Kiru Town Council from the list? Thank you. (Laughter)

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is not that we should differ but rather why we plan when we do not have the monies? Honourable chair, we indeed want this money so that the town councils take off because if we leave it at that then it will incapacitate the already incapacitated districts.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much – (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you know we are representatives of constituencies and we have heard the list of the proposed town councils attached to the report. However, there is also a request for creation of sub counties. Don’t you think we would have proceeded well if the proposed sub counties that will be created are also attached the same way they have done with the town councils?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that information should come from the ministry. 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, Parliament approves districts, municipalities and town councils. The sub counties are prerogative of the ministers and so it will be up to the minister to brief Parliament later. 

About the start-up fund for Kween District, which is Shs100 million, I believe the honourable member will take it up with the minister and we shall support you on this because it is budgeted for. A new district should get start-up funds and since it is so many years down the road without this money being accessed, it is a serious matter.

Finally, Mr Speaker from the Leader of Opposition, many staff leave on study. We are creating new districts in this financial year and I hope it has not appeared anywhere in our report. 

Therefore, the question of why create new districts, let us first fill the gaps, no. That is not yet there; we are only operationalizing the resolutions of the Ninth Parliament – (Interruption)

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, I am not satisfied because the chairperson of the committee has not answered my concern about the creation of Kiru Town Council and I can lose an election due to that because that is where I come from.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, protect the honourable colleague. 

MR MAGYEZI:  Mr Speaker, that is a serious matter but please take it that the committee receives the proposals from the ministry after they have been approved by Cabinet. Therefore, we will follow it up with the ministry and know what level Kiru Town Council fell out and we get to know maybe they did their assessment and it did not qualify. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair and honourable members. Can I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee on Public Service and Local Government on the ministerial policy statement and budgetary provisions for the financial year 2017/18? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)
         
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, you have just five minutes to summarise the report.

6.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (MS LOWILA OKETAYOT): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/18. 

Mr Speaker, before I present the report I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee while discussing the ministerial policy statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OKETAYOT: Mr Speaker, the following are the votes under the agriculture sector:
 
Vote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
Vote 121 – Dairy Development Authority;
Vote 125 – National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank;
Vote 142 – National Agricultural Research Organisation;
Vote 152 – National Agricultural Advisory Services;
Vote 155 – Uganda Cotton Development Organisation;
Vote 160 – Ugandan Coffee Development Authority; and
Votes 501 to 850 – Local Government and Commercial Services.

Mr Speaker, before I run through the conclusion and that is about the budget figures, allow me in very few seconds to highlight the key challenges facing the agriculture sector. This is a very key sector and the committee noted that the agricultural sector faces the following challenges - I will just highlight some key ones not all.

The first is recurring pests, vectors and diseases that are affecting production in both crop and animal sub sectors. The second is the lack of adequate quality inputs to satisfy farmer demands across the country. Third, there is the challenge of high dependence on rain fed agriculture and the inadequate operational funds for local governments to implement the single spine extension system as well as delays by the ministry to formulate relevant laws that would improve performance of the agricultural sector. Mr Speaker and honourable members, those are just some few of the many challenges affecting the sector. 

The committee made some recommendations and following these recommendations below are the budget estimates for financial year 2017/18 to various votes under the sector:

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 53,343,068,000; 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 116,501,826,000; and 
    c) External financing - Shs 158,439,836,000. 
This gives a total of Shs 328,284,730,000.

Vote 121 - Diary Development Authority:
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,853,580,000; 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 2,134,000,000. 
That gives a total of Shs 6,987,580,000.

Vote 125 - National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank:
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 7,132,500,000; and
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 7,500,000,000. 
Total of Shs 14,632,500,000

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation:
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 35,648,144,000;
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 8,780,494,000; and
    c) External financing – Shs 45,539,805,000 
Total of Shs 89,968,443,000.

Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5,439,711,000; and
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 310,262,723,000. 
Total of Shs 315,702,434,000.

Vote 155 - Uganda Cotton Development Organisation:
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 4,277,639,000; and 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 4,411,000,000 
Total of Shs 8,688,639,000.

Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority:
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 90,400,189,000; and there is nothing under development expenditure and that gives us a total of Shs 90,400,189,000.

Votes 501-850 - Local Government, Agriculture and Commercial Services: 
Recurrent expenditure: 
Wage – Shs 39,010,000,000;
Non-wage – Shs 6,540,000,000; and
Development expenditure – Shs 5,530,000,000 giving a total of Shs 51,620,000,000.

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority Agriculture Grant:
Recurrent expenditure: 
Wage - Shs 50,000,000; 
Non-wage – Shs 80,000,000; and
Development expenditure – Shs 6,220,000,000 giving a total of 6,350,000,000.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have some two to three recommendations: 
The committee is concerned that the extension services to farmer ratio has remained very high at 1:2400, compared to the recommended UN ratio of 1:500. In addition, where extension service providers have been availed, inadequate facilitation has been provided to aid their delivery of services and outreach to the target beneficiaries. 

In spite of this, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) still requires Shs 16.2 billion to fully recruit the critical staff and pay salaries, and Shs 39.6 billion are for operations. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government provides Shs 39.6 billion operational funds to the district to enable the newly recruited extension workers offer the much needed extension services to farmers. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee is concerned that there is a decline in the allocation of resources to the National Agricultural Research Organisation, by up to 16.6 per cent yet the country is facing challenges of pests and diseases due to weather changes. 
The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to aid responsive functionality of NARO to meet the sector objectives and NDP II goals, the NARO budget should be reinstated to that of the financial year 2016/2017 of Shs 107.865 billion. This however, requires additional funding of about Shs 17.8 billion. 
Furthermore, the committee recommends that Shs 2,000,000,000 should be availed to fully contain the incident of the army worms.  Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is a very elaborate report. Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate on the proposal to adopt the report of the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. That is the motion for your debate and let us has have limited interventions on this. Each member will take one minute, so please be brief.

7.02
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I will go straight to the issues and the first one is extension services to the farmer ratio. The committee is asking for Shs 16.2 billion to recruit additional extension workers. However, what is happening right now is that those people that are already employed are getting salary, yet they are not working. 
I propose that instead of recruiting new staff, we should motivate these people who are already there by facilitating them. Otherwise, we are not going to achieve whatever we want. 

Secondly, you proposed Shs 2,000,000,000 to contain the army worms. From my experience, I think when we had an outbreak of army worms, we recommended the ministry to purchase pesticides to distribute to the affected districts. Kayunga District was one of the highly affected districts. I would like to know, from the minister, what the purpose of that pesticide is. Is it for demonstration or for distributing to farmers to use to contain the army worms? Why am I asking this? It is because my sub county got only four litres of the pesticides but now you are budgeting for Shs 2,000,000,000 to contain this. I think what farmers need - (Member timed out.)

7.03
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to make my comments mainly on the issue of lifting over 68 per cent farmers, who are under subsistence agriculture, to commercial farming. I do not know what you are going to do about this because you have talked about commercial - the advisors out there and the agricultural officers but you have not been clear on how we are going to help farmers to translate from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture.

Secondly, how are we going to balance the two - food security and having something to sell so that commercially, you are contributing to the economy? I think that it is a pertinent issue. 

During the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President last year, he talked about the strategy of helping farmers to strengthen them commercially in order that we attain a middle income status. I think that it is something that is pertinent because we are left with four years. Will we be able to catch up anyway? That is the question that I am leaving with you. Thank you.

7.05
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Chairman, I think agriculture is our comparative advantage as a country. In the estimates that you read, I have not seen anything detailing a component of innovation and research in terms of adding value to our products and also strengthening food security in the country.

The other issue I have not seen is how we can use innovation to utilise water during the flooding season so that agriculture is a continuous activity in the country. We are faced with floods and drought year in and year out. I imagine that after the resolutions of the previous sitting of this Parliament, where the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries adopted a resolution of this Parliament to be innovative and copy new technologies so that we can take agriculture to another level - agriculture employs majority of Ugandans. Those are my areas of concern. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.06
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, recently we raised a challenge about re-activating the former agricultural station so that at a time like this when we are faced with the armyworm that destroys maize, response could be from that point of view and not at national level and that is what I have not seen in the budget.

Also, in the agricultural stations, there should be tractors for hire because when you give a tractor to a farmers’ group, they fail to maintain and manage it. However, if you leave it at the agricultural station, it is practical that they will ensure that it is managed, maintained and it is running. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.07
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy about the issue of water for production. The feasibility study of the irrigation scheme has been supported by JICA and 70 valley dams of 349 cubic meters of water were constructed. That, in essence, is not enough for what we want about irrigation. My point of concern is; what is the policy about the irrigation system? It needs to be very clear so that we are able to follow it up because we have a lot of interest in irrigation in the country.

7.08
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda is an agricultural country and the only way to move to the middle income status and uplift people from poverty is through agriculture. I would like to thank you for coming up with this report but I would like to encourage the minister to emphasise the issue of increasing production so that we can have high productivity, which can enable us have food and nutritional security, besides access to the market.

These issues must be addressed if we want to develop. One way of enhancing agriculture for development is having water for production. Without water for production, we will not do anything. This time we are expecting rain but we can see that the whole country still has that challenge. Therefore, the minister needs to emphasise the area of increasing productivity but without degrading the environment. I think that is very important.

The report is high on marketing. The money we are going to get from agriculture will help us to address other sectors of the economy, including education. Thank you.

7.09
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. The committee has told us that the ministry would like to put emphasis on artificial insemination. It is true that this current financial year, under Operation Wealth Creation, some pregnant heifers were taken to the districts.

Unfortunately, like in the case of Amudat, some of them aborted and up to now those cows have not given birth to any calves because this technology is only available in Entebbe. I would like to find out from the minister; when such happens, where do the farmers get help? We have lost hope for other calves. I, therefore, propose that you provide us with improved bulls to accompany these improved heifers. 

Finally, the committee has advised us – (Member timed out.)

7.11 
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. I am more interested in irrigation because the underlying causes of chronic food insecurity in Uganda, especially in Karamoja, are because of unreliable rainfall and regular drought. 

It is therefore imperative that the Government puts more effort on irrigation. For instance in my area, there is a river that flows into Kenya and the Kenyan Government taps that water and generates electricity from it and also does irrigation with it.

I would also like us to focus on the point of comparative advantage, as a way of fighting food insecurity. For instance – (Member timed out.)

7.12
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the President was campaigning, he talked about hoes and our villagers are waiting for the hoes up to now. May I know the status now since we may not get the tractors because of the budget constraints? 

The President promised that every household in the whole country would be provided with hoes. Have you planned for them and if you haven’t, I would like to request this House that the minister goes back and plans for them before we pass this budget. Thank you.

7.13
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the presentation. Among the issues which the committee raised as challenges is the issue of persistent pests and diseases. I prefer that the budget, which is supposed to be allocated to NARO, should be retained because according to them 16.6 per cent of the NARO budget has been cut. We need to have that budget for NARO retained so that they can deal with research related issues so that crops and animals are not infested with diseases. 

My other concern is this issue of irrigation. We need to have it as a priority to plan for the dams so that problems of drought are mitigated. Apparently, we have dire problems of drought in – (Member timed out.)

7.13
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our object is now programme-based but I am not contented with the NAADS programme, under Operation Wealth Creation. We have not achieved what we set out to achieve during the older NAADS programme. Members formed groups and their output was more than what is being done now.

From the previous NAADS programme, cooperatives were being formed unlike now where people are given inputs and at the end of the day, they even consume the little that they get and remain without seeds to replant. I wonder what can be done to change this Operation Wealth Creation so that we can have - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition.

7.15
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is important for the ministry to revise its method of work, particularly in the event that the agricultural extension workers are being recruited but we also have the army involved in Operation Wealth Creation who are not necessarily trained and skilled in that field.

I am of the view that now that we have the professionals there, the army should be sent back to the barracks to do their military work.

Secondly, we have the issue of the low-lying areas versus the steep areas. Mr Speaker, last week I saw that Government had started distributing tractors to the low-lying areas. I would like the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to tell us the alternative that he has for the steep areas like Kabale, Kanungu, Kisoro and parts of Kabarole, Kasese, Mbale, Moroto and Bududa. As you give a tractor to a low-lying area, what alternative do you have for the steep areas?

Finally, there is the issue of agricultural credit. Mr Speaker, if we must transform as a country, then we must empower the poor farmer. However, the challenge that the poor farmers have is that they lack access to credit. I would have loved to hear of farmers being directed by Government on how they are going to access credit and not just credit but a fair size of the loan and credit that is insured.

Mr Speaker, with a reasonable payment period, if most farmers can access credit with the terms that are prescribed here, then even the ad hoc efforts that the Ministry of Agriculture is doing will be addressed by the farmers themselves. I beg to submit.

7.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to allay the fears of hon. Nzoghu that Government has started an insurance scheme for agriculture. We want to minimise the risks in agriculture so that the banks can give loans to farmers.

Secondly, the legislative framework is to be fast-tracked. Honourable members, with your assistance, we need to fast-track the Bills that are before the House so that we move faster. I know it is a very important issue because sometimes the Ministry of Finance asks us what we want to fund because of lack of laws and policies. Therefore, we are working very fast and I would like to say that we passed some policies recently, which are in line with fast-tracking the legislative framework.

The national irrigation policy is being worked out. We have agreed on the issues that we had with the Ministry of Water and Environment and we are going to get the policy through to Cabinet in two or three weeks’ time.

Mr Speaker, on the tractors and the hoes, they have been provided for in this budget. We have 2 million hoes, 168 tractors and as we mentioned earlier, we are going to avail tractors throughout the country including the implements. One should be able to use a planter, a slasher, a bailer, a shaft cutter or even a combined harvester so that people can do large-scale agriculture.

Government is also going to assist the private sector to access - because it is not always Government; the private sector must come in. Therefore, we are going to provide a conducive environment for the private sector to access tractors and implements in modern agriculture.

About the extension workers and NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation, Mr Speaker, there is no conflict between NAADS, OWC and extension. As we talk, one of the Bills that will soon be tabled in Parliament is that of NAADS so that we streamline some of these things so as not to leave lacunas in the whole agenda. So, there is no conflict because extension workers are not storekeepers and they are not suppliers. They are scientists who are supposed to give agronomical and scientific knowledge to our farmers. Therefore, the others who are distributing things are a different matter. 

Fish farming is going to be high on our agenda now that we are fighting illegal fishing. Certainly, those people who have been practicing illegal fishing have been made redundant. We need to find a solution to this and the solution is getting into fish farming or aquaculture. We are going to come up with a very comprehensive plan and strategy for aquaculture. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (MS CD Oketayot Lowila): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Amongin said that we did not come out strongly on the issue of research and innovation in the report. However, I think among the two critical issues I pointed out of the many recommendations that the committee made was the issue of maintaining the National Agricultural Research Organisation’s budget. This is because the overall policy objectives of the ministry talk of strengthening research and yet when you look at the budget, there is a cut. That is why we came out with the recommendation that the budget of NARO should not be cut but maintained at the level of the last financial year.

On irrigation, the committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the National Irrigation Policy and the Irrigation Master Plan before the end of June 2017. The report indicates June 2016 but I would like to correct that it is June 2017. We expect Government to meet this deadline. In fact, we have even agreed with the Committee on Budget that if we don’t see this policy in place, it should affect the approval of the budget. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and thank you honourable members, for the serious debate on this sector. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH

7.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Committee on Health on the sector’s ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018.

Mr Speaker, before I present the report, I would like to submit the minutes and copy of the report of the Committee on Health on the sector ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I have 25 Votes and I beg to be allowed to present a summary on page 6, which shows the total allocation of Shs 1,826.10 billion. In the interest of time, I request to be allowed to highlight a few issues the committee thought were important in order to manage or prevent a crisis in the next financial year – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I propose that you deal with the figures and we will come back to those highlights.

DR BUKENYA: I wanted to capture the figures of those particular Votes because it may take us an hour to complete. However, I will do as advised. I will emphasise the figures with particular reference to the Votes.

I will start with Vote 151 – Uganda Blood Transfusion Services which was allocated Shs 9.92 billion. In the previous years, it was supported by the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), which withdrew. If they are not supported with at least Shs 5 billion in the next financial year, we are going to have an increase in maternal mortality because of shortage of blood. They are required to collect 240,000 units of blood in a year but with shortage of funding, they may not make 150,000 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I propose that you deal with the figures first and come back to make the comments.

DR BUKENYA: Vote 14 – Ministry of Health– Shs 963.92 billion
Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute – Shs 52.29 billion
Vote 115 – Uganda Heart Institute – Shs 18.12 billion
Vote 116 – National Medical Stores – Shs 237.96 billion
Vote 134 – Health Service Commission – Shs 5.45 billion
Vote 151 – Uganda Blood Transfusion Service – Shs 9.92 billion
Vote 161 – Mulago Hospital Complex – Shs 74.83 billion
Vote 162 – Butabika Hospital – Shs 12.55 billion

Vote Regional Referral Hospitals
Vote 163 – Arua Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 6.7 billion
Vote 164 – Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 7.3 billion
Vote 165 – Gulu Referral Hospital – Shs 7.08 billion
Vote 166 – Hoima Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 7.12 billion
Vote 167 – Jinja Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 8.63 billion - (Interruption)

MR KIPTERIT: Mr Speaker, what the chairman is reading is different from what I see here. Is it procedurally right for him to continue reading something that is not on the iPads?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are you looking at a different document from the one we have?

DR BUKENYA: This is table 4, which is on page 6 – budget outlook. I am sorry, Mr Speaker. Let me read the one on page 29, which is the proposed appropriation to the sector and I will do the totals. 

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health – Shs 960,895,238,389
Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute – Shs 52,237,973,249
Vote 115 – Uganda Heart Institute – Shs 18,036,916,525
Vote 116 – National Medical Stores – Shs 237,964,466,777
Vote 134 – Health Service Commission – Shs 5,452,500,858
Vote 151 – Uganda Blood Transfusion Service – Shs 9,637,713,457 
Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital – Shs 73,579,237,478 
Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital – Shs 12,551,583,600
Vote 163 - Arua Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 6,308,772,928
Vote 164 – Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 6,985,227,250 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the same figure that I am looking at and it is what he is reading. Do you have a different figure? Then you are looking at a different document. We are now on page 30.

DR BUKENYA:  Vote 165 – Gulu Regional Referral Hospital - Shs 6,894,846,769
Vote 166 - Hoima Referral Hospital – Shs 6,822,223,870
Vote 167 – Jinja Referral Hospital – Shs 8,123,851,526
Vote 168 - Kabale Regional Referral Hospital – Shs 6,259,894,258
Vote 169 - Masaka Referral Hospital – Shs 6,582,986,228
Vote 170 – Mbale Referral Hospital – Shs 10,096,354,595
Vote 171 – Soroti Referral Hospital – Shs 5,797,541,447
Vote 172 - Lira Referral Hospital – Shs 6,302,377,190
Vote 173 – Mbarara Referral Hospital – Shs 7,838,862,127
Vote 174 – Mubende Referral Hospital – Shs 5,565,213,785
Vote 175 – Moroto Referral Hospital – Shs 5,579,772,593
Vote 176 – Naguru Referral Hospital – Shs 6,715,476,425
Vote 304 – Uganda Virus Research Institute - Shs 1,852,710,752. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were those things that you wanted to highlight, in two minutes.

DR BUKENYA: Yes, I will highlight issues in no particular order. One of the issues is about maternal health, which is captured on page 23 under Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. It was previously funded by Presidents’ Emergency Plan for Aids Relief (PEPFAR) which withdrew and if not assisted with at least Shs 5 billion, in the mid-year, we may struggle with shortage of blood.

The second is the Preventive Health Care (PHC) budget on page 27 where we are emphasising Preventive Health Care. However, money going to Health Centres II, III and IV is very little to be used for extension and education. We proposed for Shs 5 billion addition.

Let us go to Mulago Hospital on page 24. Capital development allocated was Shs 22 billion but all that is counterpart funding for the rehabilitation and super specialisation of Mulago yet the hospital had on-going projects, which are going to stall for a whole year. 

Again on Mulago, there is a challenge of the operationalisation of the new Mulago Hospital, which I am happy - maybe the minister will advise - because it is not catered for in the budget.

The third issue is about human resources for health. There is a table on page 12 that talks about specialist staffing. These specialists teach interns in the regional referrals. However, there is no hospital with a staffing of 50 per cent. This means that even with the doctors we are training, we may get more Nakaseke incidents. So, we urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find a way of motivating - part of the reason why the Ministry of Health is underperforming on wages is because despite the provision of wages to specialists, they are not attracted to regional referral hospitals because they are not motivated. We have advised allocating money to motivate those specialists because they perform many roles.

On operationalising Health Centres IV, most of them are not operational because of anaesthetists. There are about 300 anaesthetists in the country and the ministry has a budget for training. However, the ministry has not emphasised training of anaesthetists yet they are critical cadres and they are preventing most of the Health Centres IV from operating. 

Secondly, even after training, the anaesthetists remain on the same scale and this would require an extra budget of about Shs 300 million, a year to make them more comfortable and attract them there.

The other issue is about lunch allowance of staff. Health workers get lunch allowance of Shs 44,000 and Shs 66,000, depending on their cadre and that has been the case for the last 20 years. Mr Speaker, what they are getting is not commensurate with the current economic trends and nothing is being done in that direction. So, we have made a proposal to see that that is enhanced in order to curb extortions because you are likely to perform and extort if you do not have lunch. 

Mr Speaker, there was a strike this year of senior health officers under Makerere University. When it closed, a good number of Ugandans lost their lives. We were advised by the President, in the presence of the ministry, to plan and see how that category is looked after. For now, there is nothing in the budget and this would require an extra Shs 4.2 billion to look after them for a whole year.

Mr Speaker, for emphasis, health is a security issue. If we do not have blood, we lose many more people than those that die of bomb blasts.  Also, there is no way we are going to attain middle income status with an unhealthy population. Therefore, we urge the House to support us and cut at least 50 kilometres of roads out of the 5,000 kilometres in the budget to enhance the performance of the health sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you make these proposals to the Budget Committee? 

DR BUKENYA: They advised me to go back tomorrow because today, they are a bit engaged but I will make it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go and articulate those issues so that they can come in a proper way through the Committee on Budget. It will help the House. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate for adoption of the report of the Committee on Health and the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018? That is the motion for your debate. Let us have the debate, one minute each.

7.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am only touched by the lack of blood at the blood bank. The chairperson has proposed cutting money from the roads and other sectors but there is a lot of money allocated for workshops in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can we pick some money from the workshops and seminars in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

7.44
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mine is quickly on the issue of lunch allowance of the health staff. Why should we allocate Shs 66,000 for someone and then Shs 44,000 for another? When people come to the table to eat, they eat the same kind and amount of food. You cannot say that because you are on U4 or U1 salary scale, then your plate should be small and the other one big. (Laughter) It doesn’t work that way. It is better that we raise the figure. Let it be uniform and it should be at least Shs 100,000 so that our Ugandans are happy while working. Thank you so much.

7.45
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is on transport. I have looked through the reports and you have not said anything to do with transport and this is specifically the ambulances.

In the previous budgets, they told us they were working on the referral hospitals along the highways and the next thing should have been to consider districts that do not have ambulances. Has the burden been left to the MPs? 

I really wanted to talk about the lack of blood. I recently buried a woman who lost blood during delivery and when they ran to Mbale to get blood, there was no blood. For that one, we should have a reallocation so that –(Member timed out.)

7.46
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is on how to attract doctors and sustain them in the hard-to-reach areas. I have not seen that because doctors keep moving because of the little pay and they are not motivated to work in far places like Karamoja, Kitgum and others.

The other issue is sanitation and hygiene in health centres. When we go to those health centres, sanitation is lacking but I do not see in your allocation anything addressing sanitation and hygiene in health centres.

7.46
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like you to clarify whether Mulago Hospital will be free because people are saying that after renovation, villagers from Butaleja or other parts of the country who come to Mulago Hospital will pay. I would like it to be on record that there will be free services. If it is for payment, then honourable members, we can’t allocate money for Mulago Hospital when it is for only the rich people.

Secondly and lastly, Mr Speaker, when we were going to Toroma, I met the people of Usuk. They said they do not have a Health Centre IV and there are some two sub-counties in Usuk without Health Centres III. I would like to propose that before we pass this budget, we at least consider those people.

7.48
GEN. PECOS KUTESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to advise the health sector on feeding. In the army, we have developed a “ration cash allowance”. The rationale is that whether you are a general or a private, you require the same amount of calories, vitamins and the rest. Therefore, food should be the same at all levels no matter how big or how small you are, provided the food is commensurate with the current market prices. When you talk of - (Member timed out.)

7.49
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, may I know from the minister whether the ministry - because I know this one has budgetary implications - has a plan for rolling out establishment of Health Centres III for sub-counties and upgrading some existing health centres especially Health Centres III into Health Centres IV for counties and constituencies? If that plan is available, can it be laid before Parliament such that I do not keep writing letters that are not responded to because I will know then that for Ajuri County, my Health Centre IV will come in the financial year 2017/2018? Thank you.

7.50
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. Government had proposed to have 49 staff at Health Centres IV and 19 at Health Centres III. However, most of these Health Centres IV and III have less than the number of staff that is supposed to be there. I would like to ask the ministry what they are doing to deal with that. Have you provided any budget for this financial year? 

Secondly, this Parliament proposed that Government takes over posting medical officers to districts across the country because some districts are hard to reach and hard to stay but this could only be managed if Government posted the medical officers to such places. What have you done so far - (Member timed out.)

7.51
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to understand the plan the ministry has for Health Centres III. Health Centres III have maternity wards and most deliveries take place at night and yet most of these Health Centres III do not have electricity. I would like to understand the plan the ministry has for availing power to these health centres even if it is just solar power for the time being, as we wait for connections to the national grid.  Thank you.

7.52
COL. (Rtd) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is on the Uganda Heart Institute. The institute has very efficient doctors and nurses and they have got one of the best machines in East and Central Africa yet they are not fully facilitated to handle heart cases. 

However, in this report, the committee was informed that they had secured a loan to fund construction of a new home but the loan was not approved. In their recommendations, they do not emphasise that the Uganda Heart Institute should be fully facilitated and given the loan so that they can save the people who are going to India and South Africa to be treated when we have got efficient doctors and good machines. Our doctors keep running away to greener pastures. I am sure these 1,400 who are going to Libya - (Member timed out.)

7.53
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, mine is on the supply of drugs to district hospitals. I realised that some of these hospitals were built in the 1960s by the Obote 1 regime and they were meant for 80,000 people. For example, the hospital in Yumbe caters for about 400,000 people. I do not know the criterion the minister is using to supply drugs to such hospitals because it appears the number has remained constant yet the population has increased. Are they catered for in this budget? I thank you.

7.54
MR GEOFREY DHAMUZUNGU (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine are two. First of all, I represent over 180,000 people with two health centres. Each ward has three beds; one for men, one for women and one for children. 
They were – (Interjections) - you can imagine all those people with only two health centres.

In 2001, the President pledged a health centre IV in that constituency; I would like to inquire how far the pledge has gone. I counted and there are less than 10 staff per health centre. It is very deadly for Buyende and in particular, Budiope East Constituency. I thank you.

7.55
MR JOHN-BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My major concern is on the heavy reliance on donor funding for these health sector. The committee has noted that on the development budget allocation, which is about 55.5 per cent, 50 per cent is being footed by external financing leaving a meagre 5.5 to the Government of Uganda.
This exposes our citizens to a risk. Suppose donor funding stops? I am asking this question particularly, because of the recent Shs 3 billion diversion; it was earmarked for treatment of persons living positively with HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis and for prevention of malaria. However, it was diverted to procure sexual lubricants for homosexuals. Madam Minister, was this merely a dictatorial directive from the donors or a diversion within the ministry?

7.56
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you. Madam Minister, as you plan to revamp health centres IV in the country, how many will you upgrade into district hospitals? Will Amolatar Health Centre IV be upgraded to a district hospital? 

The diffuse of equipment in health facilities and patients sleeping down, what is your plan to replace the beds? For Hepatitis B, you are asking for Shs 49 billion for 20 new districts; are your plans adequate for on-going vaccination in the districts that Hepatitis B is prevalent?

7.57
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, chairperson, for the presentation. Countries that have addressed their disease burden have addressed the following issues:
    1. Water; 
    2. Sanitation;
    3. Hygiene (both personal and home); and 
    4. Nutrition.

What plans do you have to address these challenges so that we do not even need to go to the hospital because people are healthy?

Secondly is the issue of retention of health workers. One of the motivators is having staff houses; what plans do you have to retain the nurses by providing them accommodation in hard to reach and rural areas. 

Lastly, what plans do you have for the treatment of people who are tested positive with Hepatitis B? Thank you.

7.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Mr Chairman, for your report. Honourable minister, what is the state of health centres II? Are they still within the structure of health services or are they supposed to close?
Secondly, on the health centres IV, it is not only Ajuri and Usuk which do not have health centres IV but also Igara West. The Minister of Health visited and said next year we shall have - up to now there is nothing. Therefore, I totally agree with the proposal that you table the list and programme for you to operationalise health centres IV for all constituencies so that we are all informed. Thank you.

7.59
MR GEORGE NSAMBA (NRM, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my constituency, the people are very worried about health centres II. The President, in his manifesto, stressed the idea that there will be a health centre in every parish and people had hope. However, again there is a view that they are going to be phased out and it is very disturbing.

I would like to ask the minister and the chairperson; what is happening? If they are phased out, what is the nearest time of the health centres to be restored? They have been doing a good job for us despite – (Member timed out.)

8.00
MR PETER OGWANGA (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): First of all, I would like to thank colleagues and the chairperson of the committee. I would like to confirm and it should be captured on the Hansard; Palam Sub County does not have a health centre II or a health centre III. 

Secondly, Katakwi Town Council does not have a health centre III. Thirdly, Usuk Sub County, which is the county headquarters, does not have a health centre III.

Therefore, Madam Minister, I am aware we approved a loan here in the Ninth Parliament regarding the issues of health centres III and health centres IV. When are you going to help us who do not have health centres, like colleagues have asked? I thank you.

8.01
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is to re-echo what my colleague has talked about regarding health centres II. We have got some parishes that are bigger than some sub counties and are currently being served by health centres II. However, there is that Government proposal to close these health centres II and each time we go to these villages, they ask about the fate of these health centres II. What are they going to do in case Government phases them out?

What plan does the ministry have for such big parishes that are currently being served by health centres II and yet the ministry’s proposal is to phase them out? Thank you.

8.02
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also have the same problems in my constituency of Bukomansimbi North. Bukomansimbi Town Council does not have a health centre III. Bigasa, which is supposed to be a health centre IV, the health workers and the patients share beds. 

Kitanda Sub County Health Centre III does not have a maternity ward and Kigangainzi, which is supposed to be a health centre III, does not have a maternity ward and staff quarters. Therefore, Madam Minister, I hope you consider the people of Bukomansimbi North. Thank you.

803
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the chairperson, for your very good report. I would like to emphasise one thing you mentioned in the report about operationalising health centres IV. Some of you may have read in the newspaper two weeks ago where the Red Pepper reported that in Atirir Health Centre IV, the doctors use charcoal to sterilise the equipment.

I would like to emphasise the aspect of operationalising health centres IV because they are quite helpful in provision of health services. Thank you very much.

8.05
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be informed of the plans the ministry has for some health centres IV, which are extending services beyond boundaries of districts. An example is in Ntwetwe County, which the Chairperson of the Committee on Health is very much aware that it serves the people of his county of Bukuya and Mukoko in Kibale District. However, the funding the health centre receives is only for Kyankwanzi and yet it is the only health centre IV in the district. 

Secondly, what are the plans for districts, which have less than 50 per cent health centres III like Kyankwanzi in the next financial year? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is an honourable member who is showing me his bowtie to attract my attention. (Laughter)

8.04
MR BOAZ NINSIIMA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, what is being done about the general cleanliness around the hospitals and health centres? When we visit the health centres, we find the compounds very bushy, the toilets are full and the places look messy. It is not good for a patient to come to the hospital and contract other diseases. 

Like many others, I have a challenge of one subcounty not having a health centre III and that is Kiziba Sub County. When the minister visited us recently, she emphasised that it will be built very soon. However, it has not been mentioned in the ministerial policy statement and I would like to know why. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we close this debate now? 

8.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I would like to start with the issue of lunch allowances for staff. I agree with you that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to give us money to increase the lunch allowance for the staff.

Lack of blood is a serious issue and I agree with the Members; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has got some money and they should consider increasing the budget of blood so that we can save our mothers.

Mr Speaker, an ambulance is a priority for us as a ministry; unfortunately, it is one of the unfunded priorities. However, we hope that in the coming financial year, this will be considered. 


My colleagues have raised a lot of issues on the health centres II, III, IV and the Government hospitals. The creation of new districts and new administrative units in the districts is expanding the opportunity for having more services for the people. After the policy, each district will have a district hospital and every constituency will have a health centre IV and a health centre III at sub county level. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, as you are all aware, this Parliament approved a loan from the World Bank towards improving maternal new born health, which is targeting the health facilities. As the committee has recommended, health centres III are going to be upgraded to health centres IV in 29 constituencies without health centres IV. Also, 93 health centres III will be constructed in sub counties without any Government health facilities. Some of the health centres II will be upgraded into health centres III especially where there are no health centres III in the sub counties. 

Also, it has been considered that sub counties which are too huge or so wide apart, where one health centre III cannot serve the entire sub county, there will be a consideration to upgrade another health centre II to a health centre III. 

Colleagues, right now the process of mapping the health facilities is on-going and we will bring the list of the facilities to be upgraded or constructed in the sub counties in the constituencies before this Parliament - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I cannot give a definitive date but we shall bring the list of the facilities for upgrading. 

Honourable members, I would like to ask you to give us time; we shall bring the list because I do not know how far the committee has gone with the exercise of mapping and verification across the country.

There was a question about Mulago Hospital. Mulago Hospital, like any other, has free services. If you go to any district or regional hospital, we have grade A and B. It means that there is a private unit for people who wish to pay for services and there is one where services are free. In the same vein, we have grade A and B in Mulago; one side will remain a national referral hospital and there will be a private unit like in any other hospital that has grades A and B. 

A lot has been said about Mulago but I would like to assure you that services in Mulago will remain free for upper Mulago as it has been. Lower Mulago is where the specialised services are going to be paid for.

Mr Speaker, the issue of no electricity at health facilities especially health centres III, where mothers are delivering -even health centres IV where power has not been connected - we have solar power projects. In some centres, the solar is functional. However, we are working to ensure that some of the solar that is not functional is repaired and to also acquire solar power for other facilities that do not have light especially where we have maternity wards. 

Mr Speaker, there was a question about hygiene and sanitation in the hospitals; I agree with colleagues that it is an attitude and mind-set problem. I believe we can work together to ensure that hygiene and sanitation is a priority especially at the health facilities.

As a ministry, our roadmap for sanitation, hygiene and nutrition is towards prevention and health promotion, which has been very clearly captured in the budget. The chairperson has said that we are requesting for increment of budget at the lower facilities that is catering for primary prevention and health promotion.

Staff houses; this is an issue that we are working on especially in the development budget for the districts so that they are in position to cater for some of the facilities required for the staff.

Mr Speaker, the Heart Institute is working towards acquiring a new home. They are working towards expansion and the report has reached the Ministry of Finance so that a budget is allocated to them to enable them start the new home where they will be in position to operate more people per week.

Finally, the issue concerning the loan will be responded to by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that he can assure us how that will work. However, as a ministry, we are still committed to ensure that health services improve for our people and that they remain free.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Micheal Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most of the issues have already been talked about by the minister but I would like to thank hon. Okupa for giving us a proposal. I will forward it to hon. Lugoloobi for consideration. 

About lunch allowances, our proposal is uniform for everyone but we are only requesting for an increment. 

Concerning the Uganda Heart Institute, they had got a possible source for the money but I think there were issues with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which hon. Bahati will be at liberty to explain. 

Intern doctors are catered for in the budget; it is only the postgraduate group who are not catered for and the senior officers, for whom we request for additional funding.

Concerning shortage of staff at health centres III and IV plus hygiene and sanitation, it is about supervision. We realised that the Ministry of Health has a challenge in supervising primary health care units. Therefore, we have organised an engagement with the Ministry of Local Government and we would like them, as a cluster with Finance, Local Government and Public Service together with Ministry of Health, to come up with a formula early in the financial year in order to mitigate this.

Lastly, is the issue from my neighbour from Kyakwanzi about people coming from Congo and other parts to Kyakwanzi for treatment. Those who have travelled all over East Africa are aware that as a Ugandan, you cannot access free health care services anywhere in East Africa. However, people from South Sudan, Congo, Rwanda, Burundi and Kenya and in most cases Kenyans get priority free treatment in hospitals in Kapchorwa. 

We, therefore, believe that when we bring in health insurance, we shall find away - and this takes about 30 per cent of our expenditure. We think if we come up with a health insurance scheme, we will be able to control the costs and losses in that direction.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you, honourable members and Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Can you throw some light on the issue concerning the loan on the Uganda Heart Institute?

DR BUKENYA: The Uganda Heart Institute reported that they had secured a loan and finished all the paper work but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development declined to endorse the loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any information on the record?

8.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I will check and come back to the House at the next sitting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2017/18 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had earlier communicated that we would be able to finish all the work that was pending but we were not able to handle the last report because there are some technical issues that need to be resolved and it cannot be resolved now.

Therefore, I am begging for your indulgence that we sit tomorrow for that item so that we finish with all the ministerial sectoral committee reports so that we can then handover to the Budget committee for the next processes. I seek for your indulgence that we sit tomorrow and not Monday; let us trade it off for Monday. Can we sit tomorrow at 11 O’clock for that one item? It will be for about two or three hours and we will break before lunch.

Honourable members, thank you very much for persevering and sitting this long. We have been able to complete most of the work we set ourselves to do today except for this report, which we will handle tomorrow at 11 o’clock. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 11 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 8.21 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 26 May 2017 at 11.00 a.m.) 
