Tuesday, 22 May 2012

Parliament met at 10.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is related to one aspect of our Rules of Procedure for election of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. However, I am finding myself in a bit of difficulty because of the numbers. I think I will suspend the House for five minutes. The clerk should ring the bell so that members come and we handle the approval. House suspended for five minutes.

(The House was suspended at 10. 35 a.m.)

(On resumption at 10.53 a.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to complete one aspect of the rules for election of the Members to the East African Legislative Assembly, specifically to deal with the candidates independent of political parties. I am required to nominate a team of 20 Members of Parliament, and this is what I have invited you to approve. Can the Clerk present the names. 

1.	Hon. Kitatta Aboud
2.	Hon. Margaret Baba Diri
3.	Hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo
4.	Hon. Evelyn Anite
5.	Hon. Ssentongo Teopista
6.	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya
7.	Hon. Stephen Ochola
8.	Hon. Namayanja Florence 
9.	Hon. Mohammed Kawuma
10.	Hon. Fred Ebil
11.	Hon. Jacinto Ogwal
12.	Hon. Ababiku Jessica 
13.	Hon. Cadet Benjamin
14.	Hon. Kenneth Lubogo
15.	Hon. Nalubega Mariam 
16.	Hon. Atim Joy Ongom
17.	Hon. Ninsiima Ronah
18.	Hon. Sanjay Tanna 
19.	Hon. Lakot Susan 
20.	Hon. Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth

THE SPEAKER: Those are the 20 members. I now put the question that the 20 members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That was the main business for the day. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister had something to report to the House.

10.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you. Our side has no problem with that but I still wanted to bring up another matter.

I rise to report in relation to rule 13 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, which requires that the two sides of the House carry out consultations with the view of reaching consensus on representation of the nine members be sent to EALA. I want to report that my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition and his team and I, the Leader of Government Business and our team, have carried out consultations and we want to report that we have, unfortunately, not reached any consensus.

There are two divergent positions. The NRM – the Government side - presented a position that since NRM is reflected politically in the country, we should have representation of six. First of all, we agreed, whatever representation, the process of getting this representation must have due regard to gender, different political opinion and special interest groups. This can be achieved by either side in the process of getting their people. The NRM proposed that - reflecting all those divergences - they should have six, the Opposition should have two and the Independents should have one. The Opposition did not accept this proposal. 

The Opposition had a different proposal. They also agree on the numbers six, two and one, but for them the six should be a representative of each of the political parties in Parliament - there are six parties - and then one Independent and two should be shared between FDC and NRM. That is their position.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we did not accept this and they did not accept our position. We agreed that we will come and report to the House that we had failed to generate consensus on the matter. I beg to report 

11.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, it is true that we were invited for a meeting yesterday at 1.30 p.m. by hon. David Bahati, who called my office. I advised him that we as the Opposition needed time to assemble, and indeed he said the best thing is that we can have the meeting most likely the following day when we have assembled the teams. 

At 2.30 p.m., I got an SMS from the Prime Minister talking about the same thing, that we needed to have a meeting. I am doing this to bring everything into perspective. At that specific time, our colleagues in the NRM had started the process of the primaries and we said we will meet the following day. Now, when we met today, we were supposed to have met at 8 o’clock but we delayed a bit because I think everybody had a late night. So, the meeting started at about almost 9.00a.m. 

It is true that the Prime Minister brought that position and the Opposition also brought their position. We also told the Prime Minister and his team that when they were making the Treaty, I think those who made the Treaty did not take into consideration the ruling party because if they had taken it into consideration, they would have mentioned numerical strength. I am happy that the Prime Minister by then was one of the ministers who participated in making the Treaty. 

We even gave him examples of the nine members of EALA of each country. We gave him Burundi as an example. We had thought it had about half a million people but he told us they have about five million people, but it has nine EALA members. Rwanda has nine million people and has nine EALA members. Uganda has 33 million people and has nine EALA members. Tanzania has 46 million people and nine EALA members. Kenya has 42 million people and nine EALA members. So, the issue of numerical strength should have applied also in the population as they were making the EALA Treaty, but they never considered it. 

Madam Speaker, we told them that the best way forward would be to seek interpretation of this rule. The Attorney-General, who was there then, said that the Speaker had directed him to go and seek an interpretation of Article 51 concerning various political parties and others. He said that the Speaker told him to only go for Article 51(1) which talks about term limits, that you never directed him to look at political parties. So, imagine a meeting where there was urgent need for interpretation but what the Attorney-General advised us was that we needed to go for that letter. So, we are at crossroads. 

What do we notice? Nominations are taking place. We were told the rules were gazetted yesterday and our colleagues in the NRM have already done the primaries but other political parties have not done the primaries and the nominations close tomorrow. So, in that regard, we failed to understand. We felt that maybe the Clerk was following the calendar of our colleagues in the NRM and not other parties because she would have given everybody an opportunity to finish their primaries if at all the process was agreed on, so that they can move in tandem. But nominations are now taking place and we do not know under what rules we are proceeding. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, during the amendment of our rules, we made a proposal to insert 13(2) in paragraph 13 and it was rejected. Our proposal was clearly saying that all the six political parties represented in the Ninth Parliament be represented in EALA and that was rejected. In the meeting, we discovered that our colleagues came with a fixed side and we could not do anything. In that regard, political parties are at a big loss. They do not know which rules we are supposed to follow, and here our colleagues are still insisting on numerical strength, which is not in the Treaty. The only person who can help us in this matter is the court. That is what I wanted to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, apart from the letter that I wrote to the Attorney-General one year ago, on the Floor of this House when we had the last stalemate on the rules, I directed that the Attorney-General should seek a certificate of urgency to have the dispute we are handling here, handled. That is on the Hansard. I asked them to seek a certificate of urgency in the East African Court of Justice. So, what else do you want me to do? 

Honourable members, as far as I am concerned, we have amended the rules. It is still my intention to conduct the election on 30th of this month because EALA have sent their programme and members should be sworn in on 4th June. So, I want to appeal to you, all the parties, really to bend over backwards to get some accommodation so that we can have the election on the 30th June. In the meantime, if you still fail to come to an agreement, we will reconvene on the 28th at 2.00 p.m. to take a vote if necessary. 

The other thing is, I do not like members who sit with the Speaker in a meeting and then come here to tell lies to the country. I called the leaders of the NRM and I called leaders of the Opposition parties. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you were in that meeting, the DP whip was there, the UPC whip was there, hon. Otada was there for the independents, hon. Bahati was there, and we agreed on the timetable in my board room. So, do not tell lies to the country. We sat together until 8.00 O’clock in the night, it was a Monday, and we agreed on the programme together. Gen Moses Ali was there, hon. Daudi Migereko was there and hon. Bahati was there. We were together. It was a programme of the Parliament agreed upon by the leadership of Parliament together in one meeting. So, you cannot jump out of it. I adjourn the House to 28th May at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 11.09 a.m. and adjourned until Monday, 28 May 2012 at 2.00. p.m.)
