Tuesday, 23 May 2006

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you. I hope you had a peaceful weekend. Last time when we adjourned, we hoped to have another meeting with you today.  But following that adjournment, we realised that the business, which we had requires ministers. This business is in form of Bills that have to be introduced by ministers. We also have reports, which ministers must respond to. As you know, the only people we approved last time were the Vice-President and the Prime Minister. Even these two have not yet been sworn-in.  

In view of the above, we decided to have another programme for Members to get information that will enable them to transact business as Members of Parliament. Programmes were drawn to that effect and the information was passed that this will be the programme for today. I must report that following the passage of amendments of certain rules of our Rules of Procedure, we were able to set up the two important committees that would facilitate us to complete what we are supposed to. 

These committees were set up by consultation by the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip. After the necessary consultations, the committees were set up and the position is as follows:

Committee on Appointments:

1.	Hon. William Wilson Nokrach 
2. 	Hon. Teopista Ssentongo Nabulya 
3. 	Hon. Grace Oburu 
4. 	Hon. Margaret Baba Diri 
5. 	Hon. George Wopuwa 
6. 	Hon. Jalia Bintu 
7. 	Hon. Loi Kiryapawo 
8. 	Hon. James Kubeketerya 
9. 	Hon. Rosemary Seninde 
10. 	Hon. Emma Boona 
11. 	Hon. Perez Ahabwe 
12. 	Hon. Matte Sibalinghana
13. 	Hon. Janet Okorimoe 
14. 	Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine 
15. 	Hon. Odonga Otto
16. 	Hon. Omolo Peter
17. 	Hon. Latif Sebaggala 
18. 	Hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello 
19. 	Hon. Louis Opange 
20. 	Hon. Piro Santos 

The above names are composed of NRM, FDC, DP, UPC and Independents. The formula depended on the strength of the party representation in the House.  

Committee on Rules:

1. 	Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
2. 	Hon. Adolf Mwesige 
3. 	Hon. Hope Mwesigye 
4. 	Hon. Freddie Ruhindi 
5. 	Hon. Urban Tibamanya 
6. 	Hon. Isaac Musumba 
7.	Hon. Kibedi Zaake 
8. 	Hon. Gagawala Wambuzi 
9. 	Hon. Fred Omach 
10. 	Hon. Musa Ecweru 
11. 	Hon. Omwony Ojwok
13. 	Hon. Bartille Toskin
14. 	Hon. Najjemba Muyinda 
15. 	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo 
16. 	Hon. Samuel Njuba 
17. 	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya 
18. 	Hon. John Baptist Kawanga 
19. 	Hon. Denis Obua
20. 	Hon. Ben Wacha 
21. 	Hon. Peter Nyombi 

I am glad to report that these committees have started functioning. 

The other matter is that last evening, I received communication from His Excellency, the President informing me about his nomination for appointment of ministers. As you are aware, the Constitution requires Parliament, through its Appointments Committee, to consider these names to approve or disapprove some of them. The committee is shortly meeting to consider these nominees. You will be given copies of the letter I received from His Excellency, the President because the committee is doing this on your behalf. 

But as far as the rules are concerned, the proceedings of the Appointments Committee are not open. Honourable members, as we see from the rules, although you may not belong to a committee, you are free to go and participate in any committee. However, you will get the copies of these names.  The only problem we had is this power but now it has come. Maybe late in the evening or tomorrow morning, you will have copies. You could advise us and we see how to proceed.  

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is either food for thought or just some clarification. There is a growing concern out there in the public that for the greater public good, the Appointments Committee would actually be made open. 

Secondly, if we could receive the names and make them available so that the public could also make their input in one way or the other. There should be an element of consultation and research carried out. But the present position of the rules does not look like it is helpful for that purpose.  Therefore, I thought I would put it to you either as food for thought or if there is a way we could help the process so that we enhance the participation of the rest of the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I believe hon. Okello-Okello, who was a Member of Parliament then, will agree with me that this issue came up in the 6th Parliament when we started enforcing the provisions in the Constitution about the appointment and approval by Parliament. This was seriously debated, but afterwards it was discarded. It was agreed that the committee should operate in the way it is operating now. 

But, since we are going to revisit the rules, you may have to bring this for more discussion and we see whether we could adjust the procedure we have been following. Maybe then we shall provide for the public to participate. It was realised that at the same time some malicious things may come in. These are the things that were considered when we decided to operate the way we do.  But we could visit it and see whether it is better to do the way we do it or do it the way you want it done.
  
3.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Opposition Chief Whip): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In view of the fact that we urgently need the Executive on the front bench so as to hasten business in Parliament, and further bearing in mind that the press today has made mention of certain names that are also part of the Appointments Committee, I do not know whether the NRM-O side will expeditiously handle this and substitute those names as speculated in the press, if it is true. This should be done to ensure that the Appointments Committee is not bogged down in executing its business. 

THE SPEAKER: I assure you that it will be done because yesterday we had a meeting before I received the names and this issue came up. We said that if one’s name appears on the list, it is not fair that they sit on the same committee. It is not even good saying, “Okay, when they are considering you, you go away and come back later.” If we leave others who are also on the same committee to consider an individual, they may be seen as trading with those staying behind. It is true that these names should be definitely substituted.

3.07
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County) Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw your attention to the fact that since the 8th Parliament started having sessions, Members of Parliament are not being registered in the book at the reception. Yet, our rules are clear: if a Member misses 15 consecutive sessions without notice, he loses his/her seat. Therefore, I am interested in seeing some Movement MPs lose their seats. We want to understand if it is a new kind of behaviour under multi-party politics. What remedies do we have now that we have failed to record our attendance to sessions these two days?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, you seem to think that it is only the Movement MPs that could miss the 15 times. Good enough, now it has not worked. This was drawn to my attention and I told the Clerk’s Office to put the book at the entrance. I do not know why it is not there but I will ensure that today if the book is not there, we buy one so that next time you come there is a book for you to sign.

3.08
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mine is also in relation to what hon. Wadri said. There are names, which appeared in the press yet have been read on the Rules and Privileges Committee. If the list, which is in the papers is true, a minister is not supposed to be on the committee of Parliament. What are we going to do in such a case?

Mr Speaker, it would have been good for the public to know about this list of proposed ministers because the public always gets information, which they could even pass to the Members of the Appointments Committee. This would assist them in their vetting exercise. Short of that, we could have a problem, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is a difference between the Rules Committee and the Appointments Committee. The reason why those on the list have to be removed from the Appointments Committee is because they have interest in the business that the Appointments Committee is doing.  However, as far as the Rules Committee is concerned, they are not yet ministers. Their names are on the list but we have not yet processed them. Therefore, they are Members of Parliament but with a possibility of becoming ministers. That list will not be affected. It is only the Appointments Committee that will be changed. 

As soon as the process is completed, anybody who will have been approved will cease to be a Member of the committee. I do not think they have started transacting business as of now. It is very important that the Rules Committee completes its work so that they lead us through the rules. We need to set ourselves rules so that Parliament effectively carries on its functions.

Otherwise, I received this list late yesterday. What you saw in the papers had a lot of inaccuracies. That confirms that there was no leakage from my Office or from state house. (Laughter)

3.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for making sure that there was no leakage. Mr Speaker, you have told that us that you are going to avail us with copies of the communication from Plot 1 Nakasero State House. I think for record purposes and for the Hansard, we request you to read it so that the public and Members get to know. There are a number of people who may collapse due to anxiety. We really appeal to you, since it is a public document, to avail it to the public. We shall get those copies later, since you have already promised to get us the copies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When eventually I release the copies, I will read the list but not now. 

3.12
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge):  I concur with the previous speaker. In order to end the speculation, the wrongful reporting and people breaking to your Office for leakages, why don’t you break the silence?  

THE SPEAKER: As far as you are concerned, you are entitled to this information because the committee is doing it on your behalf. However, why don’t I do it the way we normally do it? I am going to meet the Appointments Committee and as soon as this is done, you will definitely get the list. You are entitled to it. You will get it but let us do things as we are supposed to do them.

3.13
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Who is responsible for the announcement of the appointments? Is it the Speaker’s Office or is it the President? When we get the list here, what happens next?  

THE SPEAKER: No. I think it is done in two ways. The appointment is done by the President under the Constitution, it is not done by Parliament; Parliament merely approves or disapproves.  Parliament cannot make any substitutions. Our mandate is just to approve or disapprove. We then communicate to the President who announces his Cabinet. However, this list is still in form of something, which has come to me. It comes to me because of you. I think you are entitled to getting this information. 

3.14
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad this time that the list of nominees has been sent to you. The time is now for you to tell the country that you are in charge and you have the authority. Therefore, I will be glad when you authoritatively read those names. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)
      
THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the letter, which was addressed to me reads: 

“Rt hon. Edward Ssekandi, 
Speaker of Parliament. 

Subject: Nomination of names for Cabinet for parliamentary approval

Reference is made to my earlier communication to you on 8 May, requesting Parliament to increase the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers, and yours of 19 May, communicating the approval by Parliament on my request on the same matter. 

In accordance with Article 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution, I hereby forward to you names and curriculum vitae of the Members I have nominated as ministers for parliamentary approval as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”

Signed by the President. 

There is no harm to release the list because this is public information and this is to correct the impression, which was in the papers. The list is:

1.	Hon. Kivejinja Kirunda
2.	Hon. Amama Mbabazi
3.	Hon. Beatrice Wabudeya 
4.	Hon. Eriya Kategaya 
5.	Hon. Henry Kajura 
6.	Hon. Adolf Mwesige
7.	Hon. Hilary Onek 
8.	Hon. Crispus Kiyonga 
9.	Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere 
10.	Hon. Geraldine Bitamazire 
11.	Hon. Ezra Suruma 
12.	Hon. John Nasasira 
13.	Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
14.	Hon. Daudi Migereko 
15.	Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda
16.	Hon. Syda Bbumba 
17.	Hon. Janat Mukwaya 
18.	Hon. Maria Mutagamba 
19.	Hon. Omara Atubo
20.	Hon. Stephen Mallinga 
21.	Hon. Sam Kutesa 
22.	Hon. Mulira 
23.	Hon. Kahinda Otafiire
24.	Hon. Dorothy Hyuha 
25.	Hon. Jane Kabakumba 
26.	Hon. Nyombi Thembo
27.	Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi 
28.	Hon. Batalingaya Kamanda 
29.	Hon. Richard Nduhuura 
30.	Hon. Fred Omach 
31.	Hon. Omwony Ojwok
32.	Hon. Salim Saleh
33.	Hon. Semakula Kiwanuka
34.	Hon. Okello Oryem
35.	Hon. Isaac Musumba 
36.	Hon. Lukia Isanga 
37.	Hon. James Kinobe 
38.	Hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana
39.	Hon. Suleiman Madada 
40.	Hon. Chekamondo Ruykiya
41.	Hon. Otaala Emanuel 
42.	Hon. Werikhe Kafabusa
43.	Hon. Urban Tibamanya 
44.	Hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka
45.	Hon. Jennipher Namuyangu 
46.	Hon. Moses Ecweru 
47.	Hon. David Wakikona 
48.	Hon. Peter Lokeris 
49.	Hon. Tom Butime 
50.	Hon. Nelson Gagawala 
51.	Hon. Hope Mwesigye 
52.	Hon. Sebunya Kibirige
53.	Hon. Fred Mukisa 
54.	Hon. Bright Rwamirama 
55.	Hon. Gabriel Opio
56.	Hon. Serapio Rukundo 
57.	Hon. Simon D’Ujanga 
58.	Hon. Jessica Eriyo 
59.	Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki
60.	Hon. Simon Ejua 
61.	Hon. John Byabagambi 
62.	Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa 
63.	Hon. James Baba 
64.	Hon. Matia Kasaija 
65.	Hon. Freddie Ruhindi 
66.	Hon. Alintuma Nsambu
67.	Hon. Nsaba Buturo
68.	Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu 

Now, honourable members, that is the position. I think we should –(Interruption)

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, you will forgive me, but I did not hear the name of Henry Banyenzaki. I think it was skipped.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the good thing is that you authorised the President to appoint 69. He has sent me only 68.  Honourable members, let the committee go and consider this. In future, the procedure is that where you find that we do not have to meet here, the Speaker does not need to come to adjourn. There is an administrative communication, which is normally posted for you to get informed. We had decided that the programme for today would be handled by the administrative staff of Parliament. 

As I have said, the Committee on Rules will soon complete its work. As soon as it finishes its work, we shall come here to be briefed so that we go through the rules and adopt them for our purpose. Otherwise, if we do not then it will be the discretion of the Speaker to fill the gaps.  However, we would rather want to depend on something in writing rather than the Speaker’s discretion because some times discretion may have a problem. Therefore, you should go on with your programme for today and you will definitely be informed of other things. 

I thank you for your kind attention. House is adjourned and you will be informed when to come back. The process of approving the ministers, as you have seen the list, is a long one. It may take us a day or two. But as soon as we finish, the House will have been fully constituted and we shall be in position to transact business.  

(The House rose at 3.16 p.m. and adjourned sine die)


