Wednesday, 25 May 2011 

Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Rosemary Najjemba Muyinda.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Najjemba, I congratulate you upon your election to the Ninth Parliament. Let me hand you the instruments of your office that are in this bag. In here are the Rules of Procedure, the Constitution and the Powers and Privileges of Parliament. I wish you good luck. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I was in my office watching on the monitor to see how many Members were here for us to start at 10 O’clock. I would like to urge you to try to keep time for us to always start early.

Secondly, I did not want to spoil hon. Rosemary Najjemba’s moment, but I wanted to remind the Members that we do not clap while in the Chamber. We applaud by foot stamping. I hope you will observe that next time.

Thirdly, hon. Members, as you are aware, the President of Uganda was sworn in on 12 May 2011. It is now a fortnight and part of the work of this Parliament is to assist the President to govern this country by vetting the appointments he makes. I have been waiting for the various political parties to indicate to me the names of the Members on the Appointments Committee, but so far only one political party has sent in the names. So, I am hindered from constituting the Appointments Committee. 

In that regard, I would like to appeal to the political parties to quickly send me the names so that we can carry out our constitutional obligation to assist the President run the country. As I have said before, I will handle the Independents myself. Thank you.

Lastly, hon. Members, last time we had a number of issues raised on orientation. But I would like to call upon all Members to move with us so that we are together. I now would like to invite hon. Asuman Kiyingi to respond to the issues raised before we go to the other business.

10.54
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were last here, Members, after we had taken them through the Rules of Procedure, raised a number of issues. Many of them suggested amendments to the rules. I recall that you guided the House that that was not the session for amending the rules, but rather to acquaint the Members with the rules as they are now. You also added that once the committee on rules is constituted, it will look into the proposals as had been aired by the Members.

My response, therefore, will be very general. I should say that we noted all the observations and suggestions for amendments. In that regard, I am not going to answer specifically every question that was raised. I will only respond to the questions that were raised generally which I thought I should comment on.

The distinguished Members who have been in this House for a very long time I am sure will be able to share the wisdom and experience and chip in here and there to enrich our induction. 

One of the questions raised was: can one appeal the decision of the party whip with respect to designation or removal from a committee? My answer is, yes, but within the party. You go to your party and you sort that issue internally, but it should not be an issue for debate within the House. But if the directive of the party whip has a bearing on a Member’s right to act as a legislator, then the Speaker may be approached for advice. But with respect to membership of committees and the chairpersonships, that is the responsibility of the party whips as per rule 134(2) and (5).

There was also a repeated question with respect to Independents. What is their status and how do they get on committees? Independents were advised that they can apply to the Clerk to join committees of their choice and according to rule 134(4), after they have applied to the Clerk, the Speaker shall accordingly ensure that the Members join the committees of their choice.

There was also a proposal that the rules should be amended immediately to allow for Independents to contest for chairpersonships of committees. It is a good proposal but for now, chairpersons of committees are the responsibility of the parties. An Independent who may so wish to contest for the chair should negotiate with the parties if there are committees which are – oversight and accountability committees, for example, belong to the Opposition and the other committees with the government whip.

There was a question as to what constitutes decent traditional wear. I think when the rule talks about decent traditional wear, it assumes that actually there is indecent traditional wear and I think the Speaker elaborated that point very well. I do not have to add on to that. Decent is decent.

What happens if our rules are violated? The custodianship for these rules is the Speaker and the committee on rules. If the rules are violated; or you have misbehaved in the House, you are referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and the committee investigates any matter which is referred to it and recommends appropriate action to the full House.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just need a clarification. The other time I asked about people who could have been summoned by the committee on rules and they never appeared. Now you are still telling us about that committee where a case is referred; is it by choice that I can decide not to appear before the committee or there is something which should force me to go and appear before the committee because of my indiscipline? You need to clarify that. 

The other time hon. Nyombi explained, but I did not get it very clearly. He insisted that some people were referred to the committee but they never appeared before the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us first take the responses because there were many questions. Let us take the responses first and then we shall give you an opportunity to ask.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure, with respect to the Appointments Committee, the provision is that the report of the Appointments Committee is submitted to the House and adopted without debate. The Member suggested that the rules should be explicit on the conditions under which a Member can be approved or disapproved. Usually, the appointments are for constitutional or statutory offices and the requirements or qualifications are provided in the enabling statutes or even in the Constitution. The qualifications, the experience required and integrity are all provided in the enabling statutes, and before the committee approves any name, it assures itself that the legal requirements have all been met by the respective candidates submitted for endorsement.

There was a suggestion by a Member that there was an apparent contradiction between rules 144 and 146. On close scrutiny of those rules, I do not think there is actually a contradiction because rule 144 says, “The chairperson of the committee shall report to the House any appointments approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.”

Then 146(1) says, “Where the President’s nominee is not approved by the committee, the President may appeal to the House to take a decision on the matter.” 

A Member was saying that if the House is not allowed to debate the report of the committee, how come the President can appeal to it?

My response to this is that when we appoint the Appointments Committee, we are actually ceding some powers and responsibilities to it. And because of its importance, we entrust the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to attend that committee and once they have made a decision for the efficient running of public affairs, we say, “Let us proceed”. I did give an explanation as to why it is not proper that we should subject every nominee to a public debate in the plenary and I do not have to repeat those arguments. So, rule 144 is talking about ourselves as a House. We have entrusted this committee with the responsibility to approve and if it does, we proceed. But if the President has appointed a person and the person is rejected, and he is not satisfied with the reasoning, he has a right to appeal to the whole House and I think there is no contradiction.

Hon. Kiwalabye suggested improvements in the voting system to save time. Why not? Our rules can be adjusted once the appropriate technology is procured. 

There was a suggestion, I think from hon. Mulongo, to the effect that we should allow digital files and laptops within the House. That is subject to debate and I have no problem with it –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Does someone have a phone which is on? Can you please switch it off?

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Contents of speeches; it is stated under this rule that it is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions. And a Member was wondering why in committees of the House, there is use of abusive language. Reference is made to “thug”, and “this man”. 

The rule is very clear; it applies to Members both in the committees and plenary. And may I also say, with respect to decorum in language that Members are referred to as “honourable” by colleagues, and not by themselves. It is not right to say I am hon. Asuman Kiyingi. It is others who call you honourable, but you are Asuman Kiyingi. We have the title “Right Honourable” reserved for the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister and their Deputies. So, when you are addressing the Prime Minister, you say, “Rt Hon. Prime Minister” or “Rt Hon. Speaker”, or “Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker.”

Under rule 26, we are supposed to get the Order Paper and the business of the House well in advance. A Member was complaining that at times we are bombarded with so many documents at a go with no time to read them. That was well noted; there is need to receive documents in time, particularly Government papers which are for consideration in the House and Members have to read and internalise them before they deliberate on them.

There was a Member who wanted to know the difference between a parliamentary session, a parliamentary sitting, and a parliamentary meeting. A session is a parliamentary year. It begins in May and ends in June. A meeting is a series of sittings which may last for a period of three or so months. 

So, in every session there are usually three meetings. In between those sessions, we have recesses or breaks. Our Order Paper refers to the second sitting because the first one was when the Speaker or Deputy Speaker was elected. So what was expressed that we had not elected our representatives to the Pan African Parliament in the first session was misplaced because we are still within the first session as per the requirements of rule 12(2). 

A Member wanted to know something on rule 70. Rule 70 says, “No Member shall cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily.”  So, the Member wanted to know who decides whether one is moving around unnecessarily. The answer is in rule 6(2) which says, “The Speaker shall preserve order and decorum in the House and shall address questions of order and practice.” 

So the Speaker can say, “Please move back to your seat”, or someone can move the Speaker and she rules that you are moving around unnecessarily.

A Member also wanted to know, in Appendix B, Section 5. The section says, “Subject to the treaty, an elected Member of the Assembly shall hold office for a period of five years and be eligible for re-election for a further term of five years.” The Member wanted to know why some existing Members of EALA were campaigning to be re-elected yet this provision restricts them to only two terms. There is a provision that this rule is subject to the East African Treaty. If there are any changes in the treaty, then those changes take precedence. If they have extended the term to more than two terms, a Member is still eligible to be re-elected to EALA.

There was concern that the House is too big and if we are to go by 20 Members for every committee, some Members may not get committees. I think this is a matter for the Speaker and the party whips to work out. If it requires an amendment of the rules to accommodate the new numbers, we may have to do that. 

Then hon. Galiwango raised the question of use of non- parliamentary language which I have already hinted on. It is not right to call your colleague a thug or a thief; whether in the plenary or in the committees. 

Under rule 33(d), there is a requirement that committees should carry out relevant research in their respective fields and report to Parliament on their findings. And the Member was wondering whether the committees we set up actually have specialised technical personnel from within the Members of the House. Well, the fact is that some of the Members are highly qualified in their respective areas; we have lawyers, engineers, doctors, teachers and other professionals. And some of them are designated on the different committees. But in addition to that, the committees are supported by the technical staff of Parliament. So, the technical staff have an obligation to research on any matter of interest to any committee and advise the committee accordingly.

My good friend, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi “the man”, raised a question of where the Army should sit in the House. He was insisting that the Army should have five Members on the Government side and five on the Opposition side. I responded to that, but he was not satisfied. I can only reiterate that the civilian authority to which the UPDF are supposed to be subordinate, in my understanding, is a sitting Government not the Opposition. The UPDF rightly sits on the Government side.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Kiyingi should be more serious than that, especially if he attempts to read very meaningfully the contents of Article 208 of the Constitution. My understanding is that if the Army representatives cannot be independent, they should be ex-officio members because their attempt to sit on the Government side is imbalanced. Parliament is supposed to be run on a multi-party basis. On the strength of that, I read the contents of the Constitution verbatim and I would like to read the contents again: “The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under this Constitution.”

The argument here is that we could seek interpretation of what is meant by “civilian authority” in Parliament not outside Parliament. If it is in Parliament, my understanding is that the UPDF is subordinate to the two sides in this honourable House. We should have a share; five on the Government side and five on the Opposition. (Laughter) But since I intend to raise a motion on the matter, let me not pre-empt my reasoning. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think we can save that for the rules committee later.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi. A colleague, I think from Kasese Municipality, raised the question that in terms of the oath we take, we are all custodians of the public interest; we are all MPs. Why can’t a Member of Parliament who is on the Government side chair an accountability committee? 

I think someone responded to that and said it is the Commonwealth practice to accommodate the Opposition and in any case, it is not that easy to supervise and be an oversight committee over yourself. If you are on the side of Government, you are the Government; the Opposition is supposed to check on the Government. Accountability committees are chaired by the Opposition as per the Commonwealth practice.

Lastly, how do you bring to order – I think it was hon. Chebrot - the Speaker, if the Speaker is errant? Well, under Article 82, Section 7(e), “The Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall vacate his or her office if he or she is removed by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two-thirds of all the Members of Parliament.”

If you are so angry with the Speaker, the remedy is in the Constitution. But ordinarily, the issues are raised and resolved on the Floor of the House. Even when you have issues to raise with the Speaker, you stand up and say you are not satisfied with this or the other and the Speaker can advise accordingly.

These are some of the issues I was able to respond to. The rest were noted and I think the Hansard will be passed on to the committee when it is fully constituted. They will be studied. If amendments are required, they will be made. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, for helping the House get orientation on the Rules of Procedure. Hon. Members, we have a lot of business today, but since I had indicated that there are Members who wanted to ask a few questions - I have a list of 20 - I will give five Members if they still have anything that has not come out which you wish to be advised on. After that, we shall proceed to other business and return to this one later on.

11.23  
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjonjo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My concern was, in the Rules of Procedure, rule 35 - but I was very fortunate that I consulted a sitting Member of the Eighth Parliament who clarified this; otherwise, I only wanted some hint – about a strong statement - photography of women - and it was not taken into consideration. I thank you. Photographs of women’s legs -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Timbigamba is worried about the abuse of the dignity of women by members of the press who come here and abuse their privilege of entering this House. They photograph the women’s legs –(Laughter)- put them in the press and then identify them. It is a matter of concern to us.

11.24
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister. [HON. MEMBERS: “Not yet.”] Nomination, please; I said nomination.

Most of the issues I had wanted to raise have been clearly handled by the honourable member, but I want to emphasise that as honourable members, we should emphasise the substance of what to discuss here rather than form it because I am concerned about Members raising issues on where some Members are sitting, and what some Members are wearing. I feel that this is not a serious matter to discuss in this honourable House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to be guided; we are informed that in the august House, we have two sides - the Government side and the Opposition side. I am speaking in connection with rule 21 as far as voting is concerned. I have witnessed on many occasions that if one side of the House decides to move out in protest, the other remaining side will be allowed to continue voting. I feel those two sides are very important and, therefore, if one side is not in the House another side should be stopped from voting -(Interjections)- until both sides are in. 

The other concern is that I have witnessed on many occasions as far as the parliamentary score card is concerned that Members of Parliament are supposed to attend the council meetings in their respective areas where they come from. In many cases, if the Member of Parliament failed to attend the district council meeting, that Member of Parliament is given zero yet the time for the meeting may coincide with parliamentary business. I would like to find out which business we should give priority. Is it the council business or the parliamentary business? I thank you.

11.28
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not only congratulate you, but I beg to invite you to Sironko District –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let her speak.

MS WADADA: Allow me to speak. I am entitled to my opinion. Madam Speaker, sincerely I would love to invite you to Sironko District. (Laughter) I am here to talk about rule 91: “Removal of the President under Article 107 of the Constitution”. The rule states that the President may be removed from office by a resolution of Parliament. I would like to know why Parliament can dissolve the Presidency and yet it is not Parliament that elects the President? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Wadada. I said I would take only five and then we go to some other business. 

11.29
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that a colleague had requested that you differentiate between a standing committee and a sessional committee. If I can recall very well, that was not done and I am begging that since it is orientation, maybe you can explain to us the difference between the two committees. Thank you very much.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will explain that in detail. 

In my communication, I did indicate that the President of Uganda was installed nearly two weeks ago and there has been a certain amount of uncertainty about how the country is being run. It is the responsibility of this House to assist the President to fulfil his mandate. Therefore, I am invoking my authority to amend the Order Paper to permit hon. Mukula and hon. Mwesige to each move a motion.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring greetings from Kawempe North constituency. We know that it is almost two weeks since the President was sworn in and it is true there is urgency in as far as constituting the Cabinet is concerned. I know that we may do the work of the Appointments Committee as the whole House, but why don’t we give the chance to the Appointments Committee - by tomorrow or Thursday, all parties will be through with their nominations to the Appointments Committee instead of - because in the Appointments Committee, there are issues that a small committee handles and I do not think those issues can be handled by the whole House. It is my considered opinion that we wait and we give these parties that have not mentioned the names on the Appointments Committee, some two days to do so and then we can effectively scrutinise the appointees from His Excellency, the President.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have no intention whatsoever of usurping the powers of the Appointments Committee. I will not allow business of the Appointments Committee to come to the plenary. The business which is coming to the plenary is for the plenary. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Further guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: On the issue you have just articulated regarding the appointments.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are anticipating business. Allow the motion to be moved and then speak to it because you are now guessing. Please wait, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

11.33
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I wish to move the motion for the approval of the appointment of hon. Edward Ssekandi as Vice-President of Uganda under Article 108(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda:

“WHEREAS Article 108(2) of the Constitution provides that the Vice-President shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority;

AND WHEREAS the Office of the Vice-President became vacant on the 12th day of May 2011;

AND WHEREAS Article 108(7) of the Constitution provides that where the Office of the Vice-President becomes vacant, the President shall, with the approval of Parliament, and as soon as possible but in any case not less than 14 days, appoint a person qualified to hold the Office of the Vice-President;

WHEREAS the President has appointed hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as Vice-President and seeks approval of this House or this Parliament for that appointment;

AND WHEREAS hon. Edward Ssekandi, being a citizen of Uganda and not less than 35 years, and not more than 75 years of age, and qualified to be a Member of Parliament is eligible in terms of Article 108(4) of the Constitution to be appointed as a Vice-President of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 

THAT in accordance with Article 108(2) of the Constitution, Parliament approves the appointment by the President of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of guidance over a very important motion being moved by hon. Mukula. The hours for official business of Parliament are usually within the afternoon; 2 O’clock to 5.30 p.m. The Opposition side is currently carrying out a consultative meeting of great importance, and that is why they are not here. I would like to propose, with honour, that the moving of the motion be extended possibly to the afternoon session so that we are all here because we must all be seen to be participants in the approval of this important motion. So, in fairness, I move that we extend the motion till the afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: We did not sit on Friday, so that Members and their parties would have time to meet. We also did not meet on Saturday, Sunday and neither did we meet yesterday. Hon. Members, I also have my duties to perform and I gave notice that we would sit at 10.00 a.m. today. 

11.38
MS REBECCA AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. Thank you.

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I have a very important duty this morning in the history of this country to present before you a man who has stood up to the test of time; a man of integrity, competence and ability. I wish to present to you a very comprehensive CV of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Member of Parliament, Bukoto Central.

Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was born on January 19 1943 in Bulegeya Village, Kyanamukaka sub-county, Masaka District. He is married with children. He went to Lubiri Secondary School for his O’ Level and went to St Mary’s College Kisubi for his A’ Level. 

Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi went to the University of East Africa, Dar-es-Salaam from 1966 to 1969 where he qualified as a lawyer. He enrolled as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda in 1970.

Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was a state attorney in the Ministry of Justice between 1969 and 1973. In 1973, he served as a lecturer at the Law Development Centre where he became a principal lecturer and eventually head of the department. He was responsible for a number of other courses at the LDC. Between 1974 and 1979, he headed the postgraduate bar course with different duties. From 1978 to 1979, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was the acting director of the Law Development Centre and a member of the Law Council, a body responsible for the legal profession in Uganda. From 1979 to date, he has been an advocate in practice with Ssekandi and Company Advocates. 

He also served as a chancellor of Namirembe Diocese from 1982 to 1985. In 1986 to 1993, he was the lead counsel in the Commission of Inquiry into the Violation of Human Rights in Uganda from October 1962 to January 1998, a job he performed very ably. 

From 1986 to 1992, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was Vice-Chairman of the Law Council Disciplinary Committee which was responsible for disciplinary matters within the legal profession, including receiving complaints against advocates and adjudicating on such complaints. This means that he is an accomplished disciplinarian who is effective in the pursuit of professionalism in the bar. 

Between 1992 and 1996, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was a member of the Law Development Centre Management Committee. From 1994 to 1995, he was the delegate in the Uganda Constituent Assembly representing Bukoto Central, Masaka District. He was part of the great team that served as midwife to the Constitution the people of Uganda have today.

From 1996 to 2001, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi became Member of Parliament for Bukoto Central and was elected Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline in 1996, 1997 and 1998.

I was with him in the Sixth Parliament. Between September 1998 and July 2001, hon. Edward Ssekandi was elected Deputy Speaker of the Sixth Parliament of Uganda, and Deputy Chairperson of the Committee of the whole House, a job he performed very well. 

He was a Member of the Parliamentary Appointments Committee, a committee which deals with the approval of the appointments made by the President under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

In June 2001 to May 2006, he was re-elected to serve Uganda in the Parliament of Uganda representing the people of Bukoto Central, Masaka. 

In July 2001 to May 2006, hon. Edward Ssekandi was elected Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. And while he was the Speaker he served as the chairperson of the Committee of the Whole House. He served as the chairperson of the appointments committee. He served on the Parliamentary Service Commission, a body responsible for the administration of the Parliamentary Service. He also served and represented Uganda in various international organisations, for example the CPA, IPU, ACP/EU assemblies, et cetera. 

I had the opportunity to travel with the hon. Edward Ssekandi to Abuja and I saw a man with a lustrous character; a man of ability. 

Hon. Ssekandi, in February 2006 to May 2011, was re-elected to Parliament of Uganda to represent the people of Bukoto Central, Masaka. In May 2006 to May 2011, he served as Speaker of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. A job he performed very well. 

In 2008 to 2010, he was Chairperson of the Africa Parliamentary Union (APU). As the chairman of the Pan African Movement, Uganda, I want to say that hon. Ssekandi held the flag of Uganda very high and he articulated very many Pan-African issues and matters of concern for Africa.

From 2010 to 2012, he will serve as the President of the Parliamentary Union of the OIC Member States/Organisation of the Islamic Conference (PUIC/OIC), which is a Union of Parliaments of the Organisation of Islamic Countries, where he was ably elected in a conference which was held in Uganda. 

He has had other responsibilities. Hon. Edward Ssekandi, from 2006 to date, has been reading the Bible and is a member of the Uganda Bible Society. So, he is a very religious person. So, when you try to veer into areas of the Bible, I would advise you to be very cautious. He is a very illustrious and effective person when it comes to the issues of the Bible. 

In 1985 to date, he has served in the Rotary Club of Rubaga, and he has done that job very well. It means that he is a very generous person; as you know, for a number of you who are Rotarians, it is always good to be a person who is generous to society and it is a feeling that all of us aspire to have. In 1989 to 1990, he served as the President of the Rotary Club of Rubaga.

In 1996 to 1998, he was a member of the Chief Justice Rules Committee under the Judicature Act. A job, I am very sure, hon. Ssekandi continues to enjoy.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, having elucidated on the key areas or strengths that hon. Ssekandi has had, let me say that hon. Ssekandi has attended several international seminars and workshops. He attended international seminars in Africa, Europe, America, Asia and Australia on constitutionalism, criminal justice systems, conflict resolution and prevention, comparative deliberative systems, East African Cooperation and Integration. He has also attended several conferences - the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), Africa Commonwealth Parliaments, and the EU/ACP European Union/Africa Caribbean Pacific Joint Assemblies.   

I have an enormous and yet gracious task today to present to you a man of integrity; a man with a clean record and a man of humility; a man who humbles himself before God. I take this opportunity to seek your endorsement and approval of hon. Edward Ssekandi for the post that he has been nominated for to serve this country, by the President of Uganda. I beg to move.

11.53
MS REBECCA AMUGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, aware of the risk of diverting this House, you will allow me to congratulate you so that it goes on the record of Parliament that I did congratulate you for having attained the highest office in the Parliament of Uganda. 

The mover of the motion has already spoken, but I would also like to add on what should be looked at by Members before we endorse our Vice-President.

The honourable member we bring to you, as nominated by the President of this Republic, has worked in all arms of Government. He has been the Speaker of Parliament; he worked in the Judiciary and now joins the Executive. I think this is value-addition to this country. 

During his tenure as the Speaker of this Parliament, he exposed us, Members, to various regional, local and international fora. You will agree with me that many Parliaments visited Uganda to learn from us, and that is very important. 

I would like to congratulate him and thank him for having stepped aside for the women of this country, so that he leaves the Chair to be taken up by you, Madam Speaker. As women, we must support him.

As you have seen in his CV, he is a Rotarian; he is a religious person and, therefore, he believes in social responsibility. I think that is the right path that we are choosing as Ugandans this time because we are talking of service delivery. I believe hon. Ssekandi is the right person to take this office.

I may want to remind Members of this House that the nominee for the office of Vice-President would always stand with you even during the toughest moments. In the Seventh Parliament, when the LRA massacred people in Barlonyo, he did not stop at chairing debate in this Parliament, but he led a delegation to the site. That is the kind of person we want.  

I have attended various meetings and conferences both within and outside Uganda where our Vice-President to be has been highly rated. Many Members of Parliament will agree with me that the level at which we put him is lower than what other people put him. And, therefore, I believe that he should now rise to the right rank, which is the office of the Vice-President.  

The common terminology in modern trade is that of public-private partnership and he has moved through all these. He has been in the Judiciary; he has been in the Legislature; he has been in the private practice and now he is joining the Executive. I think we do not have much to debate about his candidature and I believe that all of us are going to support him.

In this Parliament, he has supported the formation of various fora, which have helped us as Members of Parliament to grow and, therefore, he is a mentor. 

As he takes this office, we, Members of Parliament must support him. He is going to be a value-addition not only to the rest of the country, but also to your constituency. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to speak and second this motion. I believe that we may not have so much to debate on his candidature.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall have some brief contributions of three minutes each. 

11.58
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to speak, not on behalf of, but for the Opposition and also to inform you that FDC, the official Opposition party is not here because they are still in a meeting to determine the Leader of Opposition and other positions. 

I would like to speak on the motion, but most importantly, what we expect as the Opposition from the incoming Vice-President. The former Speaker has been a Speaker for the last ten years and some of us have also been in this Parliament during that period and we have either benefitted from his guidance or not. But the resume which has been presented is a very good one; the one which deals with the question of law. 

The appointment of hon. Edward Ssekandi comes at a time when this country is grappling with serious legal matters, especially in regard to the rights of dissenting voices to the current Government. At this time, we would wish that since hon. Ssekandi is a lawyer with a very broad experience and will be next to His Excellency the President, he will use that office to advise His Excellency the President on some of the fundamental constitutional rights that should not be abrogated. 
 
We have seen over the last one month innocent Ugandans who were just walking being brutalised by the Police. I hope that as a lawyer, he will advise His Excellency the President correctly, that this Constitution that we all swore to protect must be upheld not only by this Parliament but also by the President because fundamental human rights of Ugandans have been abused. 

I have seen in the newspapers proposed laws that are being presumed to be coming to this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are offending the rule against anticipation. Just address the candidature and his suitability. Do not anticipate. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: The candidature, Madam Speaker, is that of legal experience; and I am saying that from a lawyer who has vast legal experience, we, as the Opposition expect him to use that experience to advise on how things should be done constitutionally.  Things should be done to promote and defend the Constitution. We are saying that him being a lawyer, that resume is good, but that resume should be used to advise the President. 

As a Speaker, we in the Opposition have felt that hon. Ssekandi has somehow been a little bit too loyal to the Movement at the expense of the voices of the Opposition. So, I hope that as a Vice-President, he will now look at the broader national interests and also treat the Opposition as the alternative voice in waiting. I am hoping that when need arises, he will serve everybody equally because it is important that we note that as a Speaker, there are certain times that we felt he was not very tolerant and sometimes took sides. I hope that as a Vice-President, he will not so much take sides but work for the good of this nation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

12.03
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a few clarifications that I would like you to throw more light on from the legal perspective. With all due respect to Rt hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi being appointed to that big office, as far as I know, Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi is greatly encumbered with legal cases in court ranging from election rigging to abuse of office. The clarification I would like to seek from you is if we go ahead and approve Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, what will happen? 

MR ECWERU: Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for a Member to sentence the candidate we are presenting and to make judgement of the candidate on a matter that is before court? Is it in order for this Member to make that remark when a person is deemed to be innocent until the court finds them guilty? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one would not want to discuss issues of prejudice. If there is an election petition in court, we have not got the judgement about it. And this Constitution has provisions for removal of both the President and Vice-President. If that time comes, we shall deal with it. Now, address his candidature. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance because that is what I was seeking clarification about.  

Secondly, the appointing authority should not stop at appointing someone as Vice-President and when it comes to defining roles, what the Vice-President does is to create his own way of doing things such as growing upland rice like the former Vice-President has been doing. I will, therefore, request that the appointing authority should allow hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi to have all the powers of his Excellency the President and not to just confine him to a specific sector.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that as we were electing you to that big office, hon. Edward Ssekandi was present and indeed I believe that he gave you a vote. I am surprised that we are discussing a very important position in the absence of the former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. I would have loved to see Prof. Gilbert Bukenya giving us his contribution on this matter, and even hon. Nsibambi.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I gave a message to all the Members that we shall have a session this morning. 

12.07
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether hon. Byabagambi is going to steal part of my time. Can I have my time? Thank you.

I stand up to support the nomination of hon. Edward Ssekandi. Uganda is indeed very lucky to have a man of hon. Ssekandi’s stature nominated as Vice-President of this country, and I know we are all going to give him “another rap” because of his track record. Hon. Ssekandi has steered this House honourably twice. When we have cried, he has cried with us; when we have laughed, he has laughed with us; and when we have danced, he has danced with us. He is a man who identifies with the needs of others. He is soft spoken and endowed with exceptional dignified composure. 

Hon. Ssekandi has left impressive footmarks in whatever field he has worked in. He is a man of his word; unlike few people, he chooses his words very carefully. I am reminded about that portion in the Bible which says that, “In the beginning there was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God.” Hon. Ssekandi treasures his words and a man who treasures his word is a man who will steer the country very well.

Hon. Ssekandi is a man of peace. We have seen him and we know that during these so called walk-to-work demonstrations - I am not going to say much - he was able to see the other side of the suffering of the ordinary person; of the women whose kiosks are destroyed. He always looks at the other side. This is why he steered the House in a balanced and fair manner. 

As I conclude, we know that he is endowed with solid intelligence and treads very slowly but very carefully. He is very self-respecting and shows the same respect to other people. Therefore, hon. Members, I implore all of us that it is once in so many years that you get a comet of this magnitude; may we support this comet. I thank you.

12.10
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the nomination of hon. Edward Ssekandi as the next Vice-President of this country.

Hon. Ssekandi has been our Speaker of Parliament, and honourable members will agree with me that in his work he exhibited a high sense of humility. He has been exemplary in his performance. Therefore, hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to appeal to you that we should support the nomination of hon. Edward Ssekandi.

Hon. Ssekandi has performed with distinction; he is a coolheaded man, he is very honest, and in his performance he has been very transparent. Those are the qualities that we need in a leader for this country.

Hon. Ssekandi is loyal to authority. If you are to be the President or the Vice-President, you must be loyal to authority. So, right now, I want to endorse his candidature.

Hon. Ssekandi is not a hypocrite; what he says during day time is the same thing he will say at night. He is not like other leaders who during day time say something and then say a different thing at night. We have seen him as a straightforward man. 

We are grappling with corruption, but hon. Edward Ssekandi is not greedy. If we are to get a good vice-President of this country, that person should not be greedy. He is not greedy like other leaders. 

Hon. Ssekandi is a listener. He has been our Speaker and he would listen to everybody whether you are rich or poor. He has been elected by his own people. That means that his ears are on the ground, with his own people. That is the vice-President that we need, a Vice-President who has his ears, and his pulse, on the ground. I appeal to honourable members to support him. 

Hon. Ssekandi is a married man with a beautiful wife and I am sure he will not put that office to disrepute and reproach. He will honour that office and he will give it the dignity that it deserves. He is the right man for that position. 

The last point that I want to make is that he is not a parochial leader. Hon. Members, listen to me because this is a very important point. Hon. Ssekandi does not believe in tribalism; he is not tribal. For us to unite this country, we need leaders who are not parochial. We need leaders that will see Uganda as a nation and build it as one. I am sure with hon. Ssekandi in that position, Uganda will be a nation and we shall all be united. Like our manifesto says, we need to build a harmonious country and I believe that hon. Ssekandi as our Vice-President, will dispense his duties with intelligence and commitment and, therefore, unite and develop our country. I support the motion.

12.15
MR SANJAY TANA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I want to begin by thanking you for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion because I have personally known hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi from my childhood. I have known him as a family friend. A colleague of ours mentioned his participation in the private sector and he happened to be involved in one of those fields where our family was.

One of the attributes that I would like to give the nominee today, and which I have personally experienced in this House, is that he is non-sectarian. I have been with him before I joined the Parliament and after I joined the Parliament. In my last five years in the House, I do not remember a single moment where Rt hon. Kiwanuka Ssekandi segregated against me because of my colour, creed or race –(Interjections)- yes, you may think it is a laughable matter, but many of the colleagues that were here did do so. I want to applaud him. 

Hon. Okot Ogong raised another issue about him being straight forward. When we came out in the corridors of Parliament, you would hear some colleagues complaining about particular rulings that he made on that day. I preferred him that way because I enjoy working with straight forward people. People who give you double-edged answers are extremely dangerous. So, it is better you swallow the bitter pill as it is rather than lingering on to maybe swallow a more bitter pill later. 

In my own opinion, I think His Excellency the President has made an extremely wonderful choice. I personally support the choice and would like to pledge my support to hon. Kiwanuka Ssekandi.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the former Vice-President on the accomplishments that he has achieved and wish him well. It is unfortunate - a colleague of ours raised it - that he is not present here today. We would have wished to congratulate him in person on whatever he has achieved and urge the hon. Kiwanuka Ssekandi to at least pick on those unaccomplished tasks that he has left behind, especially improvement of household incomes in the rural and peri-urban areas of Uganda.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I support the motion. 

12.19
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, in view of what you said in your opening remarks and also evidenced by the business on the Order Paper, I would like to move a motion that you put the question. All of us seem to be in agreement –(Interjections)- we have heard from speakers from the Opposition and from the Government side and all of us seem to be in agreement that the nominee is a person of virtue and that the nomination is really a worthwhile one. I move a motion that you put the question. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that hon. Edward Ssekandi, nominee for the post of Vice-President, be approved by this House. However, before we do so, I would want to inform the House about the procedure to be followed. Under Article 108(2) of the Constitution, the approval of the nominee for Vice-President is by a simple majority of the Members present - that is 50 plus one. 

I would, therefore, request the clerks to establish the number of members present in the House before we take the question. Can the clerks please ascertain? We will do it by show of hands, block by block. 

Hon. Members, present in the House are 246 members. We shall now proceed to vote. I think let us do it block by block, starting with the block on my right.

MR SEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, since it is obvious that the majority –(Interjections)– I would like request that you start with those who are opposed to the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am the Speaker and my directive is that we should start with those in support of the motion. I, therefore, put the question that this House do now approve the appointment of Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in support of the motion are 244; those opposed, nil; and there has been one abstention. 

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Ssekandi, congratulations are in order. On behalf of this House, I would like to congratulate you very much and wish you well. I also would like to pledge, on behalf of the House, that the Ninth Parliament will give you the necessary support you need to perform your duties. I wish you a successful tenure. I now invite hon. Adolf Mwesige to move another motion.

MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108A(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

12.32
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for the approval of the appointment of the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda under Article 180A(1) of the Constitution. The motion reads:

“Whereas Article 180(A)(1) of the Constitution provides that there shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by simple majority from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS the Office of the Prime Minister became vacant on the 12th day of May 2011;

AND WHEREAS the President has appointed the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi as the Prime Minister and seeks the approval of this Parliament for that appointment;

AND WHEREAS the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi is qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, I move that this Parliament resolves as follows:

That Parliament approves the appointment by H.E. the President of the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi as Prime Minister.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

12.34
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Yes, Madam Speaker, I second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been duly seconded. Now you can speak to your motion.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I am honoured to move the motion for the approval of the hon. Amama Mbabazi as the Prime Minister of Uganda.

Hon. Amama Mbabazi was born on 16 January 1949 in a place called Mparo in Kabale District. He is happily married with children. He holds a Bachelor of Laws Degree from Makerere University and a Diploma in Legal Practice from the Law Development Centre. He is an advocate of the Courts of Judicature of Uganda and a member of the Uganda Law Society.

Hon. Amama Mbabazi has held a number of Government positions. From 2005 to date, he has been serving as the Secretary-General of the ruling political party, the National Resistance Movement. From 2006 to date, he has also been serving the Government as the Minister in the Office of the President in charge of Security. 

From 1996 to date, he has been a Member of Parliament representing Kinkizi County West in the Sixth Parliament, Seventh Parliament, Eighth Parliament and now the Ninth Parliament. 

He was a member of the National Resistance Council from 1989 to 1995. From 2001 to 2006, he served as the Minister of Defence. In 2004, hon. Mbabazi served as the Attorney-General of Uganda. While Attorney-General, hon. Amama Mbabazi was a hands-on Attorney-General. I recall I did accompany him to the Supreme Court where he effectively defended Government and he won the landmark constitutional case which had sought to nullify the referendum of 2002. 

From 1997 to 2001, he served as the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs in charge of Regional Cooperation. While in that ministry, he was the Chairman of the Permanent Tripartite Commission of the East African Cooperation. From 1991 to 2001, he was the chairman of the International Political Committee for the Implementation of the Democratic Republic of Congo Ceasefire Agreement. 

In 1996, he served as Minister of State in the Office of the President in charge of Political Affairs. From 1996 to 1997, he was the chairman of the Movement Caucus in Parliament. At that time we had the Movement political system.

From 1994 to 1995, he served as the Constituent Assembly delegate representing Kinkizi West County. From 1992 to 1996, he was the Minister of State for Defence. Earlier on, after the liberation war in 1986 to 1992, he served as Director-General of the External Security Organisation. 

He has held a number of key responsibilities in Government and outside Government. From 1994 to 1995, he played a key role in making the 1995 Uganda Constitution as Chairman of the National Resistance Movement Caucus in the Constituent Assembly. From 1981 to 1986, he was a staff officer during the liberation struggle of the National Resistance Army and a member of the NRM external committee. 

At the professional level, he was a partner in the law firm of Kategaya, Mbabazi and Tumwesigye Advocates. In 1979, after the first liberation war, he served as the Director Legal Services, Uganda National Liberation Army. 

In 1976, he was a state attorney in the Attorney-General’s Chambers. From 1976 to 1977, he was the Secretary of the Uganda Law Council. From 1975 to date, he is a member of boards of directors of several parastatal bodies and private businesses in Uganda. 

From 1972 to 1979, he was one of the founding members of the Front for National Salvation (FRONASA), a combatant and head of the internal operations of FRONASA in Uganda. He has been the chairman of the NRM Manifesto committees of 2006 to 2011 and 2011 to 2016, which we are implementing now. 

He is a member of many professional bodies, an advocate of the Courts of Judicature of Uganda and a member of the Uganda Law Society. He has written and presented many papers in international conferences including the United Nations, the African Union and SADC on various subjects including the restoration of the rule of law in Uganda, the role of the military in the democratisation process in Africa and conflict prevention and management.

He assisted President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana as the Chairman of ECOWAS in mediating a ceasefire in the Liberian conflict. He defended Uganda in the United Nations Security Council against accusations of exploitation of natural resources of the DR Congo. He has also defended Uganda at the International Court of Justice in The Hague and he has worked very closely with the International Criminal Court in the Hague in the investigation of crimes against humanity by Kony and other leaders of the terrorist LRA. 

He has represented Uganda as a special envoy of His Excellency the President in various countries. He has also represented Uganda in many international conferences. 

Because of his distinguished service, Government and the National Resistance Movement have awarded him the Nalubaale Medal of Honour and the Kagera Medal of Honour for distinguished service in the struggle against dictatorship. 

It is now my honour and privilege, Madam Speaker, to present this distinguished statesman for the approval of this Parliament as Prime Minister of Uganda. I beg to move.

12.34
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I stand here to second a motion that has been moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige. I want to draw your attention first to the roles of the Prime Minister. When you open your Constitution, Article 108A(2) states: 

“The Prime Minister shall- 
(a) be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament ....” 

Hon. Amama Mbabazi has been in Parliament for quite some time. He is so conversant with the issues of Parliament and so he can lead us very well. He has learnt everything in Parliament and he will lead us in Parliament as he does work for Government. 

The Prime Minister is also responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is the Secretary-General of the party that won elections. He was behind the making of the manifesto of the party that won elections; that manifesto of NRM is supposed to be translated into Government policies. Having been behind the making of the manifesto, let us give him a chance to be at the centre of making the manifesto become policy, co-ordinate all the implementation and monitor. Where do you think the problem will be? With your support and with your help, everything will be possible.

Hon. Members, we look at (b): “Perform such other functions as may be assigned to him by the President ....”

In suggesting his name for this post, this is a sign of confidence from the President. He has confidence in him. He will assign him more work because he knows his capabilities. We have no reason to say no because the appointing authority who was appointed by the Ugandans has said he should be the one. So, he will give him more responsibilities because the confidence is there.

Hon. Members, the candidate we are talking about for the post has international experience. When they read his CV, you heard how he was on the United Nations Security Council to defend this country and he was in The Hague to defend this country. The international experience is in the CV.

When it comes to Africa, he has worked in ECOWAS as a mediator. He was there doing it for Uganda. He was there carrying the flag of Uganda. When it comes to regional issues, he has been a minister for regional affairs. At such a time when we are talking of fast-tracking of the East African Federation, we need such people in office. Hon. Amama Mbabazi was there at the beginning, so he should be there even now at the top as Prime Minister. 

Hon. Members, when it comes to the local issues in Uganda, he has been a minister in several capacities. He is the secretary-general who was behind the winning of NRM, and he was the brain behind forming the consultative platform for all parties in this country so that parties can come and talk. All parties, whether small or big must have a platform and their voices must be heard. 

Hon. Members, we have had Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as Prime Minister for quite some time and he has been working closely with hon. Amama Mbabazi. He is going to add on that since he has been around with him. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is experienced; his is not a new name in the politics of Uganda. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is qualified and skilled to do this work. By the way, for this job we need a detailed person and the right person is hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

I second this motion and I call upon honourable members to begin this Parliament by supporting people who are going to take up these offices. One thing I want to tell you is that hon. Amama Mbabazi, was a commissioner; in some of the negotiations we have had with the Executive he has been part of us; he has been around for some time. Becoming a Prime Minister also means that he becomes a Parliamentary Commissioner. So, let us entrust him with the responsibility of being part of the team that negotiates for the welfare of Members of Parliament and staff of this institution. Hon. Members, I second the motion. Thank you.

12.49
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate you, my old girl from St Catherine. I have a lot of hope. I know that we are very hard working people and straightforward - we mean what we say and do what we say. I have a lot of expectations from you in that chair. 

I want to make some observations on the nomination for the Prime Minister. My first observation is that from those two appointments we have had, there is no bridge of generations. The country now risks being isolated by the voters on the ground. We need leaders that represent the mass voters on the ground. There is the problem of a generation gap and a problem of leaders that are critically linked with the masses on the ground. We are becoming paper leaders who do not associate much with what our people go through. Already, we have this issue of walk-to-work. That is because of the hardships the country is going through. So, we need leaders who live the way our people live. 

Secondly, I was not in the Eighth Parliament but there were issues of integrity that came from the Eighth Parliament; precisely, I am talking about issues of corruption. We need to give our people leaders who are clean –(Interjections)– whether it is rumours or proven, a grassroots person will think that is what it is. We are now talking about someone who is supposed to supervise all departments to see how things are moving; how will he be fully respected if there has been a history of things like that? Whether proven or not, they will make his work difficult. Thank you.

12.52
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament is today shouldering a very big task of approving the Prime Minister of this country. The prime ministerial job is now constitutional; so we must be serious when selecting a person of that attribute. 

In terms of character sketch, if I may attempt to describe hon. Amama Mbabazi, I know him as an arrogant person. He is not approachable, he is insincere and the testimony has already been made by NRM members that when this honourable member was occupying the position of secretary-general, many of them were saying, “We cannot access this man; we are in trouble” and such kinds of things -(Interruptions)

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, under rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure, it is provided thus: “It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.” The Member is making very generalised statements about rumours he heard, about Members he heard talking; is he in order to impute without substantiating what he is saying?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think on the issues of the rumours, please leave them out. Just address the candidature according to the presentation. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I am not speaking about rumours. In terms of character sketch, on insincerity the person we are talking about is insincere pursuant to the charge on Temangalo. The Temangalo charge, the charge on CHOGM –(Interruptions)

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague is under Article 113(4) of the Constitution of Uganda, which stipulates, “A minister shall not hold any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise his or her office.” 

It is clear that hon. Amama Mbabazi was implicated in the Temangalo saga, much as it could have been pushed under the carpet. This is not a rumour; these are facts and it will remain on record. We would like to put it on record as the Opposition that we are opposed to hon. Amama’s nomination –(Interruptions) 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member has made a statement that it is on record, that hon. Amama Mbabazi was implicated in Temangalo and other matters. The reality on the ground is that – I have been in this House for the last three terms and during all the debates he is referring to, I was present - the conclusions of this House exonerated hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Interjections)- he was a Member. These are clear things on record. Is he in order to start misinterpreting the outcome of the previous Houses, which we are sure is not the way he is bringing them out? Is he in order, therefore, to misinform the House and move in contempt of the resolutions of this House that are clearly documented? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the honourable member cited a part of the Constitution which I am still at a loss to understand how it applies. He quoted 113(4), which states: “A minister shall not hold any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise his or her office.” He has not spoken to it. So, it is out of order. Please, hon. Lukyamuzi, proceed with your presentation.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, in justification of what I am talking about, I want to quote the words of Mark Anthony in a play by William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar. (Laughter) Mark Anthony at one time said, “I have come not to mourn Caesar but to bury him.” We must sincerely examine the issue at hand. We should not simply praise, dwell here and there but particularise the issue at hand. 

The man is not approachable, the man is insincere – (Interjections)- the man will be shouldering responsibility of Government, managing ministers -(Interjections)- and we give him the position of Prime Minister! (Interruptions)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, listening to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, you have guided clearly that he should not dwell on irrelevancies and he should not use objectionable language but he has consistently used abusive language even when he cannot substantiate what he is telling this House. I would like to move a motion under rule 66 that the Member be no longer heard. (Interjections) The rule states: “If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetition or uses objectionable words – which he is doing - and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker – which he has failed – “Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be no longer heard, and the question on that motion shall be put forthwith without amendment or debate.”

I beg to move that the Member, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, should no longer be heard.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am aware that “the man” has been out of the House for some time; probably he has lost track of the rules -(Laughter)- on the use of language in this House. Certainly, the language you have used today offends the Rules of Procedure. So, please, desist. I now rule that you end your speech and I move to other Members. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

1.00
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to really appreciate and thank this House for what is happening at this particular time. I want to thank the President for his nominations. I rise up here on the nomination of the Prime Minister. I appreciate the President’s nomination, but I see that he has not taken into consideration the female sex. For a long time, Uganda has never had –(Interjections)- any female –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Allow her to make her presentation.

MS ATIM: For a long time, Uganda has never had any female Prime Minister -(Interjections)- I feel this House has brought people –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Order please!

MS ATIM: This House has got people of high integrity, male and female, who are fully qualified. We have ladies who qualify to be prime ministers in this country but for a long time, Uganda has never considered the female sex. I cannot oppose the males but I think the President -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I have something to say concerning what my honourable colleague is saying. I would like to inform her that really -(Interjections)- I would like to say that she has never seen –(Interjections)- actually, it is true, but it is only through this time that we have had the first female Speaker which is also not –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, the Member rose on a point of order, but now she is derogating the Rules of Procedure and giving information. Can you address yourself on the matter of order which you rose on? Is she procedurally correct? 

THE SPEAKER: Is it information or is it order?

MS ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am not saying this from -(Interjections)- out of the blue –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MS ATIM: But the Constitution, under Article 21(3), talks about equality and freedom from discrimination –(Interjections)- I see that the female sex -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please allow the Member to make her contribution.

MS ATIM: The female gender has never been nominated in this country as prime minister. It is my opinion that this be taken back to the President to consider the female gender for this high –(Interjections)- Not only that, Madam Speaker, I do not think there is any lady who is going to oppose this – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, allow her to make her contribution.

MS ATIM: It is my opinion, Madam Speaker. Another issue is, if you checked Article 108A of the Constitution, the duties of the Prime Minister are listed therein - he will be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions. This position sincerely needs somebody of high proven integrity. 

In this House, much as I was not there, whatever transpired is on record in the Hansard. There was the minority report. I ask this House to be focused. Let us really be focused. It is not a matter of the majority, but let us be focused. The person we are putting here should be somebody of high proven integrity.

Another responsibility is that he will be coordinating policies. We have had the past Prime Minister, even though he is not the one, I am asking that the person who will be put in this position should be focused. On the issue of policies, I mean policies that will be put in place and not policies that will be changing on a monthly basis. We have policies on education. Uganda’s education is not up to date. The policy on health is not up to date. There are certain policies, for example, there must be health centres in every parish, but you will never find them. If it is there, there are no drugs. We are not ready to stand by such policies. I feel the person who will be put in this position should be somebody who is focused and straightforward and knows whatever he is doing.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongom, I am sure you are really just asking the incoming Prime Minister to take a particular interest in education, health and all the services that the people of Uganda want. 

1.07
MR RONALD KIBUULE (NRM, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is blessed to have a workaholic Prime Minister this time. Hon. Mbabazi is committed to serve Uganda and as Prime Minister, some of us expect reforms. 

He is well established, with networks up to the grassroots as the Secretary-General of the NRM. He has a talent of command which is interpreted by others as arrogance; so, we are just blessed. I urge all of you, Members, to support hon. Mbabazi because he is a man who is talented with command and the command is interpreted as arrogance. That is why he has been our security minister and, therefore, he is the best for the position of Prime Minister. I thank the President for the appointment.

1.08
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion, but before I do that, allow me to congratulate you for having taken the office of Speaker. I have a lot of confidence in you.

Secondly, I also thank His Excellency the President for having spotted hon. Amama Mbabazi. You have seen hon. Amama Mbabazi has experience of over 30 years. Some people claim to have experience when actually their experience is one year, but is repetitive. For hon. Mbabazi, it is actually over 30 years of doing different things. So, he has a lot of knowledge and experience in many things. He has been in Parliament for many years. Everybody knows this. He has been in private practice. He has done a lot of things inside and outside Uganda. The experience is enormous.

This man also took up arms to fight for this county to bring the peace which we are enjoying now. This is somebody who needs to be rewarded. Madam Speaker, nobody, from the experience that hon. Mbabazi has, can fail him in executing his work apart from himself. It is only him who can fail himself but nobody else, from the experience and the stamina he has. 

Hon. Mbabazi is a hard working man. Some people may doubt, but we can only measure, as a simple example, the recent elections we have held. These were among the first elections we have held under the multi-party dispensation and our colleagues in other parties know what happened. All these were efforts of the hard work of hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

The gentleman is calm, he is friendly, he listens and he is hard working. We have to listen, and we need somebody who can listen and who is hard working. That is why people were referring to him as “super minister”. So, it is proper now that he is the Prime Minister -(Laughter)- from “super minister”, to Prime Minister. 

I beg all my colleagues here; I have confidence and I appeal to you to have confidence in him. He has the country at heart. In his debates here in Parliament, which you have heard, he has never debated here as a councillor of a district of Kinkizi; he is always debating as a Member of Parliament. When you come here, you do not debate for your district but you debate for Uganda, and hon. Amama Mbabazi has always been doing that. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this chance to talk about hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

THE SPEAKER: Motion? 

1.11
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that the question be put. After various individuals have contributed and the House is convinced that the man we are talking about has the required knowledge and experience to be the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister, I move a motion that the question be put for his approval. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the nomination of the Prime Minister designate in the person of hon. Amama Mbabazi. Before we do that, I require the clerks to ascertain the number of Members present in this House today. We start from the block on the right. 

Hon. Members, the total number of Members present in the House is 244. We shall now proceed to take the vote. 

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in support of the motion are 225; those against are 18 and there are two abstentions. Under Article 108, we require 50 percent plus one. 

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I now declare that this House has approved the appointment of hon. Amama Mbabazi as Prime Minister designate. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for the work you have done this morning. Hon. Mbabazi, on behalf of the House, we wish you well. You will receive our cooperation, but please take into account the issues raised by the Members; I think they will make your life easier and your work better. The House is suspended until 3.00 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 1.23 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.07 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you back from the lunch break. I would like to remind the Members who have not yet registered that it is very important that you complete your registration. Registration is being conducted in the South Committee Room and the East Committee Room and also in rooms 107 and 108 in the North Wing. It is very important that you register so that certain things, which have been bothering you, may be handled expeditiously. 

Hon. Members, I have received a letter from His Excellency the President of Uganda dated 23 May 2011, reading as follows: 

“Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, 
Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Kampala. 

Subject: Parliamentary approval for increment of the number of Cabinet Ministers and other Ministers. 

Pursuant to Article 113(2) and 114(2) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I hereby seek the approval of Parliament to increase the number of Cabinet ministers from 21 to 29 and that of other ministers from 21 to 47. 

This is because I intend to create new Cabinet portfolios in order to be effective in political supervision of the respective sectors and to enhance better service delivery in order to achieve our goal of transformation of our country. This will also deal with the issue of representation of different interest groups at the Cabinet level. 

I, therefore, request Parliament’s approval to enable me submit my appointments of Cabinet ministers and other ministers as required by Article 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution, respectively.

Yoweri K. Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda.”

May I invite the Member for Kinkizi County West, hon. Amama Mbabazi, to move the motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF CABINET MINISTERS AND OTHER MINISTERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLES II3 AND 114 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

3.12
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of positions of Cabinet ministers and other ministers as provided for in Articles 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution: 

“WHEREAS one of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy is that all organs of state and the people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability;

AND WHEREAS the Cabinet is a central and active engine of the state to which aspirations of national unity must be reflected;

AND WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Articles 113(2) and 114(3) put a limit on the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers who can be appointed by the President;

AND WHEREAS in satisfying the aspirations of the people of Uganda to promote national unity, peace and stability, the composition of Cabinet must ensure that all major national interests are represented and the whole country is effectively supervised politically;

AND WHEREAS the President has considered it expedient that the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers be varied to enhance effective political supervision to accommodate the various national interests and to promote the transformation of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

1.	The total number of Cabinet ministers be varied as provided for in Article 113(2) from 21 to 29.
2.	The total number of other ministers be varied as provided for in Article 114(3) from 21 to 47.”

I beg to move.

3.16
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Can you please justify.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I think the motion is more or less self explanatory. In the Sixth, Seventh and the Eighth Parliaments, we had reasons to vary the number of ministers as is being requested for by the President. The main reasons are within this motion:

First and foremost, the National Resistance Movement Government as it has demonstrated before, believes in the unity of our people and does everything possible to demonstrate the representation of all corners of Uganda in its government.  

Secondly, this Government was elected on a pledge to improve service delivery to our people. And in order to do this, we do believe, as experience has clearly shown, that we need very close political supervision. There are many sectors where the central government is directly involved but even more so, at the local level with the decentralisation of the executive functions of some activities of Government, it is imperative as we gain experience and develop skills at the lower levels that we exercise very close political supervision. 

So, when the Constitution limited the numbers to a total of 42, Madam Speaker, obviously there was a reason for it. But because the framers of this Constitution realised that there may be need to vary that figure, they gave authority to this Parliament to do precisely that. And as I said, in all the recent Parliaments, this has been done.  

In the campaigns, there were certain things that our candidate who was elected President in the elections pledged to the people. For instance, he pledged to put in place a ministry responsible for areas that had undergone and still suffer hardships because of the conditions that existed previously or that exist now. 

Secondly, out of experiences of the last five years, management of the executive office and executive functions has clearly indicated that those areas where the function is too large need to be separated so that we can achieve maximum efficiency. Therefore, the President, who is the Chief Executive of Uganda, and who wields executive authority, has found it expedient to request this House to allow him - in order for him to perform his pledges to the people and especially to achieve service delivery with maximum efficiency and in order to balance appointments to achieve representation in Government of the major sectors or corners of this country - that the number of ministries be varied as requested for in this motion. 

For those who may not have been in Parliament when we carried out government reforms, you may remember that actually there were very many ministries at the time. And the reason why Government was made smaller was because at that time it was considered that the activities that we had could be handled by that size of Government. But as you know, the activities of Government have increased, the economy has expanded, and the expectations of our people are higher today that they have ever been before. 

Therefore, the President finds it necessary in order for him to fulfil his pledge to the people and in order for him to respond to the needs of today in governance and in the executive function of Government that he needs political supervision at many levels and he is asking that to achieve that, please allow him to have these ministries: 29 for Cabinet ministers and 47 for other ministers. 

Finally, there has been an argument in the media and even previously in this Parliament that this is too big; that we should not have very many ministers because it would be too costly. Well, if having a minister is costly, in order for that minister to achieve political supervision, in order to enhance chances of effective service delivery, then let it be. I hope the argument will not be that: “Let us not have that service delivery in order to save the little money we have,” because if that argument was taken, then there would be no growth in economy, which we have obviously achieved in the last 25 years. The economy of Uganda today is ten times bigger than it was 25 years ago, thanks to the effective governance of the NRM. 

Compared to other governments in the world, we actually have a smaller Cabinet. I was looking at the British Cabinet, they have more than 30 ministers and altogether they have 115 ministers. When you have cabinet ministers and others who are junior – yes, someone may say that Britain has resources and can afford it, but precisely that is what we are also trying to achieve. We are trying to achieve efficacy in service delivery; efficacy in the management of our economy so that our country and the economy can continue to grow at the world scale rate that we have registered in the last 25 years.

Therefore, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to call upon you to please support this request by the President to allow him to have enough portfolios for cabinet ministers and other ministers in order to fulfil the promise he made to the people. I beg to move. 

3.16
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to second the motion mainly because of the reasons that are expressed in the motion before us. We have just come out of a general election in which the President of Uganda and the NRM made promises to the people of Uganda. The people of Uganda were promised transformation, service delivery and efficient performance in the discharge of government responsibilities and duties. Ministers are not civil servants; they act on behalf of the head of state in discharging their responsibilities. The President is the chief executive of this country and he was elected on the basis of the manifesto that he presented to the people of Uganda.

The people of Uganda supported the promises and manifesto of the President and the NRM, therefore, what the President is asking us is for us to give him the tools to discharge the promises that he made to the people of Uganda. I think it is our duty and responsibility to support him in order for him to deliver the services he promised to the people of this country and fortunately enough a situation of this nature was foreseen by the constitutional framers who provided for the extension of cabinet when need arose.

We need transformation, service delivery and so many of the promises that were made to us during the campaign time. Therefore, we need hands to do this work and I think it is incumbent upon us as Parliament to give the President the hands that he needs to do and discharge this responsibility. The Constitution foresaw this type of situation and if there is need to review the decision we are making now, there is still an avenue to review the decisions we are making.

For the reasons expressed in the petition and those that have been clearly put forward by the mover of the motion, I strongly second the motion and call upon my honourable colleagues that we give the President the hands (the ministers) to discharge the promises that he made to this country, promises upon which the people of Uganda accepted and elected him and NRM into office. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MS HANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker; I wish to congratulate you, the vice-President and the Prime Minister. I rise to support the motion. I was privileged to be among the delegates who promulgated the Constitution. The delegates at that time were mindful that a situation will arise like today when we shall find need to extend the number of cabinet ministers and the state ministers. We entrusted this responsibility to the august House. At that time we did not see the need not make it flexible. We made it flexible to allow the appointing authority to work as need may arise. At that time we had less than 50 districts; we are now coming to close to 100 districts because of service delivery. That time we were very few and the numbers have been growing. We are over 300 members in this House and the responsibility is so huge. 

We have a challenge of the areas we come from because there is need for balance. I was the Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee; we have to grant equal opportunities in service delivery and in sharing the cake. There are needs of women, youths and other people. 

Hon. Members, the economy notwithstanding, there is sharing of the cake. We should look for equity. There is also the gender balancing where women should take 50 percent. I appeal to you to support this motion to extend the number of cabinet ministers.

3.33
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative): I stand up to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister on the resolution of Parliament to vary the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers. There is an English saying which says that, “Scratch my back and I scratch yours.” 

As a youth representative representing the views of the young people in the Ninth Parliament, I would like to say that we are 78 percent of the population of Uganda according to the population census of 2002. Therefore, as young people we would like to request that we get an independent ministry for us as youth. The reason is that currently the young people have been under the Ministry of Gender, Labour, and Social Development; that Ministry has so many burdens because it hosts the women, the elderly, the people with disabilities, labour, culture (including traditional leaders) and children. If you look at it critically we are the voters and we have demonstrated this by sending in a very young Parliament. 

If you look around; as much as some of us are representing the youth, we have other hon. Members who are 23 years old. The majority of us are the young people and young voters are sending a message to us and the Government that, “We are the majority and, therefore, our interests should be catered for”. Our interests cannot be addressed under this big ministry. 

In the Eighth Parliament the finance minister dedicated the last annual budget to the youth. The budget was talking about loan schemes, unemployment, it is the youth who are unemployed and the loan scheme for school fees is for the youth. We are saying that the role of a minister is to supervise Government programmes. For them to supervise these Government programmes effectively there is need to have an independent ministry for the youth.

3.37
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative Butalega): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have come up to support the motion and also request my fellow hon. Members, even the ones seated at the extreme end that sincerely, this is a need that we need in our country. If you see here – when they allocate a minister, it will be very easy to follow up the finances but if the ministers are very few, we are going to spend more in following up the programme.

I am also bringing in my request that there are some ministerial posts that are very big. Now the one for women is very big and yet it is all put under one ministry. I am requesting that they make it an independent ministry. Is it possible –(Interjection)- protection –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Please, do not interrupt hon. Nebanda. She is speaking for Butaleja.

MS NEBANDA: I thank you. Another request that I am bringing forward is: is it possible that they can list down the ministries and they present them to the Members of Parliament and then we can be able to know which ones they are separating and which new ministries they are bringing in? I thank you very much.

3.38
MR STEPHEN MUGABI BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The mover of the motion, the honourable MP for Kinkizi West has been very clear. Actually at one moment he said that the motion was obvious. So, I would just like to highlight two or three issues.

The first one is the growth of the country. The country has grown in all respects; in respect to the population, to the economy but most importantly in respect to interest groups -

MR KATOTO: I would like to request the whole House to at least respect the Rules of Procedure. When somebody is on the Floor, please let him or her express and articulate the idea he has –(Laughter)- please, let us behave -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please permit hon. Baka Mugabi to speak to the motion.

MR BAKA MUGABI: I thank you. I was elucidating the issue of the growth in interest groups that have come up in the country. We now have all sorts of interest groups that are legitimate and these interest groups as explained by the mover of the motion, need representation in order for the country to be maintained as stable, focused and one where there is development.

The issue of the cost of the Cabinet has been the major argument around; that the cost is very high and, therefore, we do not need a big Cabinet. I think that as we talk now in the country and in the region, our Cabinet is the cheapest in terms of maintenance. Gone are the days where we would have a minister who had an official vehicle, then the other for home shopping with a driver, then one for the wife and then staff at the office and staff at home and all these are paid for by the State. Those days are gone. 

We now have a minister with one miserable vehicle. These vehicles I see our ministers driving are very miserable with the exception of a few of them but some of them are old. I looked at hon. Kiyingi when he had just been appointed a Minister of State for Lands – the vehicle he was driving was miserable. The cost of maintaining our ministers is cheap and the argument of the cost should not come in. The relative cost of maintaining ministers is lower here in Uganda. We have seen how ministers drive and how they are well catered for in other countries. 

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Rwamirama.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I thank you. I want to supplement the honourable members’ contributions and particularly the members who have just come to this House; that ministers get the salaries of Members of Parliament; period. It is simply deployment but you get the same salary as your colleagues here. We are paid here and not there.

MR BAKA MUGABI: I thank you honourable member for that information. That is the truth. The information that the honourable has give is the truth; ministers earn the salary of a Member of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Members, hon. Baka is on the Floor.

MR BAKA MUGABI: I want to reiterate that the information that the member has given is correct because ministers earn the salary of a Member of Parliament. They are only facilitated from the ministries and given an office for them to be able to perform their constitutional duties. 

I want to allay the fears of hon. Members that it is not so bad so far. We have areas which have come up; new areas that need political oversight. For example, we have regions that have been marginalised and are still undergoing further marginalisation and need political oversight. We have areas like [HON. MEMBERS: “Bunyoro.”] Bunyoro for example and very soon, Busoga –(Interjections)- we also have the discovery of oil. These are areas that need political oversight and the East African Community because for the East African Community, we originally had one minister and the President had to come here and request us to have a second minster such that that minister could be resident in Arusha. 

These are some of the emerging challenges and issues that this House needs to look into and approve the size of the Cabinet as requested for by the mover of the motion. I beg to end there. I thank you very much. 

3.44
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): I thank you. I rise in support of the motion. 

The Government has done a lot to see that service delivery is actually done efficiently and that is why they have to decentralise, create more sub-counties and districts. I, therefore, urge all my colleagues to support the motion so that service delivery is registered by the wanaichi.

I, therefore, move the motion that we close and then we go on. I put the question –(Interjections)- I put the question –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members that is my work. (Laughter) If you are in support, I thank you.

MR MBABAALI: Yes, I am in support.

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes, please.

3.45
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much. I rise to oppose the motion. Having listened to the reasons advanced by His Excellency, the President to vary the number of ministers, I am not convinced at all on the following grounds:

In Buganda, there is a saying, “Amamesse amangi tegeesimira bunya,” meaning, “Too many cooks spoil the soup.” Madam Speaker, I believe that having almost 76 ministers is so much that our economy cannot sustain it. I heard the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi comparing the UK to Uganda, but I think that was uncalled for because the economy of the UK is miles away from our economy. So, I don’t think we can compare it to that of Uganda.

Secondly, I know that some of our colleagues, especially those from the ruling party, are going to be beneficiaries of this addition and definitely, they have to support it. But when you look into the national interests, you realise that they should be given first priority. Definitely our selfish interests cannot really match with the national interests. 

Some Members say that the reason for creating those ministers is effective delivery of services and supervision, and that is okay. But remember that we have local councils right from LC I that have leaders. We also have councillors and chairpersons at various administrative levels. What are they doing? I think they are doing the supervision and monitoring of Government programmes. We have the RDCs and their deputies. What are their roles? Why are we duplicating work? You cannot convince me that we should have many ministers because they are going to supervise Government service delivery because you will be rendering the other elective offices irrelevant because otherwise, what are they going to do?

Finally, the President talks about balancing, I think he is not being sincere and straight on this. For example, among the five top most jobs in our country – the President, the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Chief Justice, none of them is a Muslim. Where are the Muslims in those five top most posts? So, Madam Speaker, it is against that background that I totally oppose the motion. Our country cannot afford that kind of luxury. Thank you very much.

3.45
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): I congratulate you upon achieving that high post. I also stand to oppose this motion on the following grounds: the way the phrase “service delivery” was brought out is ambiguous. We needed, as a House, to understand the roles of each of these nine ministries and how they are going to benefit Ugandans. In other words, we needed to understand the merits and demerits before we start seconding the motion. I think there was need for justification for creating these ministries. 

The justification brought in by hon. Mbabazi’s motion is not enough to give proper accountability to the people we represent. When we leave this House for our constituencies, we have to explain more about these nine ministries –

THE SPEAKER: Is that information?

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: I can receive the information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank the hon. Namayanja of Bukoto East, for giving way. I will have time to tell you about what hon. Sebaggala Latif said, on another occasion. Anyway, the information I would like to give to the House is about the reasons why we have not specified these ministries. The reason is simple – the President is asking Parliament to vary the number of ministers for the duration of these five years, which constitute his term of office. In that term, he will have the flexibility to improve on them, either by naming or by whatever configuration he chooses or finds most efficient. So, if we are to name them in Parliament, it would mean that each time that is to be done, he would be required to come to Parliament to seek a resolution. That is why it is important to leave that to him, to give him that “manoeuvrability” that in the course of managing that process, he is not encumbered by need or a requirement to come back to Parliament. That is all. Thank you.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I don’t know whether I have got the information I wanted or not. I am saying this because as I said, the reasons are ambiguous and that remains. We cannot just come here to say we are increasing on the number of ministries or ministers without knowing which ministry is going to be doing what; it will help us to account to the people. 

While in Parliament, we should not just say yes or no; there must be justification for supporting something. I was elected by the people of Bukoto East to represent their views. People are experiencing poverty; there are no hospitals – if you come here to tell us about the increase in ministries to subsidise people’s the household income, we shall support you. Otherwise, standing here and rubberstamping – I think I have made my point that I object to the motion.

3.56
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I am glad to see that you mastered my name on the first day I gave it to you. 

When shall we ever work towards reducing on Government expenses? I want to give you a situation – I am asking honourable colleagues to close their eyes, reflect on their rural areas where they come from and look at the UPE schools. Since 1997 when UPE started, none of the UPE schools has ever had a facelift. As we talk –(Interjections)– I said that since 1997, I don’t know of any UPE school, maybe in other regions but in the Buganda region, that has ever had a facelift.

When you create six ministries - already a UPE child is allocated Shs 2,000 per term! But when you look at the budget we shall give to the six ministries, you realise that if that money is given to UPE schools, they can improve and run. But here we are creating new ministries. As we are talking now, in all the UPE schools I know, we have not yet given them money to run schools but school opened and we are thinking of creating 27 ministers of state and eight ministries; that is Government expense! Already we have put in place about 100 RDCs with their deputies -(Interruption)

MR MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament to mislead the House that none of the schools has ever got a facelift?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, actually when you said that, my ears also popped up. Can you really substantiate? If it is that Buganda has not benefitted from UPE because it is very serious, you know -

MR SSEWUNGU: And I am also very serious with what I am saying. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, how many schools and which ones have not benefitted or none at all?

MR SSEWUNGU: I will give you specific examples right from around here. This Nakasero Primary School, Buganda Road Primary School; go to Kiswa Primary School, visit those schools and see what is happening. These are all UPE schools. Then also come to my constituency, I even have a school where the toilets have collapsed -(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE KINTU: Madam Speaker, I have been the Chairperson LC V Kalungu District, the district has been getting money to give facelifts of UPE schools and it is wrong for the hon. Member representing Kalungu West to say schools have not been benefitting. Even when Kalungu was a county under Masaka District, we were getting funds for UPE schools despite the fact that we were not getting for all schools.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it may be unfortunate that some people think putting a facelift means building new classrooms but I refer to repairing of schools; I think let me be specific. This is on record; there is a difference between -(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this is not a village meeting. (Laughter) Is the hon. Member in order to continue providing wrong information to this august House despite very useful and on the spot information from his own LC V? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, perhaps you wanted all the schools in Buganda to have a facelift. Not all of them got but some got a facelift. I think you should accept that because information from your counterpart in Kalungu -

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I think I am the one giving information and I am representing a constituency. So, I would like to go ahead.

As we talk now, let us look at our teachers in Uganda. What is their salary scale? When you look at 27 state ministries plus eight full ministries, if we calculate this money, it can help increase teachers’ salaries and build for them houses. 

As I wind up, we are talking of increasing the ministries but look at - again, we may put districts in place because of political supervision and we have LC V chairpersons. Take an example, in my district, we have an LC V chairperson who is from the Opposition but he was given a manifesto for the NRM and he picked it so that he can pick something from there to run the district. If this person is there to supervise, let us reserve these funds towards the improvement of our schools and I pray as we move forward, one day you will visit that constituency and see the schools around. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Lulume, I just want to inform honourable Members that I will be conducting parliamentary outreaches and I will come to your constituencies and check that information because it is on the Hansard.

4.01
DR MICHEAL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose this motion and what was very interesting from the mover and the seconder of this motion was that they also looked unconvinced that what they were presenting was indeed the right thing. When you read the statement from the President talking about national unity as the rationale for creating more posts in cabinet, I am sorry; I do not think this is a rational decision. The composition of this Parliament is enough to signify the national unity that the President would want to reflect in Cabinet. 

We all come from various parts of the country; many more constituencies have been created to ensure that people are represented at the highest level of decision making. Therefore, if at all the President’s rationale in creating more posts in Cabinet [MR ISABIRYE: “Information.”] not allowed! If that were the rationale, then there are other areas into which this national unity can be reflected. 

My colleagues have talked about political supervision - Parliament has got an oversight role which we all do in order to enhance Government’s activities especially at implementation level. If at all it is about political supervision, then Members of Parliament can effectively do this work because many more constituencies have been created that is why this august House is here.

Let us assume that Parliament is not enough. We have been creating districts one after the other for the purposes of implementation of the President’s manifesto or the party’s manifesto as well as the supervision of the projects that are undertaken at the grassroots level. If at all it is about political supervision, then the multiplicity of leadership that has been created would suffice. If it is about stability as the President would want us to believe, it is not about creation of multiplicity of members of Cabinet or ministers of state because there has never been results based on research that when you create multiplicity of Cabinet ministries; some of them maybe inert; it is going to cause national stability. 

National stability can be enhanced by the unity of Members of Parliament here in this august House. If it is about efficiency [MR ISABIRYE: “Information.”] I have not granted it and I have got the prerogative to accept it or not. May the Member resume his seat?

Madam Speaker, if it is about efficiency, efficiency is about utilisation of minimum resources to achieve set objectives maximally. Are there any results based on research that creation of multiplicity of ministries would enhance this efficiency? Certainly, not! The framers of the Constitution were spot on; they looked at the economy and -(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it order for the hon. Member to mislead the House whereas Article 111 of the Constitution reads verbatim like this: “There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of that State?” 

Is it on order for the Member of Parliament to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the powers of the President are clearly stipulated and he is acting within his powers in requesting the House to alter the numbers.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am not challenging the powers of the President, but I am challenging the rationale of the utilisation of his powers; that is why I came to Parliament. So I have challenged effectively the meaning of efficiency in the appointment of further ministers. And this request is not based on any research that their creation is going to enhance his efficiency –(Interjections)- this is my maiden speech in this Parliament, let me be protected; protect me, Madam Speaker. 

I want to categorically state that the people of Uganda need service delivery and this service delivery is only reflected in the amount of resources you send in to implement projects. As we are speaking now, we know that the remittances to the local councils have significantly reduced and the local councils are struggling to ensure that they collect enough taxes to run their governments. Most of the activities of the local councils are a provision from the central government, which makes them unable to sustain the activities that the people need. 

Now you want us to increase the number of ministries so that we remit colossal sums of money to them while the local councils, which are directly answerable to the people who elected you to Parliament, are languishing in poverty; trying to answer questions which they cannot answer? 

I want to conclude by urging Members of Parliament to reject this proposal and to ensure that the President defines which ministries can be prioritised if any and to ensure that in fact ministries are reduced from the current numbers to at least 21, which were foreseen by the Constitution of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, who has a motion; hon. Rusoke do you have a motion?

4.01
MS VICTORIA RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In all the reality that Uganda deserves; I think we would be deceiving ourselves not to believe that certain ministries are gigantic and require more efficient supervision. I can give an example of the ministry of finance, where there is a section of finance in general, planning –(Interjections)– I am going to move a motion but I want to first convince my colleagues. There is planning, investment, privatisation and micro-finance.

I also want to alert those people who are opposing it to know that enlarging these ministries does not mean that we are appointing new people out of this Cabinet. It means, if the ministry of finance is enlarged, it is up to the Members of Parliament to determine that [MS AMONGI: “Order!”] and realising that we are acting within the Constitution and having exhausted everything – Madam Speaker, I now move that you put the question for Members of Parliament to justify the need why we should increase the number of ministries. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the motion has not been quite completed; can someone complete the motion?

4.12
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the wide spectrum of the views presented by colleagues, I therefore move a motion that the question be put for Members to vary the number of cabinet ministers as requested in the motion –(Interjections)– I beg to move. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, this is a very important motion, for which I think you should give reasonable time to all the parties to make sure that when we arrive at the final decision, we all think that you have given us the time required. You seem to have given chance to one side – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, four Members of the Opposition have just been speaking; four Members have spoken in your absence. I have just given four Members in rapid succession from your side of the House.

MR SABIITI: I withdraw that statement, Madam Speaker, but I request that you give reasonable time for this motion to be discussed because there are many issues that we feel need to be touched; so that everybody can know –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker is the hon. Member in order to walk into the chamber and allege that there were seven groups – I think it is not fair for the hon. Member to state that they were not given enough time. We all want to contribute - and you are doing this in the interest of time. Is he, therefore, in order to allege that a certain group was not given time to express themselves whereas you chose Members from that side and have given ample time to them to present their issues? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have given ample time to all the shades of opinion in this House to express their views and it is not right for someone who has just walked in late to accuse the Chair of ignoring Members when the record is clear on the Hansard. So can we have someone – if you want to move a motion, move it properly? Hon. Mwesige.

4.16
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the question to hon. Mbabazi’s motion be now put.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the House do approve the motion as moved by hon. Amama Mbabazi.

 (Question put, and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we return to the orientation. 

4.12
MR ZERUBABEL NYIIRA (NRM, Buruuli County, Masindi): Madam Speaker, I want to, on behalf of the people of Buruuli –(Interjections)- County, congratulate you upon being elected Speaker.

I had two elements I wanted to get clarification on. The first one was on the numbers on the committees - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Can I remind hon. Members that we are in the chambers? If you are exiting, exit with decorum.

MR NYIIRA: The first one was seeking clarification on the membership of committees. Rule 137 restricts the number of Members to 20. Rule 147 also restricts the number also to 20 and so does rule 148. The clarification I am seeking is: what was the basis of restricting Members to that particular number and can it be changed in case the amendment is brought forward? That is the first clarification. 

The second clarification is on rule 70(g). It states that no Member shall bring into the House a number of gadgets. One of those gadgets happens to be the mobile phone, but also, the present technology enables the disabled people to use some electronic devices. This is not a clarification but a request that when the amendment committee sits; it should consider changes that might be able to provide for those devices and perhaps go with developments of technology that may be required. For that matter, maybe it may be required to have mobile phones brought in.

Those were the clarifications I wanted to bring forward.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nyiira, I hope you are not proposing that you sit in this House, take your calls and make calls. That is part of the rationale but it will be explained. 

4.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to get clarification. You mentioned very clearly that in the House, we have two sides, the Opposition and the Government side. If one side of the House decides to move out in protest and the Speaker continues for that remaining side to continue voting; I was of the view that if possible, the moment one side of the House moves out in protest, voting should be stopped by the remaining side –(Interjections)- since in the House we have only two sides, that means one side is missing. Therefore, what they will be voting for may not be binding to both parties.

Secondly, on the issue of the score card; when I was not yet in Parliament, I used to witness that MPs are required to attend the local council meetings but you may find that the local council meeting may be taking place on the same day that Parliament is transacting business. I want to find out: when Parliament is meeting at the same time that the local council is meeting, you find that a Member of Parliament is given zero because the person is not attending the council meeting. If you decide to leave Parliament, go and attend the council meeting, you are also given zero that you are absent in Parliament. I would like to seek clarification: what are our priorities as parliamentarians? Which business should we give priority to? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you know there is a situation where those who want to walk out want to stop business. It is a strategy where you can effectively cripple business by walking out each time there is a vote. Your responsibility is here; if you go out, that is your business.

About the district council, you can excuse yourself and say that, “We have a session”. You can tell them you have a session and it should be recorded so that you do not get a zero in the score card.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to bring the discussions of this august House to a halt, but I am just asking a procedural question. I have been in this House since 1988. The procedure for orientation normally takes place outside the precincts of Parliament. The resource persons are called from outside Parliament or within Parliament, if possible. But now, our Rules of Procedure also provide for Members to make their maiden speeches, which are not supposed to be interrupted as far as the Rules of Procedure are concerned. Now I am at a loss. When I am talking now, am I making a maiden speech yet I am being interrupted?

Number two, why didn’t the Clerk to Parliament organise an orientation workshop for Members of Parliament rather than us sitting here, debating, and making our maiden speeches in quotes? What is the problem? Why don’t we organise ourselves properly and go for an orientation workshop, Members sit and listen to other members from outside the precincts of this Parliament? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am disturbed that you do not want to sit in Parliament to even lay down your names; you want outsiders to train you when the Speaker whom you have just elected is here? 

About the maiden speeches, they will start with the State of the Nation Address. These ones, we are exchanging views and learning. They will start with the State of the Nation Address. In addition to that, we are going to have other inductions. Hon. Chebrot I am disappointed that you do not want to be in this Parliament to learn; you want to go to some other place to hear other people. 

4.25
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice and congratulate you upon your elevation to be the Speaker of this Parliament.

My concern is in reference to rule 118 about the Committee of the whole House. I want to know, under what circumstances can the House dissolve itself into a Committee of the whole House well aware that rule 118 stipulates it is when you are handling the Bill? I am asking this because early this week on Monday, other Members were proposing that the House constitutes itself into a Committee of the whole House to consider certain business. So, this confused me a bit because when I looked at the rules it is not there and now I would like to know under what circumstances the House can dissolve itself into a Committee of the whole House. Thank you.

4.28
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, my concern is on Appendix B, part III, section 8. This is on nomination of candidates for the East African Legislative Assembly. It reads, “Any Member of Parliament or any other person may, during office hours, for five working days from the last day of nomination, inspect and verify any nomination papers of any candidate subject to conditions that the Clerk may prescribe, and may lodge any complaint with the Clerk in relation to any nomination.” 

I concerned about “…any member may lodge ….” Is it any Member of Parliament or any other person? Which one is any other person? Can it be a person from my village? That is my concern. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: It will be answered. Thank you, hon. Chemutai. 

4.30
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was looking at the Rules of Procedure, I happened to look at rule 147, that is, the Budget Committee. When I was looking at the Budget Committee I realised that we are doing orientation but in two weeks’ time we may receive the Budget. My question is: will we just accept that budget without knowing whether the concerns for the places we represent are included?  Rule 147 does not explicitly give information about how the Budget Committee comes up with the Budget. 

Another concern is about rule 130. This one was talking about committees. I took time to give a calculation, which can suffice for this Parliament. If the committees are 13 and the Parliament of Uganda comprises 375 Members of Parliament minus the 75 who will be ministers and ministers of state, the requirement would be that instead of the committees being 13 we would just add two to make 15 committees whereby 20 Members would be included.

Another question falls under rule 154 on page 226: the functions of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. The roles of these committees under the Rules of Procedure are explained very well but we do have a problem with private institutions. We would like in future to adopt in the Rules of Procedure a section which governs private institutions because we have several cases regarding private institutions which are pending. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kwagala, your issue will be handled.

4.33
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are dealing with rules – mine is a bit different and I would like to inform Members that for the few years I have been here we come in with a lot of encumbrances. As an ordinary Member of Parliament you would come in with a driver and a political assistant and you need a secretary. So, I would like to inquire whether this time round there is any provision to at least facilitate some of those people?

You may notice with time that once you employ a driver; you employ a political assistant and then a secretary, their lives depend on the simple monies you give them and their families. So, this becomes a big encumbrance on the MP and without those three let us be sure that at least you will falter in one way or the other in fulfilling what we are supposed to do as guided by these rules. So, I was inquiring whether in future there is a provision to provide facilitation for those three encumbrances. Thank you.

4.35
MR ERNEST KIIZA (NRM, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issues I wanted to raise were ably clarified by hon. Kiyingi this morning. I thank you.

4.36
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All the issues I wanted clarification on were handled this morning by hon. Kiyingi.  

4.36
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This session is very important. It is very important to orient the new Members of the Ninth Parliament on how to understand the working environment – the environment conducive for them to undertake their duties smoothly. 

I have two fears: One is in relation to the Leadership Code of Conduct as highlighted by Article 233(1) and (2)(a) of the Constitution, which I beg to read verbatim: Article 233 reads, “(1)Parliament shall by law establish a Leadership Code of conduct for persons holding such offices as may be specified by Parliament. 
(2)The Leadership Code of Conduct shall- 
a)require specified officers to declare their incomes, assets and liabilities from time to time and how they acquired or incurred them, as the case may be;” 

My fear is: when are Members of the Ninth Parliament required to declare their assets, incomes and liabilities. My I fear is that a time will reach when some Members of Parliament knowingly or unknowingly may be left out and they will fall victim as it was the case in the Seventh Parliament, if I am not mistaken. So, we fear that some of us may fall victim and we do not want to lose this golden chance of being in the Ninth Parliament. So, I beg to be clarified on that.

The second issue is about the sitting arrangement. You have clarified that we have the side occupied by the Opposition and the other by Members of the ruling party. But suppose unknowingly, a Member comes and sits on a side that is different, what is the penalty and what is the justification for it? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The whips will whip them back; the whip will deal with a person who is loitering. But on the question of the Leadership Code, the forms are normally sent at once, the Speaker is informed and the Speaker informs all the Members that the forms have arrived. We shall not allow you to forget to fill those forms.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I bring you greetings from the people of Makindye and they wish you a good stay and service in that chair. 

I have got two clarifications that I need. One is about rule 54. What does it mean by “Half-hour motions”? When is that rule applied? 

Two, rule 146(2), when is that sub-rule applied and if it is applied, doesn’t it contradict rule 144? 

The other one is rule 4(9) and rule 5(5), on electing the Speaker. At what time do you make changes without debating? So don’t the two sub-rules contradict? Thank you.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on rule 132, which is standing committees and rule 159 about the ssessional committees. When you look at the trend of events, we have increased the number of ministries and with my little understanding I would think that each standing committee is linked to a ministry. So, the guidance I am seeking is whether we shall also have more committees in light of the increased ministries. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have something I would like you to clarify. It is about rule 190(1) on evidence regarding parliamentary proceedings. You very well know that the communities that we left behind are very keen and most of them follow our proceedings on the media and elsewhere; and whenever we go to them they would like to know how far we have gone with the proceedings and particularly on certain contentious matters. They regard us as a source of appropriate information. Can I be clarified on how we shall handle the information required by the communities? 

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek guidance with a view to a possible future amendment to rule 130 pertaining to parliamentary committees. Article 90(2) states that: “Parliament shall by its Rules of Procedure prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.” 

What I have noted in the procedures is that we have fixed a specific number for each committee – actually the number is 20 – and whereas this number is fixed, the denominator is not fixed; the Members of Parliament are not fixed by number. Seasonally, the numbers change – in fact upwards; and that renders the even distribution of such numbers difficult. We need a provision to ensure that there is a fair distribution of the Members of Parliament among the committees that would do better than fixing the numbers; because when you fix the numbers, then the distribution becomes difficult.

The work of committees is so paramount that we need each and every Member of Parliament to be associated with certain committees in terms of membership. Therefore, the distribution is very important. So, when we fix the distribution of Members, it makes it very hard to ensure that if the numbers of parliamentarians change, then it is hard to ensure that they are fairly and where possible, evenly distributed. So, I would suggest that in future we would seek the intervention of colleagues to actually do away with fixed numbers and go with the phrase that will allow Members to be fairly and where possible evenly distributed than just putting the number at 20. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me say something about the numbers because many Members have raised it. We considered that to be the optimum in the Eighth Parliament. I want to assure you that there were committees which failed to raise 20 and then there were those which were over subscribed. That is why we had to consider what we thought was optimum but we are taking into account the numbers here and I want to assure you that we shall review the composition and the numbers taking into account the size of the House now. You will see it for yourselves. There were one or two committees that never raised 20.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek guidance because I have been reading the Rules of Procedure and I have read the book that they provided us. I have not come across any rule or information about the scorecard and yet I hear people are really worried about this scorecard. It might divert the Members from their actual work and instead concentrate on impressing the scorecard by some member who is outside this Parliament. So, can we be guided whether we should actually work to impress the scorecard elements or whether we should concentrate on our work, as Members of Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the scorecard is not a parliamentary tool but it is a tool from an institution outside Parliament carrying out oversight on Parliament and I can assure you that in some instances, some Members have been destroyed by the contents of the scorecard. So, although we are carrying out oversight of the Government, the public is also carrying out oversight over us.  Unfortunately we cannot stop them because they are a public body, and I think they are free to carry out oversight over a branch of Government. So, it is an evil but we have to live with it. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is with rule 171: the scope of deliberations of the committee. I wanted to be clarified. If a given committee goes beyond its scope, and I give an example like the Public Accounts Committee; it is mandated to just look into the report of the Auditor-General but then, because of personal whims, a Member of the committee brings in another issue which does not belong to it. Like in the Eighth Parliament, they jumped on the land issue. How shall we treat deliberations which are beyond their scope and of which they have deliberated on without research? Should we take it to be obiter dicta? And yet here, in rule 133(d), it says that a committee to deliberate has to carry out relevant research in their respective fields. I need to be clarified. Thank you.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you. I just wanted to inquire from your office when we are getting our offices because with me, I normally come from Iganga to Parliament and by the time I reach here, around 9 O’clock, I take around one hour loitering, mixing with drivers and at times we end up spending money when we sit in the canteen and yet we would have used that money for something else. So I want to inquire when we are getting our offices so that we can be comfortable and think deep. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let me answer the issue of offices immediately. Hon Members, since Monday, I have been appealing to the political parties and the others here to give me the whips because as a Parliamentary Commission, we give a particular number of offices to each party. And it is the whips who allocate the offices. But up to today, only one party has given me a whip. The others have not. So, I am handicapped and I cannot distribute the offices. That is why this morning I said, “Can you please help me to be more effective; I want you to get offices but I must hand them over to your whips.” And I will repeat the appeal when we are leaving. I am only waiting for the whips and then we start issuing the offices.

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification. You talked about whips taking names to your office but we, Independents, have not been considered. Since you took up responsibility as our whip, I think we should come directly to you and you get us offices. 

THE SPEAKER: I am going to distribute offices when all of us are together. I will hand over offices to the whips and the Independents too. I cannot do it just sporadically. You will be taken care of. By the way, hon. Members, Independents should not feel isolated. You are part of this Parliament and you will be looked after.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have a concern regarding rule 105, which talks about private Members’ Bills. The rules are very clear about facilitation after the motion has been moved in Parliament and probably agreed to for such a Bill but the rules are in the same way very silent about facilitation before, probably during the research time or preliminary arrangements in achieving such a Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to be guided. Is there provision for facilitation or even refund, after such a Bill has been presented to the House and probably the motion carried? I beg to be guided. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much. The honourable member has touched an area I wanted to talk about. However, rule 105(2) gives clear ground that, “The Member moving a Private Members’ Bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the department of government whose area of operation is affected by the Bill.” My concern here is: who will write to the Government department concerned so that assistance is given? Thank you.

4.57
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sending you greetings from the people of Ntenjeru County North who are actually your neighbours on one side. 

I rise on the issue of incorporating productivity in whatever we are doing and particularly in our Rules of Procedure. The concept of productivity presupposes that we do better today than yesterday. I have been working with Government from the side of development planning, and in one of the research works that we did, we established that one of the leading binding constraints has been the absence of appropriate laws,  policies  et cetera.  And the public sector has been constrained in terms of demanding the legislature to enhance their level of productivity. In other words, the demand for these laws is far much more than what we can supply from this side.

The key question is: how do we incorporate the issue of productivity to make sure that if last year we were able to generate about 85 Acts, we generate about 120 Acts this time? The other day, I think it was hon. Nyombi who was talking about how they visited so many countries and generated some reports. In short that is called benchmarking best practices elsewhere; but he seemed to be frustrated as to how he failed to get an opportunity to present and discuss those reports here. And this could be one of the means through which we can enhance our productivity. 

Unless we incorporate it in the Rules of Procedure and other programmes of Parliament, it is going to be difficult to enhance outputs. In fact most organisations that are performing well have incorporated the issue of productivity. It is a broad concept that we need to be thinking about. 

The other day it was hon. Muyingo who was talking about time management. We lose a lot in that area and at the end of the day we are assessed as to how much we are producing only to find that it is still the same or less. One would argue that the House is expanding by each term. Today, we are many more than what we were in the Eighth Parliament and someone would expect that we generate more laws than what the previous Parliament did because by the numbers, we should be able to produce more. So, we need to think about how we are going to meet that challenge. 

Madam Speaker, I could give an example: we have various ssessional committees, it would do no harm getting as many as 40 Members on each committee provided that each committee could be split into two at the operational level just like you get so may pupils and create different class in streams A and B for them. So, in the same way, we could do that because what people expect of us is a lot more than what we can provide and we cannot meet those challenges.  

So, we can split these ssessional committees, with one addressing certain issues that concern that particular sector and the other also dealing with certain issues. One could be dealing with a particular Bill and another one dealing with issues related to monitoring of the performance of that sector. Many sectors here are rotting just under our nose but we cannot do anything because we don’t have the time to address them.  

So, Madam Speaker, I propose that when we get more time, we should look at this concept and see how we could utilise it for the betterment of the performance of this august House. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I just want to say that the Speaker and the Parliamentary Commission are assiduously addressing that issue so that we can make an improvement on our past performance. But I would like to thank you for your input; it has enriched our thoughts. 

5.03
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you. Allow me thank you for taking us through the Rules of Procedure. However, I would also like to register an observation that there is a lot that is not written. And sometimes I think during the second sitting of this meeting, there were some calls that we should have guided tours and we also have risks and vulnerabilities that fellow Members should guard against. 

I would like to beg you indulgence to include some aspects in orientation that were not originally pointed out. For example, could we know about the norms, practices and the language used in Parliament? This is a matter of urgency simply because this is part of orientation. What is its purpose? Orientation is to help the Member fit in a new environment and reduce that anxiety. It feels so bad when a Member comes to the Floor and fails to move. It feels so bad when a Member comes to the Floor and doesn’t use parliamentary language. 

As an expert on psychology of adult learning, it kills the self esteem of that Member; that Member will be shy another time to come to the Floor to make a contribution. Can we address that one urgently, Madam Speaker? I request. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I informed you that this part of the orientation is on the Rules of Procedure basically. We are going to have three or four others where we shall induct you. It is not going to end here. First, we wanted you to get the principles of the rules and then we start business with the State of the Nation Address where I will protect all your speeches and the Budget and then by that time, I think you will have picked up a few other things. But there will be other inductions. 

5.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In addition to what the hon. Member has just said, during the debate on the approval of ministers, an hon. Member offered a point of information to the hon. Lulume Bayigga and he blatantly said on the microphone, “I have refused.” I did not want to interrupt debate at that time but I thought that the language that he used while declining the information from the honourable member was not respectful enough. 

I thought that Members should be guided. Even when they will not take either a point of information or clarification from another, they should do so in decorum and respect because that is provided for in rule 65 on interruption of debate. The specific provision says, “A Member may rise on a point of information or elucidation or clarification based on a matter raised by a Member holding the Floor but may only proceed with the point if the Member holding the Floor is willing to give way and resume his or her seat.” I thought Members of Parliament in the process of debate have to get lots of information and clarification but when you decline that opportunity for another Member to inform us or seek clarification; we should do so in respectful manner so that we maintain the respect of this House.

MR KATOTO: I need clarification on what hon. Dombo has presented. I thought that it is prudent when a point of information is raised, a Member should first wait for the Speaker to ask him whether he accepts or not. Do you answer direct without going through the Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You know hon. Members I did not want to apply the rules strictly during this orientation. I am waiting for you to have maiden speeches before I start “hitting people on the head”. I am now letting things pass so that you can learn but ordinarily I am supposed to ask whether you want the information. If you decline then you proceed but the whip will be later; for now let us just listen to each other.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, at some point you said that “the man” has just come back and he probably has forgotten the rules of procedure”. The point I was alluding to was connected with what hon. Dombo stated. You said after this we are going to move to the State of the Nation Address and the budget. It would be proper for the hon. Members who have just come to attest to presentations of those people like professor Kanyeihamba. I do not know whether that is part of this process otherwise what about the practicability of the process of parliamentary practice at work which the honourable members have not visited? I do not know what is in your store but I thought some of those issues should be brought on board.

THE SPEAKER: I said on Monday that I do not want the Members to be stampeded. Let us move steadily. As the Parliamentary Commission, I said that we should start by orienting them on the rules. We are going to have other seminars and additional induction. Trust me to help members come along. 

MS KARUNGI: My issue is rule 65, which is talking about the interruption of debates. You realise that in the morning I had a point but I did not know whether they start with a point of order, information or procedure and it is actually an embarrassment. So, I was praying that maybe if you could elaborate more about those issues such that we know which comes before or after the other such that we new Members can be comfortable. 

I was talking to some Members and they were saying that they cannot talk because they may make a mistake. I was lucky because I sat near her, you people should always sit with people who have been here and they will help you very much. She explained to me but I think that if you explain to everybody then it will be better for us.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are going to answer all these questions, can you make your inquiries about your Rules of Procedure? 

MS NANTUME: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of concern; so many people are not here, it is because of one thing, when they raised their amendments, you promised that you will give us time to amend but remember according to what I have just learnt it has to go to the rules committee and the rules committee is not yet constituted. You have just told us that the Opposition have not yet submitted. So how long should we wait?

I want to put forward this concern, I know that according to what you communicated, orientation begun on Monday to today Wednesday, business is beginning on Monday again next week. So what rules are we going to be following because according to my expectation, we have to adopt these rules after their amendment not these ones from the previous Parliament. That is my understanding, I need clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Until we amend these rules, they are the rules that we shall go by. The proposals made here will be placed on Hansard and passed on to the rules committee to consider after it has been set up but in the meantime we shall apply these rules. We did not come here to amend rules; we came here to understand the rules as they are. The proposals are good but it is not yet time to amend them. You will have time; in fact if some of you want to be on the rules committee then you can indicate to your whips that you want to be on the rules committee so that you capture the areas that you want to amend.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want Members to ask questions about the rules that are what this orientation is about.

MR KAMARA: My question is about leave of absence. It states that, “Every Member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker.”

My question is: if someone is absent due to a genuine cause but without notifying the Speaker, is there any specific penalty to that person?

THE SPEAKER: If you absent yourself without informing me for 15 consecutive sittings, you will be thrown out of Parliament. It is in your interest to inform me, if you are sick, you should inform me that you are sick. I will record it and inform the Clerk that, “This person is sick”, but if we continue recording you as absent and it comes to 15 sittings then you will be out.

MR KATOTO: Long live, Madam Speaker, I am really worried that when we reach to the level of amendment of these rules I may not get a chance to cite this. On page 206, they talk about who should have powers of withdrawing and relocating Members from one committee to another and again electing the chairpersons. I would like to pray that when we reach the amendment level, you should put it down and amend that under the guidance of our parties we should elect the chairs amongst ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for your proposal; it will be captured by the Hansard.

MR KATOTO: Okay.

DR CHEBROT: Our Rules of Procedure do provide that the business of the House shall be transacted in English. But I am really concerned by some old Members of this House because when they interject their speeches with sayings and quotations in their own languages of Lusoga, Luganda, Kup Sabiny, is it really in order? I think it is important that you clarify to these Members that the business of the House shall be conducted in English and no other language shall be allowed to be interjected in between. The Members do not even take the trouble to interpret what they are saying in Luganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Hansard will not capture those languages other than English. 

5.18
MR FAISAL KIKULUKUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): I thank you. Since this is orientation, I thought we should share this information with Members on rule 62. 

I am raising it because I see a number of Members here reading papers and I thought it is necessary for Members to know that it is not in line with parliamentary discipline for one to read papers.

Rule 62 goes, “Subject to these rules, and except with the leave of the Speaker, Members shall not read newspapers or periodicals or books in the Chamber of the House.” 

Rule 85(1) talks about the divisions. Somewhere it says that, “Where after the Speaker or the Chairperson has announced the results of the voting under Rule 82, immediately, forty or more Members stand in their places signifying their disapproval of the outcome of the vote, the Speaker or Chairperson shall order for a division.” 

While we were talking on the issue of the motion of approval of the appointment by His Excellency, the President of hon. Mbabazi for the Office of Prime Minister, some Members did rise to say, “I am talking on behalf of the Opposition that we are not in line with that decision and we are not for it.” I beg for your guidance; where does such a comment come in such a statement?

Why did they not rise up to protest a motion that a Member had put across? I just want to know how one protests to say that, “We the Opposition shall not believe this,” without others standing up to protest a motion that has been put by a Member in support of an appointment.

Further, somewhere in rule 88, you talk of voting in error. That, “If a Member states that he or she voted in error or that his or her vote was counted wrongly, he or she may, immediately before the Speaker announces the figures and before the Speaker declares the results of the division, move to have his or her vote correctly recorded.”

I beg to be educated. If you did put a question that those in favour say, “aye” and to the contrary “no” and voices come up to say, “aye” or “no”, how will you identify that somebody’s voice out of many that they pronounced has been counted wrongly? 

I want to know the science and the formula one can use to detect that one’s voice was recorded wrongly out of such a pronouncement. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That matter concerns the division lobby and hon. Kiyingi will explain it.

MS NANTABA: I thank you. I beg and seek guidance on rule 128 on presentation of budget statement. Sub-rule 1, the last part says, “… the Budget shall be presented to the House on such day as the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, appoint.” During the campaigns, His Excellency, the President made pledges which pledges where already stipulated in the NRM manifesto. 

If the Budget is presented to the House and one of the pledges that I want to see being touched is not in the Budget, whom do I see or consult to make sure that my pledge is in the budget and it is being catered for? I beg to be guided. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. You will be informed about the budget process. 

MR BAGOOLE: I thank you. My concern is on rule 10, sub-rule (1)(f): the composition of the Parliamentary Commission. Rule 1(f) says that it is supposed to be composed of four back benchers and then sub-rule (3) says, “Of the four back bencher Members of Parliament prescribed under sub-rule (1), one shall come from the Opposition Party or Parties.” 

When I happen to read the Rules of Procedure, it is like they consider so much the numerical strength and in this case I am concerned about the Independents. When you compare the numerical strengths of the Independents this time, it is far greater than even the Opposition side. 

My suggestion was that when it comes to the rules committee to amend these rules, can they consider that one of the back bench members come from the Independents? I beg to move.   

THE SPEAKER: I thank you.

MR HARUN KYEYUNE: I thank you. This is a very good exercise but my appeal to you is to make arrangements for us to meet the technical staff such that we can know who handles what.

May I also know about the benefits and privileges of Members of Parliament so that we can plan accordingly? I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on Monday a Member raised issues of welfare and I informed you that we shall have a closed ssession where we shall discuss those matters. That ssession will take place tomorrow. I do not want you to mix the rules with the issues of welfare, please! We shall have a closed ssession tomorrow to discuss those issues by ourselves.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I wanted to benefit from your experience and I want to ask for education on appendix (f) on the Code of conduct for Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Point of Order, Madam Speaker. Is hon. Sam Engola in order to keep receiving his calls when the House is in session?

THE SPEAKER: Who is that?

MR CHEBROT: Hon. Sam Engola.

THE SPEAKER: No, no that is out of order. Can you please go to the lobby if you want to use the telephone; you can’t use a telephone in this Chamber. Yes, hon. Ssempijja.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, Part VII on the code of conduct talks about declaration of interests, but I want to benefit from your experience and be educated on how a Member of Parliament would declare interests in this regard. Maybe there are people in Parliament here who have done it before – I would like to know under what circumstances this section applies to a Member of Parliament.

Two, there are other things on which information should provided to us. For example, in this building, we have not known where the library is located –(Interjections)– no, we know where the toilets are; those are easy to find, but there are those other things that we need to be informed about. Before we came here, we heard about recreation, a football team – those other things that concern the Members and should be really talked about. Although they don’t directly come under the Rules of Procedure, they affect our wellbeing in this place. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssempijja, for the interests of the Members, I just want to give an example. We have the Committee on National Economy which deals with loans. Supposing we are discussing a loan to an institution where a Member of this House is shareholder, then that member has to declare their interests; such a Member can disqualify him/herself from the debate in reference to that issue. 

5.30
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you, on behalf of the people of Ntoroko County, upon your victory. 

I would like to say something about rule 13 that talks about whips. I think inclusive of the so many roles that whips do for political parties or for the people they represent in Parliament especially in the Opposition and the NRM side.  

when I look at Section 10, it says: “Other functions of the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip and party whips shall include: a) organizing party business; b) keeping Members informed of business; c) supplying lists of Members to serve on standing or ssessional committees; d) co-operating with whips in putting into effect agreed parliamentary business; e) acting as intermediaries between leaders and other party Members; f) arranging representations of the party Members on official and parliamentary delegations; and g)acting as tellers during divisions.”

When I look at this, I realise that the whips have a lot to do for the people they supervise in the House. But the other thing is that it is absurd that there is no provision for independents who are even more than the Opposition in this House. 

I, therefore, would like to suggest that independent Members of Parliament get someone to monitor and help them do things in a common manner. Otherwise, just to say that we report to you when sometimes you may be inaccessible – we need someone on the Floor to coordinate our activities or to act as a whip for us. This will help us to easily get offices and access committees. Yes, you are going to handle our issue in regard to placement onto committees, but sincerely there is need for more recognition in the House rather than us having to run around as individuals yet we could operate via a single platform. Thank you.

5.33
MR BIGIRWA: Many members have congratulated you upon the elevation to that office. I am no exception; I have to also congratulate you.

I rise in regard to rule 8(1), which I would like to read verbatim to the House. It reads: “Every member shall, as far as possible, have a sit reserved for him or her by the Speaker.” 

I am just wondering about the practicability of it based on the current size of Parliament Chamber versus the numbers in here. This is important because this sub rule puts it as a mandatory on the part of the Speaker to reserve sits for Members.

My understanding is that in the event that is possible, that is okay, but if not possible, I would like to suggest that instead of using the word “shall” which makes it mandatory yet you may not afford to do that, can we use the word “may?” I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OKWENYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had not got the chance of speaking on the Floor of the House because I have been sick. So, let me take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your victory; you really made us proud.

I want to comment on rules 11 and 12, which talk about the election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly and the Pan African Parliament respectively.  One thing I noticed is that most of us the new entrants (like I would say) really do not know much about those two parliaments. So, Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that you give us a highlight about what happens there? What goes on in those two parliaments?

The other thing I would like to talk about is the manner in which some Members conduct themselves. There are those who are talking so many times. They want to talk like five to ten times, yet we are many and some of us would also like to get opportunity of talking but we cannot. There are those who are dominating. So, I would beg that you try to regulate them and let us also get an opportunity of talking. Thank you very much for your audience.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okwenye, you will be informed about both the Pan African Parliament and the Legislative Assembly.

MR SSALI: Mine is a concern and the second one will be guidance from you. Madam Speaker, mine concerns rule 8 on sitting arrangement in the House where it reads that, “Every member shall have a seat reserved for him or her...” But on my side, it seems that I do not have a reserved seat because for the last three days, I have been coming here and sitting in different places. I very well know that we have a Chamber somewhere which is a bit comfortable but for the last three days, I have been seated here on these uncomfortable chairs and nobody has bothered to tell me as to why I am seated in this hall. So, I request that, that one be clarified.

The other one is on rule 96 and I seek guidance on this. I might have a trip; a business trip or I am going to visit someone abroad. Do I need to come to you or write to you to inform you that I will not be around during this period? I seek guidance on that one. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, you are a Member of this House. If you leave the country, you are supposed to inform me especially when we are in session. I have already told you that if you miss 15 sittings consecutively without notifying the Speaker, you are out. So, it is in your interest to inform me even if you are going on a business trip that, “I am not available for four days or five days or six days.”

Then, on the issue of the sitting, when I took the oath, I informed you and apologised that we are sitting here and not in the Chamber because of the numbers. We are constructing a new Chamber to accommodate 550 Members where all Members will have a seat. But I am also hoping that an opportunity will arise for us to use the Chamber when our numbers decrease by other appointments. But for now, I am sorry you have to be inconvenienced. Just sit near your friends.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is on rule 57(1). It says, “A Member desiring to speak shall rise and address the chair and shall only speak after catching the Speaker’s eye.” My concern is that, what happens if a Member tries or attempts to stand up several times to catch the Speaker’s eye but you do not maybe - I have seen instances whereby some Members are rising up several times, we try to stand up but unfortunately, your eye does not catch us. So, I do not know what will happen in the subsequent meetings on the Floor when the Member tries to stand up and perhaps you are not seeing us. That is my concern.

THE SPEAKER: I have just informed hon. Ntabazi that she spoke the other day. I informed hon. Muyingo that he has already spoken and I informed hon. Awongo that he has already spoken. Surely, how can you accuse me of not seeing you and you are late, you were not here part of the day?

MR SSASAGA: No, Madam Speaker, I need some guidance on it -

THE SPEAKER: No, please do not accuse. First of all, you are late; you were not here in the morning, yes! And you have not been here. You have just arrived and then you are complaining about not being seen. In the morning, I started from your side. Everybody who was here spoke. In the afternoon, I started from this side so do not be in a hurry to accuse.

MS ACHENG: Madam Speaker, on behalf of St Catherine old girls, I congratulate you. I am Ruth Acheng Joy, Woman MP, Kole District. I rise to seek clarification or guidance on rule 14 which says suspension of the rules. My concern is under what circumstance do we suspend the rules? Is it in emergency or in crisis? I beg to be guided. Thank you.

5.44
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you.  I would like to talk about rule 13 that talks about whips. Rule 13(1) says, “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip appointed by the government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.”

Then rule 13(4) says, “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in opposition to the government and having the greatest numerical strength among the Opposition parties in Parliament.” 

And then their roles have been spelt out in rule 13(10). Organising party business, keeping Members informed of business, supplying lists of Members to serve on standing and ssessional committees, cooperating with whips in putting into effect and coordinating agreed parliamentary businesses and so on and so forth.

My concern here is or what I would like to maybe request is that, in future, let the President of the Opposition party for instance Dr Kiiza Besigye also be co-opted in the House so that he sits with us and then coordinates all their political activities within the House instead of walking and walking -(Laughter)- and after getting tired of walking on the streets, they have now resorted to hooting and hooting. You businessmen who have battery shops sell to them car batteries so that - you know the hooting consumes a lot of battery power and soon they are going to get tired of the hooting. 

So, my request is that in the nearest future, let people like Dr Kiiza come and also sit with us here as Chief Opposition Whip. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Dr Besigye was represented in the previous Parliament by the Leader of the Opposition, an elected Member of the House.

MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the constituents I represent, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon attaining the big office you have attained in the Parliament. I need to be guided on rule 66 during our debate here, I was shocked. The rule reads in the headline: “Motion that a Member be no longer heard: ....” There are a lot of words down there, but I need more light on this. As far as I am concerned, whatever is here is still unclear. I have seen the way we debate here, I have heard the language we use here and this rule might be applicable to most of us when we get to serious business.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang, the key lies in the words, “irrelevant, tedious, repetitious or objectionable”; those are the key words for which a Member can be stopped from talking.

MR DRITO: I wish to congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker and convey similar congratulations to our new Vice-President and Prime Minister. I am raising a point of clarification on rule 8(4). It relates to the sitting arrangement in the House. It states that “Any independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit on”

Madam Speaker, I need clarification. Having decided to sit on one side of the House, can any independent Member of this House, at the same time or after a period of time reconsider his or her position and move to another side of the House. Or is it a one off decision that a Member should abide with throughout the period of the Ninth Parliament?

MR MAGEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring you greetings and congratulations from my people. I have observed that we receive the Order Paper and all documents for our discussion either at the gate as we come in or when we are already here seated. And this actually includes even substantive motions and supportive documents. But we appreciate that this constrains our research, our preparedness and our scrutiny of the papers we are going to discuss. 

Our rule 24, “The Clerk shall send to each Member a copy of the Order Paper for each sitting - 
a)  In the case of the first sitting of a meeting, at least two days before that sitting. 
b) In the case of any other sitting, at least three hours before the sitting without fail.”

The rule says, “without fail”. I am aware that you might have constraints especially at the beginning like this one, but I am looking ahead when we begin serious discussions and debate. So I would like to get your guidance and clarification. What should I expect as a new Member in terms of delivery of important documents to me in advance of the meeting? 

We could receive some of these electronically; we have been assigned e-mail addresses. But I have learnt that there are some we have to receive in hard copy. And much as we get them in our pigeon holds, every Friday, we have to be in our constituencies. So to help us debate meaningfully, I want to understand; what is the procedure; what should we expect?

Secondly, for hon. Kiyingi, help me to understand rule 162 on the select committee vis-à-vis rule 164 on the ad hoc committee. I have read through and I seem to understand that the select committee handles matters which come in rapidly from the Business Committee; but I am not clear on what business is assigned to select committees vis-à-vis the business that is assigned to the ad hock committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me assure the Members that one of the reasons we have asked you to register is to complete the records of all the Members in this House so that each of you is assigned a pigeon hole with your name where all your papers will be placed. So please, complete the registration and we shall give each one of you a pigeon hole with your name and your keys.

Once we have sorted out the accommodation, you will also receive other information on the internet. But I do not know whether you wanted us to do other deliveries; I do not think it is possible at this stage. We use the internet and the pigeon holes.

I think Members have generally raised the issues that they wanted answered. But I am also aware that I have not yet provided you with transport. So I would like to adjourn the House now so that you can go home and arrive safely. Tomorrow, I will permit hon. Kiyingi to respond in the afternoon. 

I appeal to all the parties to use the morning tomorrow to give me the names of the whips so that we can start work. My work is really hindered. Tomorrow, I will leave the morning for the parties and the Independents to organise themselves so that by afternoon, we know who the whips are and then we can start our other business. 

I want to thank you very much. Have a good evening. Tomorrow we shall have a closed ssession about our other matters, which I do not want to say here. The House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.56 and adjourned until Thursday, 26 May 2011 at 2.30 p.m.) 

