


Thursday, 23 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We are at the tail-end of the budget and I made a promise to the Members that I intend to keep - that we do what we can and if we are able to finalise, then we will do the needful. There are Members who had requested to raise some matters.

2.11
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent concern. According to the school calendar, schools will open for second term on Monday, 27 May 2019 and yet the teachers, under their umbrella organisation - the Uganda National Teachers’ Union - have declared an industrial action. 

I am concerned - and this should be for all of us to get - that the learners are bound to lose out academically. Government negotiated with the Public Service Unions and signed a collective bargaining agreement with these unions, UNATU inclusive. This was done following the guidelines spelt out in the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act, 2008 and the Designation of Public Service Labour Unions Statutory Instrument No.56 of 2011.

In the CBA, the Government and Public Service Unions clearly highlighted and agreed upon salary enhancement for three years in a selective manner, which has not been done -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter, honourable member?

MS RWABUSHAIJA: If this problem is not settled, then our learners will miss out academically because this is second term and they are bound to lose out because time wasted will not be regained and “time and tide waits for no man.”

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Government should renegotiate with the workers concerned - that is the Public Service Unions - in order to come out with the new CBA which will be signed and probably put to an end the standoff so that our children are able to continue with their studies; instead of issuing dos and don’ts through the media yet they know that we have a negotiation machinery in place, according to the laws of this country.

The Government should implement the CBA without discrimination because last year they were able to give according to the agreement. People were given their enhanced salaries but this year, they have changed the mode and there is no clear explanation.

Thirdly, if the Government does not negotiate with the workers, then we should support them in their industrial action or else we do not pass the budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Government is aware of the issues regarding the teachers and the Ministry of Public Service has initiated an effort to speak to the teachers to try and explain to them the position of Government.

To say that we are not going to honour what we promised - the timing might not be what you wish because as you know, there are a number of issues that we are handling this financial year. However, we have not said that we are not going to honour what we promised.

Communication will be made to the leaders of the union, there will be discussions and I implore the honourable member that you allow the budget process to move on as we talk to the teachers. I am sure that we shall have a common ground on how to move forward.

We have been talking to them for a number of years; we have honoured our obligations for almost three years and we cannot fail on this last one.

2.16
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raise an issue of urgent national importance in regard to the proposed cities that are going to be formed in Uganda. I was at the Ministry of Local Government today and I was told by the relevant officer in the ministry who gave me the list of the proposed cities and I would like to bring the background of Teso sub region -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Urgent matter?

MS AMONGIN: The urgent matter is in relation to Soroti City; I would like to bring to the attention of this House that Soroti Municipality is one of the oldest municipalities in this country and it hosts people from different communities including the Bagisu, Karamojong and Iteso.

If you look at the criteria for a place to qualify to be a city, Soroti is one of those areas that have potential to grow. Therefore, I would like the Minister of Local Government to come and explain to the people of Teso why Soroti City is missing and if it is not included –(Ms Adeke rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On urgent matters, the Member raising has all the information.

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Local Government to come and urgently explain to the country why Soroti Municipality is missing among the proposed cities.

The minister should also explain the criteria used for choosing which municipality comes first and why others come last. On behalf of the people of Teso, I beg to move.

2.19
MS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conveniently, she is also from that sub-region.

MS OKURUT: Thank you, hon. Amongin, for bringing up that matter. Definitely, there is a lot of beef in what she has said. Soroti is something else because the population – yes, historically and otherwise. 

However, Mr Speaker, as you know the creation of these cities is in phases. Hon. Amongin, go and assure the people of Teso –but we should be realistic. It is too late for the first phase and I know the Iteso very well; they will understand that this is in phases. It is staggered and therefore, this is the first phase –(Interjections)- honourable member, it will come but I agree with you. I will take the information to the Minister of Local Government so that he can go down there and give an explanation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. When these matters come to Parliament, they will be sent to committees where different people will make their presentations and then the committee will be at liberty to make some suggestions to the House. Therefore, all is not lost; we will see how to do it after all, there is nothing before Parliament yet.
 
2.21
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I rise on a matter concerning 12 Ugandan girls who are stranded in Saudi Arabia. A sad story is in the Saturday Vision of 18 May 2019 and when you read the paper, the names of the girls are Ugandans. There is Nanyondo, Kyomuhendo and Naigaga among others.

According to the story, these girls have been dumped at a deportation centre either by their employers or police. The girls are denied food and access to medical treatment. The names of the labour firms that took these girls, they do not sound Ugandan. I wish to know if we can find out the owners of these companies.

Also importantly, as we read the sad story of these girls, the same paper is carrying advertisements of firms calling young people who want to work abroad to apply for the job opportunities. Mr Speaker, I would like to know from Government the condition and fate of these girls who are at the police station.

Secondly, I also would like to find out if the ministry has any mechanism on how they get feedback on these girls who are employed in these countries. I beg to lay the paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from the Government?

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development will liaise with the honourable member and address this issue.

2.24
MR DEOGATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the closure and destruction of coffee in my district by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). 

Last Friday, UCDA invaded the districts of Bukomansimbi and the greater Masaka in general with a mission to close all the coffee factories at a time when farmers are looking for money to take back their children to school.

The act done by UCDA has caused distress to the farmers to the extent that this is the time when the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) is in the act of distributing coffee seedlings to the farmers yet UCDA has refused the planting of coffee. The call is everywhere to increase coffee production to boost this economy.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries intervenes and directs UCDA to go and sensitise farmers, dealers and processors instead of closing factories. The UCDA gave a directive that all coffee factories must be built with permanent structures using bricks; that this is the reason the quality of coffee has gone down in the country. 

Mr Speaker and Members, when you look at the coffee factories since the colonial times, they were all built using iron sheets on the sides as walls and the coffee quality was never bad during those days. You cannot tell me that it is at this time that they are using the same materials that the coffee quality has gone down.

The farmers in the district are distressed and I request that the ministry intervenes in the situation. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter has come many times. What is going on? 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will come to the House this afternoon. We are going to ask him to make a response to that question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the matter raised by the honourable member about closure of coffee factories is very serious and urgent. Right now, they are already in action closing factories and stores and farmers and factory owners cannot access their premises.

Therefore, I urge Parliament that procedurally, it would be right to halt, by a directive from the Speaker, the process of closing factories until the minister makes a statement explaining the reasons they are taking that action.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in relation to the teachers’ strike. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and I am happy my vice chairperson is here.

As a committee, we stopped the increment of science teachers’ pay alone. What is happening is that there is an instruction taking place and we have been told that science teachers are getting their pay rise and others have not been catered for. This is steering teachers to continue going for industrial action.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for us to stop any increment in that sector until the matter is sorted? Otherwise, if you decide to increase the pay for only the science teachers, the teachers will continue in the same way. (Applause)

Also, regarding the issue that was raised by hon. Itungo, this Parliament asked the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to carry out proper streamlining and sieving the companies that export labour. Many companies are opening up and a lot of complaints are coming out.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that when the minister comes in the afternoon, he gives us the explanation as to how far the ministry has gone in sieving those companies that are taking people to work abroad? Otherwise, the problem will continue. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR GUMA: Mr Speaker, you and I are historicals in this Parliament in the sense that we have been here for a while. I think there is a provision in our rules that says that when Government is not present, Parliament cannot transact business. Every sector has a minimum of two ministers, save for security, which has only one minister as far as I remember.

I do not know why the leadership of this institution cannot discuss with the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to compel the ministers so that when Parliament is in session, there is a minimum of one person so that these questions are effectively answered. Every time, hon. Bahati or the Government Chief Whip will say, we shall tell them but the questions that are raised are never answered. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has hon. Ssempijja Bamulangaki, hon. Christopher Kibanzanga and hon. Joyce Kabatsi for animal husbandry. How come the three are absent without any apology? It is as if we are joking here and are not taken seriously. We understand that they are busy but there should be at least one. For example, hon. Kasaija has agreed with his friend and hon. Bahati is always here on time. Why can’t every ministry be represented here whenever there is a sitting? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that has stopped being a procedural matter, it is now a question for the Prime Minister. As soon as he shows up, I will ask him so that he can tell us why sometimes we are constituted the way we are and business is difficult to execute. When this happens, they pile up our Order Paper. 

Honourable members, I will cause an alteration on the Order paper to accommodate the following:

    i. A statement from the Pan-African Parliament by hon. Jacqueline Amongin; 
    ii. Laying of papers; the Parliamentary Commission Annual Report; 
    iii. A petition from Muslims from Ishaka, Bushenyi to be presented by hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju. 

Those are the alterations that will be accommodated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -
 
MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that on Wednesday, 6 March 2019, this House set up a select committee to inquire into the evictions and displacement of the people of Apaa community in Amuru District. The committee was given the following terms of reference:

    i. To investigate the current state of affairs relating to the land conflict in Apaa community;
    ii. To determine the root cause of the conflict;
    iii. To propose the way forward and report back to Parliament within 45 days.

Mr Speaker, the committee has been able to interact with stakeholders, undertook a field visit and is currently compiling the report, which should be ready in two weeks’ time, which time will be beyond the period that was accorded to the committee.

It is on this note, Mr Speaker, that the committee seeks the indulgence of this House to accord it an extension of two weeks to complete the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the request. Are we agreeable to give them two weeks? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure? Let us deal with the procedural matter.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you. Mr Speaker, most recently, to avoid profit repatriation and economically injuring our people, the President directed on Buy Ugandan, Build Uganda (BUBU) and provided that contracts, which are below Shs 1 billion should be given to local companies. In addition, any procurement of road works below Shs 40 billion and public works below Shs 10 billion should be given to locals.

Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am rising on is, the Companies Act is not clear on a resident company. As a result, companies whose centre of control and management are foreign are pretending as if they are resident companies. Therefore, they are taking over what is meant for us, including the 30 per cent of any development project that the President directed.

Mr Speaker, in February 2018, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority came up to issue guidelines in line with what the President directed. I will give an example of the Busega-Mpigi Road, which is about 23 kilometres. In that project, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) contracted China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation together with China Railway 19th Bureau Group Company Limited and this was a contract value of over Shs 500 billion, meaning 30 per cent was supposed to be for local companies.

However, because there are so many Chinese companies that are holding out to be resident companies, they ended up being awarded the contract of 30 per cent of local materials, at the detriment of our local people.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this House, especially your Chair, directs that the minister responsible should either issue guidelines or come up with a proposal to make an amendment to comprehensively state that in the interest of BUBU, a resident company must not be any company that is purporting to be resident and yet it has a centre of control and management, which is foreign and in a nutshell, is actually foreign? That is why I rose on a point of procedure and my apologies that I did not come to your office prior, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, with procedural matters, you do not have to come to the Speaker’s Office. However, it is not also a typically procedural matter. Honourable minister, what is going on with these matters? Are these things true? If they are true, do they serve the purpose for which BUBU was pronounced, if this is what is happening?

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg that you grant the request of the Member so that the minister comes to address and update this House on issues of local content and on that particular matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract that matter and let it be drawn to the attention of the responsible minister. This response should come next week, if Parliament sits. Can we now go back to the Order Paper?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that The Law Revision Bill, 2019, be read the first time. It is supported by a Certificate of Financial Implications in accordance with the law. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture that Bill, which has been presented for first reading. It the Law Revision Bill, 2019; it stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle expeditiously and report to the House within the framework of the rules. 

STATEMENT FROM THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

2.40
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I would like to present a statement, on behalf of the team that I lead at the Pan African Parliament. It is titled, “Statement to Parliament by the Leader of the Pan African Parliament delegation on Africa day,” celebrated annually on 25th May. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, 25 May 2019 is Africa Day. It is the annual commemoration of the day of the defunct Organisation of African Unity, which was founded in 1963. On this day, leaders from 30 of the 32 independent African states by then, including Uganda, led by the then Prime Minister of Uganda, the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote, signed a founding Charter in Addis Ababa Ethiopia, the capital. 

The Organisation of African Unity established the African Economic Community. In 2002, the Organisation of the African Unity established its successor, now called the African Union. However, the name and the date of Africa Day have been retained as a celebration of African Unity and its achievements. 

Africa is on the match towards a more prosperous future in which all its citizens - young, old, male, female, rural, urban of all breeds and backgrounds, are empowered to realise their full potential, live with satisfaction and pride about their continent, a future with healthy and well educated people living in robust and developed economies. Indeed, this is a progressive match towards the Africa that will be envisioned in Agenda 2063 of the current African Union. 

Africa Day provides an opportunity to acknowledge the achievements of the peoples and governments of Africa. In commemoration of this auspicious occasion, we, members of the Pan African Parliament, in appreciation and recognition of the fantastic and wonderful differences that the continent of Africa possesses - would like to be identified with the Africa Day through events celebrated annually on 25 May 2019 in the different member states.

The celebration of Africa Day in Uganda 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the theme of the African Day this year is, “Refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons.” The continent this year has a general theme that is running all its organs, which is towards durable solutions to forced displacement in Africa. 

This theme was launched at the African Union summit in Addis Ababa in February 2019, of which Uganda is one on the spot. Uganda is celebrated in the continent for its effectiveness and good policies in ensuring that it hosts the different asylum seekers and refugees in the continent. 

During the just concluded sitting of the Pan African Parliament, Midrand, South Africa this year, the Pan African Parliament, in its resolutions, overwhelmingly recognised Uganda for its treatment and hospitality to refugees, to the host communities of the refugees in Uganda and the wonderful policies in place enabling everyone to feel comfortable in Uganda. 

Uganda is, therefore, recognised for being the third in the world but also the first in the continent of Africa in having good policies and hospitality in hosting refugees from the different countries including, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Rwanda and Burundi, among others. 

One of the resolutions adopted by the Pan African Parliament encouraged African countries to consider the model of refugees’ administration, where refugees are integrated in host communities and taking an example of Uganda. 

The Pan African Parliament also honoured Uganda for being a model country in the treatment and hospitality towards refugees in host communities and hence called upon African countries to emulate those basic practices. 

Noting that for several decades, Uganda has generously hosted refugees and asylum seekers from the conflict-affected countries in its neighbourhood, especially the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, South Sudan, Rwanda and Burundi. 

Considering that the Pan African Parliament recognised the work and effort put forward by Uganda, the Ugandan delegation to the Pan African Parliament, in commemoration of Africa Day, will have an outreach programme and interface with refugees and other stakeholders in the internally displaced camps to emphasise issues among others, peace, security, youth unemployment, education, health, gender issues, which are part of the SDGs and climate change in cognisance of Agenda 2063 of the African Union. 

The delegation intends to carry out the meeting in Adjumani Refugee Settlement camp, which is located in Adjumani District, Uganda. This will include meeting of refugee camp leaders, leaders of host communities as part of the activities commemorating the Africa Day. 

As a delegation of the Pan African Parliament, we will sum up these activities by having a National Symposium, We call upon all of you and members of the civil society organisation, private sector, among others, to talk about Agenda 2063 of the African Union, which Uganda endorsed and the refugee situation in Uganda. Honourable members, you are therefore, invited.

The meeting will also emphasise that refugees are protected in law and practice and are accepted by the community.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Honourable members, that is information for us and given the rules under which it is presented, we have received. Thank you very much. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a couple of documents. I will read them and lay them in bunches:

    i) Report on budget performance by selected health sector institutions.
    ii) The reliability of meteorological information by Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA).
    iii) Report on the evaluation the performance of the output based project implemented by the Rural Electrification Agency.
    iv) Report on the management of wetlands in Uganda by the Wetlands Management Department (WMD) under the Ministry Of Water and Environment (MWE).
    v) Report on the promotion of export trade by Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB).
    vi) Report on the regulation of universities by the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE).
    vii) Report on the budget performance in the works and transport sector.
    viii) Report on the identification and registration of persons by the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA).

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this batch.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committees to handle.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the second batch is the follow up of the report on the value-for-money audit on regulation and monitoring of drilling waste in the Albertine graben by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA).

The third batch is the performance audit of the preparedness by the Government of Uganda for the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (2030 Agenda). 

The fourth batch is the value-for-money audit reports on selected urban infrastructure projects implemented by the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) participating municipal councils in the financial year 2016/2017. This includes the municipalities such as; Arua, Entebbe, Gulu, Fort portal, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Lira, Masaka, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Soroti, Tororo, Kasese, Kitgum, Mubende and Kamuli. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. This stands referred to the appropriate committees for handling. Thank you. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the last document on the annual report Parliamentary Commission, Parliament of the Republic of Uganda for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. This stands referred to our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to look at and advise us on how to handle it. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION FROM MUSLIMS FROM ISHAKA, BUSHENYI

2.53
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This petition is moved under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

This is a humble petition of the Muslim leaders and communities of Ishaka-Bushenyi against the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) over violation of their freedom to practice their religion. 

Your humble petitioners bring this petition on behalf of the Muslim communities of Ishaka-Bushenyi and assert that the actions by the UPDF of occupying and closing their place of worship infringes on their fundamental human rights in contravention of Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Your petitioners aver that the continued unlawful occupation of the Mosque is unjustifiable and violates their rights to freedom of worship under national and international law. Your humble petitioners further aver that there have been political interferences with the administration and management of the Ishaka-Bushenyi main Mosque, which has perpetuated conflicts and divisionism among the Muslim communities in the district, resulting into clashes and in some cases death. 

Your humble petitioners further aver that there are eminent threats of unlawful acquisition of land belonging to the Muslim community and as a result of political interferences, which have gravely affected the operation of the legitimate Muslim leaders in the district.

Your humble petitioners contend that as a result of failure by the relevant agencies and institutions to amicably resolve this problem, there is bound to be more clashes and insecurity.

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament: 

    1. Urges Government to immediately vacate the UPDF from Bushenyi main mosque.

    2.  Institutes an investigation into the grievances of the Muslim communities of Bushenyi with the view of finding a lasting solution.

    3. Calls upon Government to investigate the unprofessional conduct of the police and UPDF in regards to the interference in management and administration of Bushenyi main Mosque.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto append their signatures as attached.

Mr Speaker, the petitioners are present in the House this afternoon and with your recognition. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is a complicated one. It involves the UPDF and it is asking the Government to investigate. It is not asking Parliament in particular to do anything. Would it be proper to ask the Prime Minister to look at this or should we – would it look like directing the Prime Minister or should we give it to the Government Chief Whip to take full charge on this because there is no direct prayer to Parliament? 

1. 	The petition states that the UPDF should vacate Bushenyi main Mosque.
2. 	Institute an investigation into the grievances of the Muslim communities of Bushenyi with the view of finding a lasting solution.
3. 	Calls upon Government to investigate the unprofessional conduct of the police and the UPDF in regards to the interference in management and administration of Bushenyi main Mosque.

Can prayer two and three co-exist? Can Government investigate and Parliament also investigate at the same time? I think we should adopt one way. Honourable member, what do you want us to do?

MS ADEKE: Mr Speaker, the prayers in the petition are detailed. The first prayer is urging the Government to immediately vacate UPDF from Bushenyi main Mosque. Upon your directive, I think it is something that should be taken up by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The second prayer is to institute an investigation into the grievances of the Muslim communities of Bushenyi with a view to finding a lasting solution. I think that can be done by the Office of the Prime Minister - no, the investigation is something that would be rightly suited for Parliament as a neutral party.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is clear. (2) says, “Parliament institutes an investigation into the grievances.” What I am saying is, (2) is asking Parliament to investigate, (3) is asking the Government to investigate. So this is what we are going to do; we are going sever the specific aspect of (2) and prayer No. 2 will be done by Parliament. That is referred to the appropriate Committee on Physical Infrastructure to look at and come back to Parliament. 

We shall forward prayers (1) and (3) to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to take action on them. Is that correct?

MS ADEKE: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is accordingly referred to the committee and to the Prime Minister. A reference will be made so that he can take a look at the issues raised and see how to handle them. 

MOTION THAT HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2018/2019 AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2019/2020.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a procedural issue as far as the budget is concerned. I am sure, at an appropriate time, we would not want to take long to handle the budget but from the figures that I see, it shows that if we are not careful, we are going to hit a glitch. People are misusing words to take public resources. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where have you seen the figures from?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have the budget document which I got on my iPad and I downloaded it –(Interjections)– you do not have it? Then you are unfortunate. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am now an IT expert.

Mr Speaker, you recall that one time, Kampala Capital City Authority came here to ask for money to pay Basajjabalaba. They asked for Shs 70 billion. We stopped it. Now, from what the committee is trying to allocate – priority areas – it is allocating Shs 40 billion under Vote 112 to Kampala Capital City Authority for restoration of ownership of the city abattoir and this is the same person – 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to discuss a document that has not been laid before Parliament, one that he claims to be on the iPads, yet it has not yet been uploaded there? Is he in order to discuss a document that we do not have?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually the specific rule is anticipation. We are not permitted to do anything in anticipation. What you could do is to first go and confirm with the Committee on Budget if such things are there and then you can run back to Parliament and say, “I saw it there and it is coming”. 

I, however, think it would be better if it came first and then you raise it because now you are anticipating. No document has been laid before us. We have called for the motion and the minister has just come; the motion has not been moved yet. If you have anything, I advise that you handle it that way. Let us receive the motion.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. I have been informed that the committee needs another 30 minutes to be ready. I do not know whether I should proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you ready with your motion?

MR BAHATI: I am ready to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then proceed. We will deal with those matters when we reach them. Right now, it is your motion.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2018/2019; and the budget proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2019/2020. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Maj. Susan Lakot, Member for Aringa North, Member for Kumi Municipality, and Member for Ngora County. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion he has read is for a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2018/2019; and the budget proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2019/2020.

Honourable members, two aspects; in Financial Year 2018/2019, we have passed some supplementary budgets which the minister has to brief us upon and also the Committee of Supply needs to know the totals of everything so far and then he briefs us on the budget proposals for the coming financial year. That is the motion capturing those two aspects. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, regarding the supplementary expenditures, I justified the figures last week and I am very glad that the House supplied and therefore, I will not concentrate on that matter.

I would like to remind Members that before 1st April this year, our ministry laid the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020. The key priority in this budget was infrastructure, mainly infrastructure in the Albertine Region, to fast-track the production of oil. We also considered the expenditure for the science teachers. 

You will recall that last year we passed a budget, which did not consider some of the categories of scientists. For example, we could pay more money for the consultants in universities yet the consultants in hospitals, who were in the same level, were not catered for. That distortion has also been corrected. 

The theme for this year’s budget is about industrialisation and property for our people. Therefore, the big portion of this budget is concentrating on infrastructure, industrialisation – agro-processing – to be able to support and lift the 68.9 per cent of the household who are still in subsistence economy.

We have also tried our best to cater for other administrative costs. We will, for example, be looking for issues to do with cities in the next financial year but we have laid ground for them now. We are hopeful that once the report from the Committee on Budget comes to the House, you will be able to pass this budget and allow the Executive to start implementation on 1st July.

Mr Speaker, a number of issues were raised under sectors and we have taken note of them. As we prepare for the next financial year, they will take the first call on our budget. For example, the House has raised issues of unfunded priorities and you have questioned: how can a priority be unfunded? That is a big question. However, the reason we normally provide for that, is that we want that when we get resources for the following year, they take a first call on our budget. Therefore, all the issues that have been raised have been noted and as resources come in, we will be able to capture them as the first call on our budget.

Mr Speaker, I know the report will be coming and I look forward to the support of the House to appropriate this budget so that we can work on the infrastructure to fast-track the oil production in the Albertine Region, to support the industrialisation programme of our country, to support the lifting of the 68.9 per cent of the households who live in subsistence economy and to continue supporting the peace and security of the country.

For example, Shs 1.5 trillion has been allocated to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the sake of the peace and security of our country. This is mainly to protect the people of Uganda and their property. It is a pro-people budget, a pro-Uganda budget and a budget that supports all of us, including the Parliament of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider and approve;

    1. The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for Financial Year 2018/2019, and
    2. The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2019/2020. 

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Usually, this debate is kicked off by a report from the committee. Is the committee chairperson ready with the report? If the chairperson is not ready, let us pose it here for now and give it some time. When the chairperson comes, he will report and we will have a debate. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PAYMENT OF CLAIMS BY THE UGANDA-SUDAN TRADERS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH SUDAN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that the report was presented and paused for debate. As I guided, we have discussed this matter using every provision of our rules; petitions, motions and even ratified agreements. There is no single procedure in our Rules of Procedure that has not been used to try and find a solution to this problem. 

Therefore, this House has debated this matter and we hope this debate will be the final one so that at least the people who have been affected by this situation can begin living their lives the normal way. Let us have a good debate and the debate starts now. 

If there is no debate, I put the question. (Laughter) No, I asked, is there a debate - and no Member rose –(Laughter)– I cannot debate it myself. Each Member will have three minutes and I will start with the Member for Rakai District.

3.15
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the select committee that went to South Sudan. Like everyone knows, this has been a big issue since the Ninth Parliament but when I read through the report, the committee’s work was well-done because of the achievements that looked as though they could not be achieved. One of the achievements was putting up a verification team from both Uganda and South Sudan. It gives me hope that even these other companies that were not yet verified are going to be verified and every Ugandan that traded in South Sudan and has records will be paid back their money.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment on Annex 15. From the recommendations they made, they categorised the payments and companies to be verified, giving it a total of $207 million. When you go to Annex 15, there are two categories and the first one has 23 companies, which claims are quoted in US Dollars. The other category has these companies whose claims are quoted in South Sudan Pounds. 

When you look at the subheading on Category A, the amount of money or the exchange rate at the time of supply is not captured. For the record, I request that it reads, “Claims at the Ministry of Finance of Sudan awaiting authorisation for payment at the exchange rate of 2.9 as it was at the time of supply.” Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.18
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report. However, I have two or three concerns. 

We are dealing with two sovereign states: the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan who are both members of the East African Community.

As far as I am aware, Ugandan traders were subjected to paying licenses and taxes in South Sudan. I do not know whether the bilateral arrangement between Uganda and South Sudan where Uganda is to pay off the debts and arrears and then South Sudan pays Uganda. Is this sustainable?

There are some issues I would like know. First of all, have we ascertained the authenticity of the companies we are intending to pay off? Secondly, is this going to set a right precedence? Should we presume that our Government should pay whoever faces this kind of liability? For example, Ugandan suppliers for coffee seedlings have not been paid for the last two years. Uganda Coffee Development Authority alleges that it needs Shs 19 billion to pay off these arrears. 

We are also dealing with teachers’ issues. I do not know whether what the state is doing is right, if South Sudan is going through instabilities – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not take us back. The issue of whether it was right or wrong was concluded and that is why there was part payment. We are moving from there.

MR SSEMULI: Mr Speaker, my recommendation is that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) avails us the status of these companies; whether they have been filing returns to this country so that we can be in position to come up with a good recommendation. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.22
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

On behalf of the people of Bunyole County West, I would like to say that if Government goes ahead to pay the people who lost their property in South Sudan, it will set a bad precedence.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has   said that – (Interruption)

MR OGONG: Mr Speaker, you made a very clear statement that this matter has been in Parliament for a long time and that this Parliament debated this matter and made a decision that Government of Uganda should pay the traders. Government accepted the commitment. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to take us back to whether or not the traders should be paid? Yet, this Parliament has made several decisions on this matter? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not go backwards. We have had this debate and we have agreed that these people should be paid. We have also understood that, that payment is on behalf of the Government of South Sudan and a sovereign guarantee from the Government of South Sudan that when they recover, they will pay this money back to the Government of Uganda. It is a sovereign debt to another country that will be paid back when the country recovers. 

We cannot, therefore, have that debate now. The debate we have now arose from a petition after part payment was made. I do not know the exact amount but I think it was Shs 40 billion. Some beneficiaries who were approved by this Parliament did not receive the money and so, they came back to Parliament. That is why this select committee was created.

This select committee is to confirm that there are other people - if you heard the report when it was presented - outside the ones that were paid, that should be paid. The verification committees from both countries should go ahead to finalise the verification so that Government of Uganda finalises the payments and wait on the Government of South Sudan to refund money when they recover. Therefore, do not take us back.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is some money, which Parliament approved and according to certain information, that money was paid to people who did not even participate in any business in South Sudan. When we give them leeway, the same people will take the money.

Mr Speaker, we have problems here. We have seen teachers suffering. Why can’t we use that money to pay teachers instead of paying South Sudan? The report says there are people who did not have documentation - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to resume your seat? (Laughter) 

2.25
MR HASSAN KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, I would like to set this debate on the right footing. The question for today is not whether or not we should pay the traders. The question is the criteria used to pay those who have been paid and leave out those who have been left out. That is the basis on which the select committee was established by Parliament. That was the question my colleague, hon. Oyet asked on the Floor of the House.

I share the same question with hon. Oyet because I understand the origin and the reasons it arose. There are people from West Nile who traded with South Sudan and they were among the first to trade and incur losses. Although their money was little, it was money and they were listed among those to be paid. However, to our surprise, they were not paid.

Therefore, the question on the criteria arises. Why did you pay $ 41,623,514.59? This is the money that was paid to 10 companies and these companies are listed. Should I read them? [Honourable members: “Yes”] They include the following: 

    1. Rubya International Ltd
    2. Kibungo Enterprises Limited
    3. Aponye(U) Ltd
    4. Afro-Kai Limited
    5. Swift Commodities  Establishment Ltd  -

If you want the details, they are here and they include the companies and the amount of money paid.

Mr Speaker, we have serious companies from West Nile; people we know, who have been left out. They traded with the people of South Sudan even before independence. During the war, the people of South Sudan lived in West Nile. We were among the first to support them during the war. The traders lost truckloads of goods and their names were listed but others were left out. We are not talking about those who were left out. We are asking about those who were assessed and put on the list but left out of the payment. The question is, how did you select these people? Was it in the magnitude of - (Member timed out.) Mr Speaker, just to state my prayers, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, your time is up, Sir.

3.29
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Governments all over the world have a practice of bailing out its citizens or companies, as long as investigations have been done and there are good reasons to do so.

In our case, what is still bothering me is that we had information from a whistleblower at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which was disturbing. Can we know from the minister whether what this whistleblower, who is also a member of the ministry, said was wrong so that we are settled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know this whistleblower? Why are you going around in circles?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, where I read, it was the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury (PSST) who claimed to be a whistleblower. (Laughter) So, since we have the minister here and the PS was there, we should be given information on this to make us comfortable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.30
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine goes straight to the minister.

When we are grappling with the issue of who should be paid or who has not been paid, I would like to know from the minister: in international trade, there is what we call bond in force. You bond your goods when you are exporting them, meaning that if there occurs any problem with those goods, you go back to the insurance company where you bonded those goods to recover the costs, which are equivalent to the goods. (Applause)

I would like to know whether due diligence was done before coming up with this list, which you are grappling with, to make the taxpayer lose money. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I also stand to reiterate the question that has been raised by my brother here. It is good for us to support our companies that have lost because of the war in South Sudan. However, the question that my colleague has raised is a very big one. 

When people are travelling, they say you need to get travel insurance. What is the purpose of the insurance? Most of the companies that have been dealing with South Sudanese are companies with billions of money.  I would like to believe that most of them insured their businesses. Are we now helping the insurance companies to hide? I would like to appreciate the fact that it is South Sudan paying but that is also money because those are our brothers from the other side.

The aspect that was raised by one of my colleagues here should open our eyes for future action. Our committee was tasked to go and lift the veil. If you look at number one of the terms of reference, it talks about lifting the veil and verifying exactly who qualified to be paid. 

To what extent did it do its work in regard to the first term of reference? I expected to see a table here, listing company by company and their status, including the trend of tax payment. How much did we get from South Sudan in terms of business that we traded with it through these business people? That trend analysis is critical in accounting.

Mr Speaker, in principle, I do not have a problem with paying those who qualified genuinely to be paid but there must be no discrimination. In Teso, people lost animals and human life. They have never been compensated. Who are those who qualify every time to be compensated and others never qualify? That is the problem. We need to sort it out. The boat must be balanced. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are debating a report of the select committee and the point being raised by the Member for Kumi Municipality is on page 20, where there are companies that have been paid, company name, directors, shareholders, nationality of shareholders and amount received. It is on page 20 of the report.

3.35
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, MARACHA COUNTY EAST, MARACHA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that we are no longer discussing the merits or demerits because we have already made a decision to compensate these traders. My worry, first of all, is that I do not know whether those who guaranteed this loan did due diligence to find out the capacity of the Government of South Sudan to be able to refund the Government of Uganda, with the current level of financial crisis in that country.

Secondly, in my opinion, this whole South Sudan compensation is a fraud. I believe it is fraud, even if I do not have the evidence. There are rumours that even the select committee that has been looking into this matter was demanding for their 10 per cent. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you put such matters touching the integrity of this House and its Members and proudly say you have no evidence and even eloquently say “rumours”, I think you are completely out of order. So, you will not continue speaking.

3.37
MAJ. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak in regard to pages 20 and 21, in line with the companies that were considered for payment on the Shs 40 billion.

Look at a company called Aponye Uganda Limited – among the directors are Apollo Nyegamehe and Harold Byamugisha. When you go to Rubya Investors Limited, there is Harold Byamugisha. When you go to Apo General Agencies Limited, there is Harold Byamugisha and Apollo Nyegamehe.

Mr Speaker, could this be a coincidence that the same people are the ones being paid under different companies, yet, we have more than 23 other companies that have not been considered for payment? (Applause) 

I request for an explanation from the ministry on how they came up with a criteria of paying the same people under three different companies, considering this Shs 40 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I concur with the committee that people who supplied goods to South Sudan and lost money, as we have already agreed, should be paid.

Much as I agree with the committee, there is an anomaly in the report. There is one company, which was at the final stage – all the due diligence and verifications were done on this company. On the original list, the company was there but when I look at the report of the committee, it is not there on pages 20 and 21. 

I would like to amend the committee report so that this company can be included on the list and be paid. The company is Nile Valley Construction and Investment Company Limited. I beg that I lay on Table this document so that the committee looks at it and action be taken. Thank you.

3.40
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 16, one of the companies claiming compensation is called Thomas’ Farm, $10 million. If they were cows, how did they count the cows to get exactly the $10 million?

Secondly, on what my colleague from Butaleja said, I would like to state clearly that all these companies are talking of big amount of money. If they were exports, then there are export documents, which went through the process. I can tell you that the South Sudan’s Government can agree now but tomorrow, they will deny. When they deny, it is the people of Uganda who will suffer.

We do not object. Even there were small businessmen from Bugisu dealing in tomatoes who suffered but they are not on the list. However, these big ones who are on the list; where are their export documents to confirm that they indeed exported? 

Secondly, all international businesses have insurance and if there is an insurance cover, it will tell you the amount of goods you are going to take. You cannot pay when an insurance cover exists unless they also have a fake insurance company, which has been issuing bonds for them to take these goods.

Mr Speaker, people lost property but these on the list are just colluding to steal from us. We want to use your office so that we do not pay them. We can continue doing verification and they will bring a supplementary and we pay genuine people. 

If you look at this money – let me give you another example of Aponye which my sister has – he has $6.8 million and $13 million. This Aponye here, if you go to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), his tax returns alone should have a turnover of Shs 100 billion per year. Did the commiitee confirm with URA that this man has income tax returns of more than Shs 100 billion to justify that he trades with this amount of money? In fact, URA must show us their income tax returns to confirm they have been trading and equally show their turnover and profits.

Mr Speaker, these people are a group of criminals who are using your office. The person who was a whistle-blower was the Secretary to Treasury. Why did he blow the whistle? Why didn’t he pay? We would like the Secretary to Treasury to come and throw more lights to us. You recall the other time, you asked the Auditor-General to come here. Let us call the Secretary to Treasury; we pull the bar and have him speak to us. These are people who are cheating us. We should not allow this good money to go. Our people are suffering. Teachers are suffering – (Member timed out.)

3.43
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to add my voice on the unfairness and the discrimination, which was exhibited during the handling of this payment. When you look at page 21, an individual was paid instead of a company. I thought the bilateral framework for this payment was to pay companies and not individuals. I wonder under what circumstance an individual was paid instead of a company.

This leads me to think that all these other ones who are paid and are appearing twice or thrice were not even genuine companies. The committee went ahead to recommend that other businessmen and businesswomen who did not have documents and contracts should be paid using Ugandan money and should be catered for under the budget of 2019/2020 Financial Year. 

I would like to ask the minister whether he is concurring with the recommendation of the committee, and if this is catered for under the budget of the 2019/2020 Financial Year. If that is the case, which criteria will you use to verify and come up with a genuine list other than what we are seeing from pages 19, 20 and 21? I would like to get that clarification. 

Otherwise, we have people who are suffering. The genuine Ugandans who have provided services, like teachers and genuine businessmen and businesswomen who have not been paid. If we are spending money on people who are not genuine, then I do not know where we are going as a country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee as I wait for the answer from the committee and the minister. Thank you.

3.46
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether our debate is going on well. From the report, the ten companies are part of the bilateral agreement between Uganda and South Sudan. If we continue to block these other traders whom we have been trying to defend since the committee was established – let us separate the ten companies and concentrate on the small traders who were also listed so that we are able to ensure that they are also catered for. The money they are supposed to benefit has to be included in the budget in the same way with the other ten companies. We should resolve that the ten companies are not paid unless all these others have also been paid. Thank you.

3.47
MR DAVID ABALA: (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I listened to you and read the report yesterday, it appeared a certain rock fell on me because of the many challenges you are going through. My heart is very heavy. I am crying internally because of what I have heard and read concerning this payment.

We are talking about the process of how these companies were arrived at. Unfortunately, some people have not been included on the list. We paid ten companies and yet the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury was a whistle-blower, an administrator, implementer. 

Secondly, let us be fair to ourselves. The element of fairness and equity is not seen in this report. There are those people who did business in South Sudan but unfortunately, they are not included here, especially those women who have been cursing us on social media. 

Today, we are now saying 20 and more companies; tomorrow another 50 will petition the President and we will come back here, Mr Speaker. I am worried - that is why I am saying my heart is heavy. The first question I would like to ask; these companies we see here, have they paid taxes as we are rushing to clear them?

There is a lot of “jam” as I call it because different people have different companies and are going to be paid millions of dollars. I am concerned because in northern Uganda as you know, especially Omoro, there is Nodding Syndrome; in Teso, poverty is increasing. That is why I am concerned about this and would like us to come out genuinely to name the companies that are genuine and not this situation of the same people under different company names going to be paid –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee led by their chairperson for a good report, which concerns Ugandans who have been trading with South Sudan.

I fully support the recommendations, starting with recommendation No.1, which is concerned with paying the traders and including those without relevant documents. That is ex-gratia. 

However, we shall have a problem in future if we keep on doing business like that because the fraudulent people will use that window to steal Government money. That is why I go ahead to support recommendation no.4, which talks about having an export strategy.

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that export strategy is expanded into a deliberate export policy. Failure by the traders to insure their businesses and to organise themselves shows that we do not have a clear export policy, which can support our traders and make them international to trade better with other countries.

That is why I propose that we improve the capacity of the Export Promotion Board such that they can always give out enough information to the exporters; prepare them very well such that they can be very good exporters. Otherwise we would be just be fire-fighting. In future, such a problem would arise because we are still trading with other countries. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raise two concerns, why I would request this committee report be taken back to the committee to attend to it. My argument is on assumption that if Uganda Government has signed a memorandum of understanding with Government of South Sudan, that Uganda Government will pay the traders and South Sudan will pay Uganda later; there is nothing wrong with that.

If you put on the shoes of the traders and you see this Parliament as the last roadblock on whether you will be paid or not, they would probably want to enter inside here and submit. However, the issue of payment should not be an issue of debate. The only issues of debate to me are two; one, who should be paid – because there are lobbies all over the building. There are small companies that are not seen anywhere in this report.

Therefore, we need the committee to tell us what we should do with those small companies. No one can hear their voices and concerns because the big shots have covered the whole space. In the first schedule of payment, they were paid and now again they are top on the list of those to be paid.

Therefore, this Parliament should –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. In the Ninth Parliament, I was privileged to serve on the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We managed to go to South Sudan and we met these traders who were suffering there. It was a big group. They really suffered very much.

Therefore, if we are not recognising them here and looking into their plea then – in the Ninth Parliament, we shall not be doing anything for our people. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would request that the list should be revisited because this list is not conclusive. We can see hon. Mawanda is now submitting from the Floor, which is very dangerous for this House. Therefore, this list should be revisited.

Secondly, -(Interjections)- I am going to move a motion formally because whether they should be paid or not, it would be in bad taste for this Parliament to say they should not be paid. They have to be paid but we have to revisit the list. We also have to revisit their tax returns. This committee should have made an annexure from URA showing the behaviour of these companies because we are worried that some companies have emerged from nowhere because they have good contacts and they are claiming for $3 million yet they have not even –(Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to clarify first? The issues have been very many. Can the minister respond to some of them then we – we are not stopping yet. Hon. Mawanda, what is that?

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, the claim from a company, which was excluded from the list. As already submitted, I do lay on the Table a claim from Nile Valley Construction Investment Company to be included on the list of those companies that are to be paid. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. (Applause)

3.37
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report they have presented. However, I would like to start by declaring my interests. Before I came to Parliament, I used to be one of those transacting to develop the young South Sudan. It is true that very many people were involved in businesses in South Sudan like in export and construction. I am also aware some of the companies mentioned here were trading with us in South Sudan.

However, like hon. Odonga Otto has said, the institution I was representing lost quite a lot of money but we were not able to recover any documents to warrant submission here and stand firm that we were running a business there.

There are very many people who lost and are not on the list. How I wish this committee can extend its work to invite even those who have not been lobbying around Parliament here – (An honourable member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not like members accessing the microphone before they are allowed. Please, respect that. You cannot the microphone before you are allowed. And because you have done that, you will not speak on this matter for now.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, very much. The committee has done a good job and it should continue to expand their terms of reference to attract and invite even those who have not been called here.

It is only the lobbyists who have been hanging around Parliament and a few informed people who have appeared on this list. Personally, I am not on the list because I did not have evidence to present but now I want to appear in the list and ask other people in Mbale and Tororo to be brought on board.

4.00
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, this matter has been on the Floor for many times and Parliament has also made a decision on it. As per our rules; “Parliament cannot review its decision in a matter that they have pronounced itself on in the same session.” It is very clear. 

This matter is very sensitive, the committee reported here that when peace returned to South Sudan, many of our traders enjoyed the opportunity to trade in that country and the volume of our exports rose from $200,000 million to $1.3 billion. This means our country and traders were trading in South Sudan.

Unfortunately, that did not last long. There was insecurity and in the process, the Government of South Sudan that engaged our traders with agreements did not live to their contract because of insecurity; they lost money and could not pay our traders.

The Government of Uganda together with the Government of South Sudan had a meeting and the latter agreed with the Government of Uganda to willingly pay but at that moment they could not.

In those terms, they came with what they call sovereign guarantees; that the Government of Uganda helps the traders in Uganda and the Government of South Sudan would refund to the Government of Uganda.

It does not mean that the tax payer of Uganda is losing anything. It means that the Government of Uganda is paying the traders in advance but the Government of South Sudan will refund this.

Honourable members, let us be fair, how we can pay the 10 big companies and ignore the small ones? Are we really fair? As you know, these big companies are from one area and -(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was in this House when hon. Bahati brought the claim of the 10 companies. I was among the members of Parliament who protested the payment to the 10 companies. 

I invite you to look at page no.21 & 22, the committee states that Ms Sophia Omar - there was no company of that kind but there was a woman who benefitted from the Shs 10 billion but the committee does not tell us how much this woman got.

Secondly, when they come to the other nine companies, they cover everything but do not give details of those 10 companies and how they certified them. You might think that we only sit in Parliament but we know some of these companies. 

Mr Speaker, when we talk about Aponye, we know what it is. (Interjections) That is why hon. Bahati, when we were raising procedural matters here, seeking clarification, he was not interested in taking them. The issue was giving 10 companies the Shs 10 billion and it was done with no verifying. 

The committee was supposed to take interest in those 10 companies. On page 16, the committee gives the categories of people demanding those with and without documents -  we need to know those companies.

Those who benefitted from the Shs 10 billion walked away and are enjoying their lives. They will never know whether they did any transaction only that they got their money and are dancing to their tunes.

However, the poor people who suffered will continue suffering and looking for members of Parliament saying, “we heard the report; where is our share” but nothing will be taken -

Hon. Bahati, I would like to thank you very much for the struggle you made for the 10 companies but they were dubious. I rest my case.

4.06
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. However, I would disagree partly with the committee about the recommendation to pay those people who went to trade in South Sudan and got a problem at that time.

On the 21 March 2019, Amber Court Market in Jinja got burnt and millions of shillings were lost. To the local people, women and the poor people who normally trade in Uganda. Everybody saw this and we know these people. Nobody has come up to say we compensate them and they are Ugandans. 

On the 12th November, 2017 Bugwere Market in Mbale was burnt to ashes and these too are Ugandans.
On the 14 June 2012, Napia Market in Jinja was burnt down and over 500 traders were in tears; nobody has compensated these people.

In 1987, when this Government came to power up to 1990, the people of Bulambuli, Katakwi, Lango sub-region and Ngora lost cows but nobody was concerned. We are here saying that we should compensate the traders who went to trade in South Sudan, which traders we do not know. These ones are known and nobody is bothered. Are we doing justice to this country? 

Honourable members, if we are for the poor, let us reject this thing. Let us throw it out and come up with a clear resolution. If it means paying, let them pay everyone, including those people whose properties were burnt. Thank you and I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have four children and you come home with one shirt and you give it to one of them, the others’ argument should not be, “Why have you bought for him?” The argument should be, “Buy for me also.” You do not say, “tear that shirt; we do not want it because you have brought only one.” You say, “okay, he has a shirt; buy us shirts as well.” That should be the argument.

The fact that other people are being paid should not make us think that they should not be paid because others are not being paid. The case we should make is, yes, they are being paid. Let them also pay others while they are paying these ones. Wouldn’t that be the proper argument for a Parliament rather than the line we are taking?

4.10
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all express my disappointment that the committee did not stick to their terms of reference. I will point out Term of Reference No. 1 - the committee was supposed to lift the veil. In Common Law, a company is a separate legal entity distinct from its shareholders. That is a principle in law.

The committee went and lifted the veil and found that all these companies were registered in South Sudan and therefore, they are not Ugandan. (Applause) These are corporate entities in South Sudan. The fact that the shareholders come from Uganda does not make them Ugandan traders. (Applause)

Therefore, I thought the committee was going to come back to Parliament having lifted the veil. I can tell you that lifting the veil is done in specific circumstances; where there is fraud, where there is a company acting as an agent of some persons, where there is a sham and when the companies are associated. When you look at KK Uganda, it purports to have supplied KK Sudan and yet, they are the same. 

It is my submission to this Parliament that the 10 companies are not Ugandan. We should not even bother. In South Sudan, there are laws. If a company in Sudan has a disagreement with Government, they can go to a South Sudan court and sort it out there. It should not have come here in the first place.

Therefore, I would like to submit strongly that this Parliament takes exception to the findings and ensures that only Ugandans are paid. I can tell you that those 10 companies are not known in Uganda. Thank you.

4.12
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this great opportunity to talk about this issue. I sympathise with our business people because very many of them lost their livelihoods in South Sudan and that is not debatable. My biggest problem has been elucidated clearly by hon. Odonga Otto. 

In my constituency, I can name about 10 business people who lost their livelihoods. One of them is Mr Sam Ndyajunwa, Chairman LC III Kikagate who lost all his earnings including two big lorries. Unfortunately, he is not on the list. This is very absurd.

The people we are talking about are Ugandans. They are our brothers and sisters. Some of you even have relatives among them and you know exactly what happened to them. What we should be debating now, like hon. Odonga Otto said, is the very many Ugandans who lost possessions in South Sudan. As much as possible, we should engage other organisations like PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Ernest and Young to bring us a comprehensive list of people who lost their livelihoods in this trade – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of clarification from hon. Byarugaba. My understanding is that there are business people who were trading with the Government of South Sudan. Some of these business people or companies are acknowledged by the Government of South Sudan because there is a bilateral agreement. I think some of them are being paid.

However, it appears that there are also companies and individuals who were doing business with the Government of South Sudan but that Government does not acknowledge them. They fall under another category.
We also have hundreds of Ugandan individuals and companies who were doing business in South Sudan, not necessarily with the Government there. I am one of those; I used to go and train the Parliament of South Sudan but I am not claiming anything although I was also not fully paid.

The clarification I am seeking from hon. Byarugaba is, are we arguing that the Government of Uganda should compensate all those who were doing business in South Sudan or those who were doing business with the Government of South Sudan?

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, honourableMinister, for that information. Finally, the committee has done something good but it can go a little further and maybe, tell this august House that we need timelines –(Member timed out.)

4.16
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. How I wish the select committee had started its work right from the time the budgeting process started. I am reliably informed that the figures we are debating now have already been captured in the Financial Year 2019/2020 in which case, with all that we have gathered on the Floor of Parliament this afternoon, there is glaring evidence that the compilation of the list of beneficiaries for this payment is inconclusive. There are still many out there whose losses have not been documented.

Secondly, there are also those who are well positioned; who have already fixed themselves in. In Luganda, there is a common saying that “Oliira mukavuyo” meaning, “Eat in the confusion”. I already see some influential and well positioned companies eyeing this money. 

I represent a municipality, which for all reasons, is known as the most business oriented municipality that shares a common border with South Sudan and Congo. My people of Arua Municipality and West Nile in general lost a lot in terms of business ventures in South Sudan. Most of them were not giants like Aponye who are well known. I would say they were petty traders who would have lorry load of goods and services taken across. How are you going to help these people? This is all they had in their lives and they lost it there. 

The largest number of boad-boda riders in Juba, South Sudan were boys from Arua Municipality and the records are there to that effect. They lost lives, property and all that they had. Others were raped and there is evidence but they are nowhere to be seen because they have not been given an opportunity to be heard.

Mr Speaker, I came back from Arua on Monday this week. Last week, they told us they had tried to pass their documents to the select committee that was handling this matter. I remember when I came from Arua, I told the chairperson of the committee that I followed her although not physically but I knew what work you were doing in Juba. Didn’t I say this? I said it because the people of Arua Municipality were concerned that they had lost all their property and they heard there was a select committee in Juba but they had not been given an opportunity where they could also come with documents –(Member timed out.)

4.19
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are a number of categories of traders that lost their money and businesses in South Sudan. I would like to bring it to the attention of this Parliament that we cannot only go to consider those big companies that lost money and think the small companies, whoever small their money was, they lost money but we can turn our back on them.

South Sudan is a member of the East African Community. There is a bilateral agreement between the Government of South Sudan and that of Uganda. I would think the Government of Uganda commits to make more engagements with the Government of the Republic of South Sudan so that the plight of these other traders is also considered.

I worked with AfroKai Uganda Limited, supplying grains to South Sudan. When the company fell, I also lost money and I would want AfroKai to be paid so that I also receive my money, which is still with AfroKai.

The question is; there were companies that were dealing directly with the Government of South Sudan. Then there were companies that were also doing business in South Sudan. Mr Speaker, I think this is where we need to take a position as Parliament and Government of Uganda.

Personally, I would think, as we engage the Government of the Republic of South Sudan, the plight of these other traders who were not engaging directly with the Government of South Sudan must be considered so that they agree to pay these traders as we wait for the Government of South Sudan to refund Uganda the money it will have used to pay these traders.

By doing this we will be helping traders who are now in distress, lost business and not employing people. Therefore, I would think the committee, the minister and this Parliament considers this and some of the companies that have lost money and not on the list - we give the opportunity to open the door to include these companies and I think the minister of finance should be able to support them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us see if we are moving together on this. There seems to be agreement on the previous position taken by this Parliament that our people who were affected should be paid and the payment arrangement should be Government to Government - one Government paying on behalf of the other and the other paying back the Government of Uganda. That has been agreed.

The other thing that might need to be understood is that for Government to Government transactions or for another Government to own up, the dealings could possibly or must possibly be with the Government for a Government to say yes, they know this transaction. 

It could be Government in the case of the Government of South Sudan or State Government because they had State Governments; it could be State corporations, or any of those things but that have a governmental relation. Therefore, those categories of people who supplied the Government of South Sudan and its agencies and have documents are subject to the process between the two verification committees; that is the bilateral agreement. Upon those processes being complete, they should be paid. That is what the agreement says. It did not only talk about ten but had the provision to say that further verification should be made by the joint committees and other companies that have become eligible should be paid by the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan will respond.

What is not clear is about people who were trading with other people in South Sudan. Individuals supplying supermarkets or trading in the markets - are they captured and are they verifiable because we also need to be realistic in the way we make proposals. Can it be proved that Jacob Oulanyah supplied tomatoes to Dengaluala and can the Government of South Sudan be responsible for that transaction? 

Therefore, we also have to exercise some level of realism in trying to deal with this thing. So, I think we are going to have to deal with certain levels but what is also coming out is that even on the list of the people who supplied Government with documentations or Government agencies, some of them are not yet on this list. 

It is also clear that there are people on the list that was initially submitted to the Ministry of Trade who are no longer in the list that has been approved for payment and verification because these processes have taken long.

Therefore, how should we proceed with this matter? Let us now find a solution on this - can we reduce the issues now because the issue of a company not being on the list is clear. Therefore, if there are new matters, let us bring them now. Okay? Chair, do you want to say something?

 MS ANNA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity to do some clarification. 
Mr Speaker, the committee was given terms of reference. The first was to lift the veil, given the genesis of the complaint brought to Parliament by Members of Parliament representing the aggrieved companies as their electorates. 

On page 21 of the report, you will find that we lifted the veil. These are not South Sudan companies but Ugandan companies. The only difference is that – and I hope my colleagues do understand and we mentioned it as a committee that South Sudan has a policy that all business contracts are given to South Sudan national companies. 

However, what happened is that South Sudan companies did not have capacity and so, they sub contracted Ugandan companies because they had capacity. The only problem we found is that our companies that got sub contracts did not register them with the Ministry of Justice of South Sudan to make them legal sub contracts.

There are those who registered them and their cases are very clear with the Government of South Sudan. We indeed lifted the veil and that is why we provided you with documentation. We even provided you the list of companies of South Sudan that traded with Ugandan companies.

Mr Speaker, there was a verification committee in South Sudan-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Traded with or partnered with?

MS ANNA NANKABIRWA: They partnered with - there are two categories. Some partnered and other got sub contracts from the companies that had got contracts from the Government of South Sudan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That can still be understood under a partnership arrangement, they are doing it together.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Sir, there are two scenarios here. There were grain reserve contracts in South Sudan, where the Government of South Sudan wanted to stock grain for a food reserve. They call it “dura” in South Sudan. There are some categories of companies that participated in that. That is where they got a problem in South Sudan because some companies did not supply and others supplied air. 

The committee found that the Government of South Sudan set up their own investigations because there were demands by their own contractors. When they carried out the investigation, they cleaned and blacklisted some companies. The only Ugandan companies that made their way there are those whose partners were later on cleared in South Sudan. If you are a Ugandan company and your partner in South Sudan was not cleared, then you got a problem in the supply of the food reserve. That is how those 10 companies came up. There are also other companies - small and big – that supplied SPLA, states in South Sudan and carried out services for Government agencies. Those are other companies that are demanding for payment. 

Mr Speaker, the issue that the committee was tasked to investigate was equity and justice. The committee considered this term of reference - whether there was equity and justice when the first 10 companies received money. We perused through and studied documents. We studied the bilateral agreement. Before the bilateral agreement, we got a letter that was written by the President. I would like to lay that letter on the Table and read it. 

Whereas this issue began in 2010, the President of the Republic of Uganda addressed it in a letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because several traders were “crying” that their assets were attached by banks. The President and a Cabinet memo, which I would like to lay before this House, directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – if I can read this letter verbatim to this House for your attention -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can you just give us the relevant bit, not the whole of it. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: The relevant bit is that the President said that other countries, as a way of promoting exports, provide funds for export credit guarantees. When traders are selling to risky markets with potential instability, in case they are not paid, these funds are used to pay them so that the concerned countries do not lose promising entrepreneurs. 

It is based on this that Government of Uganda entered an obligation through a bilateral agreement. Mr Speaker, this Parliament approved this bilateral arrangement on 3 April 2018. When I read this bilateral arrangement – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we read it. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: It obligates Government of Uganda to cater for all traders. The first category in this bilateral arrangement includes the 10 companies who had entered –(Interjections)- This is what the committee found. I cannot dispute my own findings. The 10 companies had entered a memorandum of understanding with the Government of South Sudan.

Number two – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Can we have order please? 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: There are other categories mentioned in this bilateral agreement. Section 10 of the bilateral agreement agrees that there are other companies that traded in South Sudan. Sections 5 and 6 do mention clearly that those companies that have to be paid are supposed to first of all be verified and agreed upon by the Government of South Sudan. 

When we were trying to find out whether there was equity, we found out that the first guarantee was for the 10 companies. The question was: Why did you exclude the small companies, the small traders and the other companies? We got an answer. They were not included because the Government of South Sudan had not verified their claims. Mr Speaker, you allowed us to go to South Sudan because we wanted to ascertain whether the answer given by both the ministries of trade and finance was correct. 

In South Sudan, we met with the Minister of Finance. Good enough, the current Minister of Finance, hon. Salvatore Garang, was then the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance. We met with the ministers of trade, defence and the Rt Hon. Speaker of the transitional Government of South Sudan. They did acknowledge that indeed they had not set up that verification committee. 

They informed us that in the first sovereign guarantee they had given us, the Government of Uganda had not met its obligation of paying the full sums of money. We explained the reason to them. They told us that since our Parliament is taking it as a matter of urgency, then they would give us a verification committee. 

Mr Speaker, the committee was sent. Indeed, because you are the one who sent us, we came to your office with a letter that was written to you, which is even attached to our report. In this letter, the Government of South Sudan wrote to the Ministry of Finance and attached a copy to the Speaker of Parliament confirming acknowledgment of receipt of those claims. It also confirmed the setup of the verification committee and we attached it to our report. We also brought it to your office because we had been sent. It also had the ministerial order of appointment of the verification team, so that we hasten the process of verification. 

There are some companies whose payment was at the level of bounced cheques. Some of them had even received part payment and some had payment advice forms. They were cleared for payment but because Government of Uganda had taken over the issue as a “debt collector”, these traders could not move to South Sudan to get their monies. In the bilateral arrangement, it was stated that the money was to be paid through the Ministry of Finance in Uganda. 

In the letter that was written to you, Government of South Sudan acknowledges and has informed the Speaker that they are providing a guarantee for them very soon and they acknowledge that they can be captured. Before I go to the last category, I would like to say that this gives hope to our traders that have not been paid.

There is this category of traders who we mentioned to the Government of South Sudan. South Sudan said, as a sovereign state they cannot take on traders of a private nature who dealt with private companies. I am being verbatim and saying as it was said in the meeting that we held with the agencies in South Sudan. They said that they will not acknowledge companies which did not have contractual obligations with Government. They further said that they can only acknowledge those companies with contractual obligations.

Mr Speaker, we felt hurt because many of the traders from the northern part of Uganda and West Nile are small people with small companies. That is why our recommendation is that Government of Uganda considers ex gratia payment so that our people can go back to business and have life. I rest my case.

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to make clarifications on a few issues which have been raised. I thought that it would be important to put the debate in context and understand the choice before us.

There is no compensation that we are making. The Ugandan traders went to South Sudan as hon. Felix Okot-Ogong has said, at that time because of the involvement in foreign trade. They were able to improve on trade relations between the two countries by almost $700 million. However, after supply, they got into problems and appealed to our Government. We have been looking at a number of options available to solve this problem because they are quite a number of Ugandans who are suffering in this situation. 

One of the solutions that we came up with - South Sudan said, “Government of Uganda, if you can raise some money and pay Ugandan traders who traded in South Sudan, then we shall make an agreement and when we stabilise, we will pay you back.” The 10 companies were the first contacts between the two governments and brought this issue to the attention of Government and they formed part of the MoU which was signed in 2010. Part payment by South Sudan was made and eventually they failed. We then went into a bilateral agreement in 2016. In 2018, we came to this House and the House ratified the agreement. 

Therefore, the principle of whether Government of Uganda should come in to help the Ugandan traders who traded with the Government of South Sudan is a principle that has already been adopted and agreed upon by this House. We ratified that agreement and the 10 companies were part and parcel of that agreement. When the agreement came here, Parliament said “No, there are other companies that had reached a certain stage,” and you added the 23 companies. However, for these 23 companies to be paid, we had to make an addendum to the current agreement and they became part and parcel of the agreement. 

The agreement also provided that all other companies which were not mentioned in the agreement should be verified through a joint verification committee and all of them be paid. It is simple to understand; for example, if hon. Joy Atim buys from hon. Amelia Kyambadde and she fails to pay, she then goes to hon. Cecilia Ogwal and says, “You pay, when I get money I will pay you back.” Now, it is going to be hon. Amelia Kyambadde –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you use more practical examples. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: These people supplied the Government of South Sudan. The Government of Uganda is coming in, on behalf of South Sudan, and we are paying for them because – (Interjection) - Please, can you give me a second? Honourable colleagues, this is Parliament of Uganda and if we could understand, we can make a proper decision. We are paying these Ugandans but South Sudan will pay back this money to Government of Uganda. The question is when? “When” is what you approved here in the agreement? Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection so that I explain this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, order!

MR BAHATI: The agreement which we laid here and was approved by Parliament of Uganda shows that after payment, we send that return to South Sudan and within 12 months, they will refund the money. 

Mr Speaker, the select committee was formed to do the following:

1. 	The $10 million which you paid to the 10 companies, was it paid according to the rules and resolutions of Parliament? In the report, the committee found out that the Accountant-General, whose vote is to pay the monies he is allocated, paid this money according to the rules. 

2. 	The second question was to lift the veil of these companies. The veil was lifted and everybody knows who owns these companies.

3. 	The third question is: What happens to the other companies? The framework of the contract is that we are going to have a joint verification committee, which has delayed but I am glad that when the committee went to South Sudan, South Sudan immediately formed that committee and they have written to us to send our team to join them. For the companies which will be verified, South Sudan will issue a sovereign guarantee saying that, “We have verified this jointly and this is the amount of money. After you have paid them, we shall pay back the money.” This is as simple as that.

Mr Speaker, the question we are answering today is simple and straightforward, and the only point we have to agree with is that the committee has raised two points - There are two categories of suppliers to South Sudan; there are private companies which supplied Government of South Sudan and there are those private companies which supplied private companies. The Government of South Sudan is inclined to first deal with private companies that supplied Government. Those private companies that supplied private companies are rather complicated to verify. 

Lastly, I would like to end by putting the public on notice. There have been a lot of rumours, especially surrounding those people who supplied in South Sudan. Everything that Parliament will decide is what our Government will follow. Let no one deceive you that you can go somewhere and your name will be included on the list. You have got to follow the rules. Let no impostor go around the country saying, “I will see this one or the other one”. If you get such a person, please report him to the police and he or she will be arrested. Only companies that will be verified by the joint committee agreed upon by South Sudan and approved by this House will be paid, according to the rules. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This has now given us a big challenge; when our people do business with the neighbouring countries, there must be some policies in place to protect them. Those private-to-private traders are the most vulnerable. They are suffering and a lot of them have died because they took loans and their houses and all their property was taken away and so they are dying –(Interruption)

MS SYLVIA AKELLO: Thank you very much for giving me way. I would like to give information that those you are talking about who got the loans got a letter from the minister, which was their surety, telling the banks to give those traders money that the Government will pay. At the expiry of the letters written by the minister, hon. Bahati, to the banks, the banks started taking these people’s houses. 

I know of a man called Mr Omara who sleeps in Mr Kayanja’s Church. Whoever goes there can find him because he cannot go anywhere because of the issues of the loans that were guaranteed by the minister and they failed to pay them. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you very much. Honourable minister and the committee which worked, it is our local people who are suffering. Those who are paid are big Government officials and they are rich people. How do we protect the vulnerable ones? 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is appalling that the names that are captured here are bigwigs. As the minister has just said, there are people that got their names onto the list. They are demanding pay and asking victims to make their claims bigger so that their names can get onto the list. If one refuses and sticks to their figure, then one’s name is not included there.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you that the traders in hotel business - those that were selling tomatoes and other items - constitute the majority, but their names do not surface here. I would like Parliament to have a say on this. What is the fate of our people who have lost money? I have a case in Lira. You know the value of the money of South Sudan. A woman had sold and when war erupted, she put her money in a polythene bag and she was walking with it and they grabbed it. She is now down to nothing. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. That is the concern of the Members of Parliament - private-to-private business and those individual traders who are suffering with loans. Their businesses were doing very well but because of the war, they lost. How do we protect our people? The rich companies, please, forgive us. The committee accepted that we should consider these others and it is now Ugandans to consider. 

The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, how are you going to help these people? We are not going to push this to South Sudan. South Sudan has agreed to pay, especially for those who were their partners, but now those private-to-private businesses are our problem. How do we help them? We are asking the trade minister to help those people who are dying. They keep coming to our homes and our offices; they are in a sorry state. Honourable minister, please help us. 

This should be an eye opener. We are going to make a policy to ensure that our people who do trade in the neighbouring countries are protected or they are covered in the event that something breaks out, like what happened in South Sudan where people lost a lot of their wealth. 

My proposal is that we should put our heads together and this should be given to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I know that our people are doing business in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and South Sudan. Let us find a way to protect them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have had a good debate on this issue. There is an agreement between the two countries. Under that agreement, there is a continuing process and that continuing process is supposed to be handled by the joint verification committees set up by the two countries. Any claim that has documentation has to be submitted through to the joint verification committees and once the verification committees confirm and approve them, those lists will come back to us and we will authorise the payments. 

That means that it is not ending today or tomorrow. For companies that have documentation and have supplied Government of South Sudan or its agencies, they should submit them. What we need to establish is where these documents should be submitted to - that should be clear - and they are transmitted to the joint verification committee, which will be sitting to determine this thing.

The second issue is that there is a category of people who never supplied the Government or its agencies, and they form the bulk of the people suffering in those different places. The recommendation of the committee is that a system should be devised to capture the list of this category of people and the Government should give them a one-off ex-gratia payment to at least lift them a little to restart their lives. (Applause) They have no way of making a claim against the Government of South Sudan because they have not supplied that government. 

According to the committee, it is an obligation that as Government, we should look at our own citizens. They have supplied, they have legal documents and some of them are known. The recommendation from the committee is that they should be listed and the Government takes over to make a one-off ex-gratia payment to them. That is what the committee is recommending. 

Can I propose that we adopt this report? Let us adopt this report and allow the processes that are captured in the agreement – If there is a name that has documentation but could not have been accessed by the committee, there must be a process of having it captured so that it is transmitted to the necessary agencies to handle appropriately.

Committee chairperson, have you received any further issue? I want to conclude this matter.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your good guidance. There is a small amendment on Annex 15 where a company called Ranway Petroleum had submitted their documents in South Sudan and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sent this information through my email. In the letter that they wrote to you, they attached the list of companies they had received and they indicated to us that in the document they have, there is a company called Ranway Petroleum Limited, which was not on the list. I gave that information to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accordingly –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order. Mr Speaker, you have wisely ruled that some companies were verified. You also ruled that there is going to be an ongoing process of verification, which has brought hope to many of us seated here. However, the committee chairperson is submitting another list to be added, which cannot wait for the ongoing verification. Why the hurry? Is she in order? 

I also have two companies that I would like to add. Where will the story end? Even hon. Mawanda has another company. (Laughter) Therefore, is she in order to overturn the Speaker’s guidance on such a sensitive matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, in the course of the debate, these matters came up. Hon. Mawanda rose and had a document, which he laid here. Sometimes you do not even know how to handle these things. However, there is a process. Even if it is not captured now, there is a process of capturing these things. We have just been informed that South Sudan has finally set up a joint verification committee and the list has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The letter that has been sent, which has been copied to me, is this one and it has additional lists and all kinds of things. Let us live by these. We will have opportunities to continue reviewing these matters each time they come. Can I put the question to this matter?

Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the select committee on the payment of claims by the Uganda-South Sudan traders against the Government of South Sudan be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are receiving the report of the Budget Committee. Which one do we handle first? Can we receive the report from the Budget Committee and see if we can conclude this one tomorrow? I do not think we can do it today. After receiving the Budget Committee’s report, we will continue and finalise with the debate on the rules. Is that okay?

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR 2018/2019
(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question was already proposed for your debate. The chairperson was supposed to report to guide our debate. Mr Chairman, can you report?

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the national budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020. In view of what you have just said, that there is more business to be presented, I will read a few sections of this report; the rest can be accessed –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising concerns what you said, that I should look at the budget report. I have the report and there are issues, which are fundamental and we have not reconciled them with the chairperson of the Budget Committee, as you proposed.

Therefore, would it be procedurally right for the chairperson to present a report which has budget reallocations as per the identified priorities, among which is Shs 40 billion under vote 112 for Basajjabalaba’s City Abattoir and it is called a priority? Every electoral period he gets this money. There is also payment of domestic arrears of Shs 5 billion to the Uganda Police SACCO under vote 114. Mr Speaker, a SACCO with domestic arrears –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I have listened, but is that a procedural matter? That is a matter for debate. Can we listen to the chairperson and then you debate? Chairperson, please proceed. Please, let us receive this report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I will go straight to the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020 on page 35. Ultimately, after considering the corrigenda, we will have the overall budget.

In line with regulation 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2016, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted corrigenda to the budget for financial year 2019/2020. These corrigenda have the following categories:

    i. Adjustments to the budget to cater for emerging expenditure pressures;
    ii. Increase in external financing;
    iii. Additional resources to Ministry’s Departments and Agencies (MDAs) on account of an increase in projections of Non Tax Revenue (NTR); and
    iv. Resource neutral corrigenda.

Arising out of the corrigenda, the budget for financial year 2019/2020 is indicated in the table below. From that table, we note that the original budget amounted to Shs 39,548,472,607,000 but changes have been made on it. The changes amount to Shs 939,430,728,000. The overall budget is now Shs 40,487,903,335,000.

The critical expenditure pressures addressed by the corrigenda include issues relating to:

    a. Salaries, pension and gratuity, amounting to Shs 137.99 billion; 
    b. Critical Government commitments, amounting to Shs 388.75 billion; and
    c. Election road map 2021, amounting to Shs 73.26 billion.

Overall, we see an adjustment of Shs 600 billion, if you offset the cost of domestic borrowing.

The shortfall under wages is intended to cater for wage enhancement for administrative science staff in the health and education sectors who were not considered when the salary enhancement for judicial officers and salaries for Local Defence Units (LDUs) was done. The corrigenda therefore provide for emoluments for judicial officers and salaries for LDUs. 

The corrigenda provide Shs 103 billion to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to enable the implementation of the digital stamps and e-tax system. The digital stamp solution will be installed at the various sites of licensed producers. Initially, the project is intended to cover the following products: beers, cigarettes, drinking water, soda, spirits and wines. The cost of the stamps will be as indicated in that table. You will note that in column 2, we have the projected quantity of stamps that will be required in each of those subsectors. We also note the unit price of those stamps in column 3, and we note that the unit prices vary from Shs 15 per stamp to Shs 240. The estimated cost overall is about Shs 126.3 billion.

According to URA, Cabinet had taken a decision that the cost of digital stamps would be borne by the Government. The committee notes that with the investment of Shs 126 billion, Government can only realise additional revenue of Shs 47.74 billion in the first year. Moreover, after the first year, the manufacturers will be required to pay. The manufacturers, however, have rejected this arrangement because of the cost implications. 

The committee further noted as follows:

    a) That URA never brought the issue of digital stamps as an unfunded priority during the discussion of the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2019/2020; and that the expenditure was found to be too huge, implying that there was need for more time to critically examine the matter.

    b) That URA procured the services of SICPA SA and the contract was awarded on 4 October 2018, a matter the committee found irregular, as this could not have happened without evidence of financing the project.

    c) That the cost was too high and that there are huge variations in unit costs, which URA failed to justify.

    d) That the idea of making Government pay for the digital stamps was against the law as will be elaborated later.

    e) Noted that while Government was to meet the cost of the project in the first year, there appears to be no exit strategy in the second year as no Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) exists between Government and the manufacturers; and

    f) Noted that the digital tax system neglected the potentially available local solutions.

The Existing Legal Framework

Digital stamps are provided for under the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 and the Tax Procedures Code (Tax Stamps) Regulations, 2018.

Under section 19A, we discussed the tax stamps:

    1. A person dealing in goods, whether locally manufactured or imported, shall affix a tax stamp on any goods locally manufactured or imported as may be prescribed by the minister under subsection (3);

    2. The commissioner shall prescribe the manner in which a tax stamp is to be affixed to goods.

    3. The minister shall prescribe, by statutory instrument, the locally manufactured or imported goods on which tax stamps shall be affixed.

Under section 19B, we have the penal tax relating to tax stamps. I will skip that and go to regulations 4 and 7 of the Tax Procedures Code (Tax Stamps) Regulations, 2018, which provide as follows:

“4. 	Procurement
(1) 	The commissioner shall in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2013 procure a person to -
(a) 	print and deliver tax stamps at such a time, place and in such a manner as the commissioner may prescribe;
(b)	develop, install and maintain the system at the premises of the manufacturers, importers and the authority; and
(c)	develop, install and maintain any other related system as the commissioner may prescribe. 

(2) 	For purposes of sub regulation (1) (b), the commissioner shall define the functional, security and fiscal control requirements to be observed by the contractor in developing, installing and maintaining the system.”

Regulation 7 provides as follows:

“Tax Stamp Fees

(1) 	A manufacturer or importer shall purchase tax stamps from the commissioner at a fee specified by the commissioner by notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper of wide circulation.

(2) The stamp fees shall be paid to the commissioner by manufacturers and importers of prescribed goods, based on the quantity of stamps issued to them.

(3) 	The stamp fees shall be paid before the stamps are issued to the manufacturer or importer.

(4) 	The Authority shall maintain a bank account in which the revenue from the sale of tax stamps shall be deposited for purposes of paying the printers of the tax stamps supplied and for defraying the expenses of managing the system.”

From the above provisions, it is clear that – 

1. 	A manufacturer or importer is obliged by law to affix a tax stamp on their goods as prescribed by the commissioner under the Tax Procedures Code (Tax Stamps) Regulations 2018.

2. 	The commissioner procures a consultant to develop, install and maintain the system which prints and delivers tax stamps.

3. 	The manufacturer or importer pays for the stamps, which money is used to pay for the printing of the stamps and defraying the expenses of managing the system.

Our recommendation is that the decision of the Government to pay for digital stamps is not in line with the provisions of the law. Since URA submitted that it had procured the contractor as mandated under regulation 4, the cost of printing tax stamps and maintaining the system will be paid by the manufacturer or importer through the purchase of tax stamps. So, this request could not be sustained.

Budget Reallocation as per Identified Priorities, Financial Year 2019/2020

We were asked to harmonise and reconcile these figures and we captured the information, which we summarise in this table. It is quite a long table but it has two parts. The first part is about resources identified for reallocation. The second part, which is on page 43, identifies prioritised allocations in the budget for the financial year 2019/2020 and those are the destinations. I do not know whether I should go through these one by one; you have them. 

I heard hon. Nandala-Mafabi raising the issue of Basajjabalaba. I do not have, in this report, a statement on Basajjabalaba. If it is there, he should show it to me. 

What we are talking about here is that KCCA has seen its revenues dwindling over time. They used to collect revenue from taxis and boda bodas but now they pay zero. Therefore, this idea is to allow KCCA repossess the City Abattoir and start generating revenue. We need to begin to see the revenue of KCCA going upwards instead of going downwards because KCCA is now increasingly becoming dependent on Government. 

When we met them, we proposed that the issue of the fees that they impose on taxis could be easily harmonised under the Traffic and Road Safety Act. That is where they could insert fees charged on taxis and the same for boda bodas. We think that we can progressively begin to resolve this problem at KCCA, so that they become self-sustaining.

Figures Recommended for Supply 

Arising from the above adjustments, the following figures are recommended for supply as expenditure for financial year 2019/2020.

In that table, we give a summary of the estimates for supply by expenditure category and revised budget estimates in thousands. We have presented details of the subtotals on the recurrent expenditure that include figures for the central Government, referral hospitals, foreign missions and local governments, which I will read in detail when we go to supply. 

The subtotal for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2019/2020 is Shs 10,594,173,246,000. Development expenditure, which is also part of appropriation covering central Government, referral hospitals, foreign missions and local governments, comes to a subtotal of Shs 17,362,990,173,000. The total for appropriation, covering both recurrent and development is Shs 27,957,163,419,000. We also have statutory expenditure, which is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund, amounting to Shs 12,530,739,916,000. The grand total, combining the figures for appropriation and statutory expenditure, which is the budget for 2019/2020, is Shs 40,487,903,335,000.

Mr Speaker, those figures can be found in the detailed schedules from page 54. Under Schedule A, we present the recurrent budget estimates from vote 001 up to vote 797, giving us the total recurrent expenditure, which I just read above. In Schedule B, we present the development budget estimates for FY 2019/2020 and this should constitute the Appropriation Bill on development expenditure. The votes also run from vote 001 up to vote 797 on page 78, and the total development expenditure is as I mentioned earlier.

On page 79, we have Schedule C that presents the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund for financial year 2019/2020. The figures run up to page 80. 

The grand total is as I read it. Mr Speaker, that is my presentation on behalf of the Committee on Budget. The report has been duly signed. I beg to move. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, there is a minority report signed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Atim Ogwal and hon. Joy Atim Ongom. I do not know who is going to present it but there is a minority report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Can we have presentation of the minority report. Please, give us a good summary of the issues.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Before he does, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Budget on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report.

5.26
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. Honourable members, a budget is like a pair of hands with its fingers. It has potential to cause excitement but it can also make you dirty if you do not apply it properly. It is in that spirit that I present a minority report.

Now that we want a summary, I will pick the issues as they appear and start with the last one on the minority report. 

Mulago Casualty Ward 

We would like to ask this Parliament to approve Shs 3.5 billion to be allocated to Mulago Accident and Emergency Casualty Ward in the next financial year. We are all potential candidates for that ward but when you get there, a slaughterhouse is far much better than it. Before you know it, whether you are big or small or whether you have insurance or not, you can find yourself there. 

This is the face of the new refurbished hospital. Therefore, it is so critical that we provide this small funding for us to give a facelift to that ward. Otherwise, it speaks badly –(Interjections)– I have compared this with the chairperson of the Committee on Health’s request. He is aware that if Shs 3.5 billion is provided, that ward can be given a facelift and life. 

The Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) 

As you are aware, the money that was running YLP was relocated to the Office of the President/State House. The reasoning is that it is still an evolving fund in that base. However, this money is already borrowed by various youth groups and transferring this money to the Office of the President when the election is two years down the road will, more or less, allow this money to be taken as a political gift. It will not serve its purpose. 

Much as I do not oppose – I know the President is fairly embattled politically and he needs extra oxygen; he is under pressure from the political environment and he may need the money. However, our bone of contention is that the money should be left to run YLP much as it has expired. If we left the money and asked the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come up and refine it, it will continue to deepen and help the youth. The temptation also is that money in State House can sometimes be used in a partisan way.

Discrimination in Salary Enhancement

Mr Speaker, I think this Parliament can applaud Government for allocating Shs 49 billion to the health sector and Shs 13 billion to enhance payment. That is a positive direction. The danger with this, however, is that they are only helping those related to science. This Parliament passed a resolution, which was very clearly articulated, that this is discriminatory and it goes against the spirit of our Constitution. We, therefore, contend very strongly that a corresponding amount of money be provided to also enhance the salaries of the arts teachers. That is only fair. (Applause) A professor of science and that of psychology are both professors and they are paid for hours spent.  

Most of the Members of Parliament here are not scientists. I am a scientist - I hold a Bachelor of Science Degree in Economics - but I can say the majority Members –(Interjections)– By the way, I did mathematics, economics and physics at A level. The majority of Members in this House come from arts-related backgrounds and they are wonderful Ugandans. They are products of those arts teachers. The arts teachers also deserve to enjoy and live peacefully.

This discrimination will endanger professionalism in all sectors. Our humble appeal is that we conform to the Constitution. Otherwise, people are going to go to the Constitutional Court for this matter. It is indiscrimination; needless to add.

Non-Permissible Allocations

Another bone of contention is non-permissible allocations. We have spoken for the eleventh time that this Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development, now that it is transforming itself into another organ altogether, still lacks a legal framework. However, Shs 10 billion is being given to this initiative. Our humble view is that this money should be reallocated to the enhancement of –(Interjections)– You want Busoro Hospital? You will speak for it. 

This is the kind of money you can reallocate to enhance the salaries of teachers. We are identifying the resources. (Applause) 

Also, the innovation fund is so critical because without innovation and science, countries will not prosper. We need a legal framework though. As we speak now, that legal framework is not yet provided. So, that money can also go towards that basket where we can find money to enhance teachers’ salaries –(Interjection)– Information? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is presenting a report. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we are also saddened to note that there is inadequate counterpart funding. It has been established that there are critical counterpart funding gaps in the next financial year, one of which is Shs 29.8 billion for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). As we are passing the money for SAGE, we have not provided the counterpart funding and this is for the vulnerable people of our community. We need this for the whole country now and we need to find that money.

Kawolo Hospital

You know, for those who use Jinja Road, that this hospital is very critical for managing accidents. There is lack of counterpart funding of Shs 6 billion. 

Rural Electrification Agency (REA)

You know how critical REA is because most Members of Parliament are up for elections. People need electricity in the various villages but there is a counterpart funding gap of Shs 19 billion. 

National Science Technology Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement Project

This project has a counterpart funding gap of Shs 12 billion. 

The Industrial Skills Centre

It has a counterpart funding gap of Shs 1 billion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform Members that failure to provide counterpart funding in the last financial year cost Uganda Shs 200 billion in payment of such charges on loans we obtained but did not utilise. This is because we lacked counterpart funding just in one sector - the road sector.  For us to borrow, pay interest and then not provide counterpart funding - we lost Shs 200 billion. This is simply a waste of money. That is why we ask that as we pass this budget, we must ensure money would be paid. Some of this money will be paid when some of us are dead. That is why the debt we have right now will take us 94 years to pay if we do not borrow any further. However, to pay that debt and we do not find the monies not utilised is extremely very unpatriotic. 

Unspent balances as I have been reminded; Mr Speaker, we have been having an on-going issue with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the National Treasury. Every single year, you will never know how much money remained as the year closed and it is never reflected as an opening balance.

We know that you cannot anticipate right now how much money will remain on our Consolidated Account but the Auditor- General should find a way of reflecting this money that is left so that it is not misused. There is a possibility that these monies that remain on our accounts, whoever accounts for them and how much - That is why we are asking that there should be correspondence. 

Mr Speaker, I have tackled the issue of counterpart funding. I am not going into very hard issues and I beg your indulgence. One of it is classified expenditure. When you look at the table I have drawn, it looks at classified expenditure for the various agencies. Classified expenditure is rising as per the table; those who read will look at this. However, just look at one single item that would terrify every taxpayer.

Uganda wants to acquire some equipment, I do not want to go into the detail but this year, it has already spent one trillion shillings on that equipment. Next year, it is going to spend another Shs 1.9 trillion. When you go through the ministerial policy statement, it is going to cost one trillion for the next four years. That means that equipment will cost equivalent to Shs 6.5 trillion. That is an enormous amount of money. I know we are countering real threats.

However, the biggest threats facing peace and stability in Sub-Saharan Africa with well-established research are increasing populations and the usual lack of production; that you will not be cured by increasing spending on military power. 

You need to come up with ventures, innovations and strategies that empower the youth. However, when you increase this kind of money, it is haemorrhage. You know it is very easy to spend classified expenditure in any way you want. It can be subject to abuse by the Executive branch. That is a known fact world over. Parliament needs to pronounce itself on that issue.

Mr Speaker, the next issue concerns insufficient taxation in the transportation sector. I am not reading verbatim in order to save time. Let me speak about the environmental levy. We put up an environmental levy that was intended to generate funds that could be used to mitigate those effects. 

However, when you look at what is taking place with the environmental levy, you realise that the Ministry of Works and Transport together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are not doing a good job.

That takes me to infrastructure levy. Mr Speaker, as we are building the infrastructure, the so good roads, we are not matching them with the infrastructure fund that is meant to maintain them. When we maintain them, soon or later we will require money to rebuild an infrastructure. Therefore, you will be in the vicious circle of ever borrowing to build your roads and therefore, there is need to scale up on the collection of the environmental levy. 

Mr Speaker, that takes me also to the petroleum fund. The petroleum fund was established and it has a law that controls it and how money from the petroleum fund should be utilised. However, it is saddening to note that more less the entire money that Uganda has gotten from petroleum all of it has been used.

Part of that fund was supposed to reserve some money in the special reserve for our children and grandchildren. However, we are consuming it and endangering the future generation. We are not so sure that all the money collected from the petroleum fund goes to what the law stipulates because that money was ring-fenced.

Mr Speaker, let me go to the final issue: deviation from budget resources. In your Chair, this Parliament deliberated the MTEF and approved a Budget of Shs 34 trillion. However, here we are right now with a Budget of Shs 40.5 trillion; an increase of Shs 6 trillion.

Mr Speaker, part of these increments has come in enormous pro-genders and additions to the MTEF. This speaks volumes about the planning and the Executive arm of Government whether before they bring the MTEEF, they have really made a thorough thinking through of what the next financial year will look like. Once you fail to plan at MTEF, then do not tell us that you will plan optimally on how to utilise the money.

However, the big contentious issues embedded in this are that as they continue to bring us with more MTEF, they are increasingly going to borrow money domestically. At the first go, they do not envisage how much money they will need for them to be able to do work. This domestic borrowing like the chairman has read has a lot of problems.

Mr Speaker, I will beg at a right time to go into this. One, they have told us that they want to borrow Shs 500 billion domestically. Interest payment on Shs 500 billion will be Shs 54 billion. However, they are going to do in the same year redemption of Shs 216 billion. That means that the total borrowing of Shs 500 billion will be Shs 316 billion. That is the most expensive money and that is Budo economics, it is absolutely bad economics.

Where do you borrow Shs 500 and the cost of borrowing is Shs 300? However, they are hiding the fact that they are going to borrow Shs 800 billion. Now, unless you are initiated and you are not an engineer like hon. Waluswaka here to understand these issues, you may not really -(Interjection)- know the danger related to this kind of economics because increasingly, the third biggest expenditure of our Budget is on interest payment. Part of the biggest push of interest payment is money borrowed domestically and money borrowed domestically is non-concessional.

Uganda has now been ranked among the three countries that can no longer get concessional loans. This is because we adopted wrong economics -(Interjections)- the source of information is reflected in this report and you have an iPad. Let it help you. 

Mr Speaker, regarding deviation from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, it is imperative to note that the country has deviated from the objective of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility regarding fiscal balance section. I do not want to read the whole text but this is very critical. We committed to a five year development plan for the country and to simply deviate from it and go our own way will have real implications.

Lastly, on non-inclusive GDP growth, because this touches the lives of Ugandans, I beg to read this section. “It is projected that Uganda’s economy will post a real GDP growth of 6.3 per cent from the earlier projection of 6.0 per cent. It is further asserted that the main drivers of growth include accelerated growth in trade, manufacturing, private construction, public sector investment, infrastructure, agriculture, tourism among others. Whereas GDP is growing, it is not inclusive based on the observations below:
 
(i) 	GDP growth is not a valid measure of economic wellbeing in Uganda where the poverty rate is rising from 19.7 per cent to the current rate of 21.4 per cent.” 

This is a mismatch. You have GDP growth but you have poverty at household levels growing. That speaks that there is –(Interjections)– No, it is not declining, it rose. I will challenge you; this is your report. It rose from 19.7 per cent to 21.4 per cent. That means there is a mismatch in our model of economic growth and this is a reality. That is why household incomes have been declining. 

(ii) 	GDP does not reflect how public resources are distributed. Presently, majority of economic production used to compute GDP for Uganda is held by an enclave of large investors and patronage networks who account for 10 per cent of our population but own 35 per cent or a third of the national income. This entrenches a majority of the population in poverty hence the widening inequality rather than shared prosperity, wealth deprivation other than wealth creation.

GDP figures include profits that are repatriated by foreign investors who are accumulating wealth based on economic incentives that are not easily accessible by local investors. This is a big factor. As you give foreigners incentives, our local people are crying for small incentives. Foreigners expatriate the profits while the locals; the wanainchi work without incentives and are becoming poorer and their companies are collapsing. 

I challenge the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Works and Transport. Of all the big contracts that you award - because these are sectors that we allocate a lot of money to - how many Ugandans are you awarding contracts in your various ministries? (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. Our rules provide for minority reports but the wording in the rules is very clear that, “A minority report should present where the Member or members differ from a decision taken by the majority of the committee members.” That is the substance of a minority report but I hear my friend just giving a narrative about his opinion and a lecture about the economy – (Interjections) No, I am very awake.

Is the honourable Member proceeding well without clearly showing where he differs from the majority of members and merely narrating stories and opinions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, having pointed out in paragraph 2.0 the areas of dissent, I have looked through and some of the areas of dissent are not the subject of the committee report but I chose to live with that to allow the Member time finish his presentation without interruption. However, the elaborations are now going beyond what I had tolerated initially.

You can raise pertinent issues but within the rules. Some of those issues could have come in a substantive motion, which we would have given enough time to debate rather than carrying them in a wrong vehicle and affecting the structure of our debate.

Honourable members, the areas of dissent that I have recorded are in Mulago Causality, the Youth Livelihood Programme, salary enhancement, permissible allocation to PIBID innovation fund, inadequate counterpart funding, unspent balances – Those are the issues of concern but they are not part of the majority report. They should have been observations and not points of dissent because the committee has not said anything about them. The committee has not said anything about classified expenditure or environmental levy. Deviation from Budget figures is a general concern, which I had chosen to live with. 

We have received views from the minority and those are the issues that are captured, which I thought would be points that could guide us in the debate but those that I have pointed out are actually not part of the main report. As such, they will divert our debate and make it difficult for us to come to a reasonable conclusion on what the report is saying on this Budget for the next financial year.

Honourable, if you are going along those lines, you might want to reconsider because I will not be patient anymore. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the ruling of the Speaker is final but I respectfully have a different opinion. This report has two points, including the macro analysis, which is very elaborate and which the chairperson chose not to read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You disagree with what is in the report?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, it is part of the main report and it comes with solid conclusions. The main report on macro analysis goes through all the issues that I am raising. The point I was making is that when you read through macro analysis, we only differ in the recommendations but generally, they reflect the same opinion.

In conclusion, it is important that our economy, as it grows up, should be inclusive and attempt to capture every segment of our society. I am aware, as a politician of what is blowing in the country. We are dealing with the first case of failure to address the needs of the youth batch – the number of youth we have in millions – (Interjection) - yes, youth explosion. 

Uganda is one of the few countries on the scale of risks that is failing to address the issue of the youth population increase. It will impair our security and growth and it is reflecting in the decisions we are taking in our security sector. It remains a key driver of the economy. Any debate of a national budget that does not capture that would miss the point. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is a very elaborate report from the committee and a very elaborate minority view on the issues raised by the committee - (Hon. Waluswaka rises) -Sergeant, would you like to inspect the honourable member’s chair? There might be pins in there. (Laughter) He has difficulties in sitting or are there other conditions that make it difficult for him to continue sitting? (Laughter)

Honourable members, these are very elaborative issues. I had hoped that the minister will take two minutes to respond to two issues and then we see how we proceed. I was also hoping that we might be able to finalise with the report of our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Then, I would seek your further indulgence so that we come tomorrow at 9 o’clock and finish this business. Otherwise, I would like us to handle the report on rules and finish today.

Honourable members, I am the only one who has been sitting here since two o’clock and I am still okay. Do not complain at all. Many of you have been up and down; I should be the one complaining most.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to respond to at least two important issues. 

I also would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report that has been written in the very difficult circumstances. I thank the mover of the minority report too. 

Mr Speaker, while any Member has a right to move the minority report, if the Member of the same committee continues to move a minority report on every report, I think it is an issue that we need to investigate and see whether there are some peculiar reasons about it. 

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would have expected the minister to allow members to give their opinions on the two reports before he comes to summarise. Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the one who allowed him. Proceed, give those two responses then we see how to move tomorrow.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we are working hard to ensure that all our priorities are financed. To finance this, we have started some important reforms through which, we think we can raise finances to finance our budget. A budget proposal without resources to finance it is nothing.

Therefore, this financial year, we proposed to do one of the reforms through digital stamps. We would like to see accuracy and precision in the sector of manufacturing. If one is manufacturing or importing a product here in the country, one of the reforms that we are introducing is a digital stamp where Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) will work with the manufacturers to put stamps on every product that is manufactured in real time. Once a stamp is put, it will be linked to URA. Every product that goes through a factory will be known in real time by URA through that digital stamp system.

When we introduced this, the question was: who is going to bear the cost of the stamps? Should it be the manufacturers or Government paying the service provider? From different discussions - and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives who has also been involved in this will make a point -  Government agreed that for the first one year, we are going to cater for the cost of the service provider as we raise this revenue through digital stamps –(Interjection)

I know you are very well informed but can I make a point and finish? Thank you. We made a provision in this budget of Shs 103 billion to carry out this reform. The reform is going to double the amount of money that we have been getting from the taxation of manufacturers. 

Mr Speaker, I have seen one of the proposals of the committee to reduce this amount from Shs 103 to Shs 7 billion. This money you are reducing will undermine our effort to collect more money to finance the budget yet we would not want to come back here through supplementary budgets and start quarrelling with Parliament. You have instructed us –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this House we debate. I think the quarrelling is somewhere else, not in this House. 

MR BAHATI: Therefore, we would not want to come back and argue with Parliament and debate this matter when we can resolve it before we pass the budget.

Mr Speaker, we are making a final appeal to the whole House that we need this Shs 103 billion. When we go to the Committee of Supply, we have identified areas where we will cut it. We will be moving a motion to amend a supply schedule to see to it that this is restored. This is an effort to raise more money to finance the budget.

Friends, remember that the budget we are having is a cash budget. If you curtail us from collecting more money, we will have difficulties in financing it. That is point number one.

Point number two is on the capitalisation of Bank of Uganda –(Interjections)– this is very important, colleagues. We made a provision of Shs 486 billion. As we speak, despite the circumstances the bank is going through, the capital of the bank is impaired. They have been making losses; they need to be stabilized in order to stabilize our monetary policy situation.

The Budget Committee is proposing to reduce this money by Shs 288 billion- a massive Shs 288 billion. This will impact on the capitalization situation of the bank.

Mr Speaker, we have chosen to put these things on record to appeal to the whole House to reflect on these two issues because they are serious. We are likely to make a mistake. Therefore, we appeal to the House that these two issues are looked into again. I see the whole House is in the mood of supporting these two issues so that we can correct the situation. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, I thought the minister could make this so that when we come tomorrow we are able to have a discussion and move on. In addition, the principles are clear, this is the Budget. Usually, there are no principles to debate in the Budget because the Budget is about what we know should be done and finance operations of Government for the next year.

Therefore, let us reflect on this so that when we come back tomorrow as I argued earlier, we see how to proceed with it. Yes, hon. Mafabi on the same procedural issue?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there is already a law about stamps and it says -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I suggest that you consult overnight and if the matter remains outstanding, you can raise it tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Mr Speaker. The other one is my issue, which I raised, but since you have said tomorrow, about the Shs 40 billion. I want to make it clear that the chairman was saying that where is Bassajja Balaba?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I was saying that why don’t you discuss that and come back if the matter still remains outstanding, then you can raise it tomorrow when we are ready, is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented yesterday. I proposed the question for debate and we should be having the discussion on the general principles. However, the reason this review was proposed was from the House is that there were certain gaps and things that needed to be improved upon. We sent it to the committee and then it reported yesterday on the different aspects. They have proposed some amendments. 

Are we going to debate the principle of these amendments or should we go and see what the amendments look like to see if we can adopt them or not and then we leave it like that? Can I put the question to adopt the report and then go to the committee to handle the amendments? Is that okay? 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on Proposed Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now move to the stage of looking at the amendments? Are we ready to proceed with the proposed amendments? Yes honourable chair, we are ready, can we proceed?

6.11
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, honourable members. The first rule that was proposed for review to the committee was Rule 11 on Parliamentary Commissioners. The committee proposes that we replace sub rule (4) and (5) of the current Rules of Procedure with the following:

“(4) Nomination of the candidates for election to the Commission of the four Members of Parliament referred to in sub rule (1)(f) shall be made by the Government and Opposition sides.” 
 

“(5) The constitution of the Commission under this rule shall be done during the first meeting of the first session of a new Parliament.”

The committee further proposes that we insert a new sub rule (6) as follows:  “(6) The four members referred to in sub rule (1)(f) shall hold office as members of the Commission for two and half years and shall be eligible for re-election.” 

The justification is to align the sub rules to section two of the Administration of Parliament Act Cap 257.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee. Can I put the question to this for its adoption? I put the question that the rules be amended in the Rule 11 to the effect proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that we amend Rule 112 of our Rules of Procedure with regard to leave of absence by replacing the entire rule with the following:

“Leave of absence in Committees

    (1) A member shall attend the meetings of committee to which he or she is designated, unless leave of absence has been granted to that member by the Chairperson.
    (2) Leave of absence in a committee shall only be granted to a member-
(a)	who is away on parliamentary duties; or
(b)	who provides sufficient cause justifying the member’s absence from the committee”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you want to take decision before you have even heard their proposal? Proceed chair.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: “(3) Application for leave of absence from a committee may be in writing to the Chairperson.

(4) The grant of leave of absence to a member shall be communicated by the Chairperson to members of the committee in the committee meeting immediately following the grant.

(5) Where the application for leave of absence from a committee is made to the Speaker under Rule (3) -
    (a) the applicant shall notify the Chairperson of the committee and he/she shall be notified of the application and decision made on it;
    (b) a member shall not be required to make a further application for leave of absence from the committee to the chairperson of the committee.

(6) 	In exceptional cases, the whip may inform the chairperson of a member’s absence and the circumstances leading to such absence.

(7) 	A member shall not, without satisfactory explanation, absent himself or herself for 15 or more consecutive meetings of a committee.

(8) 	The chairperson shall give a written warning to a member who absents himself or herself for five consecutive meetings of the committee without having been granted leave of absence in accordance with this rule.

(9) 	The warning referred to in sub-rule (8) shall be communicated by the chairperson to members of the committee in the committee meeting immediately following the warning.

(10)	If after the warning, under sub-rule (8), the member continues to be absent without leave from the meetings of the committee for five consecutive meetings, the chairperson of the committee shall report the matter to the Speaker and the Speaker shall give a written warning to the member. 

(11) If after a warning under sub-rule (10), the member continues to be absent without leave for five consecutive meetings of the committee, the Speaker shall refer the member to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for investigation.

(12) A member whose conduct is under investigation by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline under this rule is entitled to be heard in his or her own defence and to be represented by a counsel of his or her own choice.

(13) Where the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, upon investigation, finds the member in breach of sub-rule (7) of this rule, the committee may recommend to the House that the member be suspended from the service of the House for a period not exceeding 15 sittings of the House.

(14) Sub-rule (1) shall not apply to a member who is a chairperson or deputy chairperson of a committee.

The justification is:

    a) To enforce the attendance of members in committees.
    b) To provide a sanction for absenteeism from a committee.”
Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed in our Rule 112. The proposal is to remove what exists now and replace it with what the chairperson has read. Can I put the question to that? 

I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 112 remains as it is.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, the committee proposes the following amendment to Rule 215 of our Rules of Procedure with regard to the timeframe for committees to report. The committee proposes that we replace sub-rule (3) with the following:

“(3) Where extra time is not granted or upon expiry of the extra time granted under sub-rule (2) and the committee has not reported back to the House or otherwise completed consideration of the matter, the House may –

(a) 	appoint a select committee to consider the matter and report to the House; or
(b) 	proceed to deal with the matter in question without any further delay. “

The justification is to allow the House, in dealing with a matter, to be facilitated by a report of a select committee, notwithstanding that the original committee was unable to efficiently or effectively complete the consideration of the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from a presiding officer’s perspective, this would not be solving the problem. Here, the committee has taken 45 days already and asked for an extension. Then, you have refused to give the extension in the committee but now you are creating a select committee, which is going to start from zero for another 45 days. Therefore, you have now extended the period without saying that you have extended it. It is an automatic extension.

The procedure should be that if they fail and Parliament has not accepted the extension, that matter should come back straight to the House and we debate it like we handled some Bills previously. It should be handled case by case so that when the matter comes and the extension cannot be given and the reasons are not satisfactory, the House proceeds with the matter. 

Chairperson, I would urge you to withdraw this because it is not sustainable. There is nothing to defend here. Just withdraw it. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, the proposed amendment to Rule 215 and 140 are similar. I, therefore, propose that the committee withdraws the proposed sub-rule (3)(a) of Rule 215 and the proposed amendment to sub-rule (3)(a) of Rule 140, which are effectively dealing with the appointment of a select committee to consider a matter and report to the House. We should delete them and under sub-rule 215, delete (a) and have (b) proceed to deal with the matter in question without any further delay. 

The next proposed amendment of Rule 140 is, “Delays with Bills.” It also has a similar amendment. We propose to delete the proposed amendment (a) and have only (b), which proceeds to deal with Bills without any further delay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear? Isn’t that already part of the rules? Is that new, Clerk? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, as you have stated, Rule 215 as it is, is the setting of the timeframe for committees to report. Therefore, when you delete and insert a new sub-rule, it changes the whole meaning because it starts from (1), (2) and (3). When you insert a new sub-rule, it changes the new meaning of the whole rule, as you have said. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have said that the whole proposal be withdrawn and the rule should be left as it is. Honourable members, the proposal to amend Rule 215 and 140 is withdrawn. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House as we make the decision to withdraw this. We are trying to cure the mischief of the House considering proceeding on a matter without a report. If the House has no report on that, what will inform it? I thought the purpose of the report was to inform the House. 

As a committee, we thought that it would be good if the House got a report to inform it on the Bill so that it makes the decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has been happening is that each case is handled on its own merits. A committee knowing that its days are about to expire, you do not wait for it to expire because if you let it to expire, you cannot extend something that has expired. You will need a more complicated procedure to do it. You may want to say that maybe a week before the day, you come to this House. You may not need to even write to the Speaker. Okay, you may write to the Speaker but the decision is made by the House and then you make the case that because of the following factors, we have not been able to complete. We have gone this far, can you give us one or two weeks and we would be ready to complete this matter. Then the House will take a decision.

If you fail after the extension, that might be another matter.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The committee wishes to withdraw the proposed amendment to Rule 215 and 140 and proceed with the proposed amendments to Rule 155 with regard to standing committees. The committee proposes that in sub rule (1), insert a new paragraph, (n), as follows: 
“(n) the Committee on Climate Change.”

Justification: to create a Standing Committee on Climate Change.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a proposal to amend Rule 155 by insertion of a new paragraph (n) to the effect as proposed by the committee chairperson, “the Committee on Climate Change.” Honourable members, there is a background to this as well. Structurally, we are also faced with a difficulty. The number of committees and the maximum numbers provided makes some Members be without committees. It might be something you want to think about carefully to see that all Members sit in committees. Is that okay? Can I put a question to this? I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, following from the amendment to Rule 155 on standing committees, the committee recommends that we insert a new rule 182(a) to read as follows: 

Rule 182A. Functions of the Committee on Climate Change

 (1) 	It shall be the function of the Committee on Climate Change to provide oversight regarding responsiveness to matters of climate change, its mitigation and adaptation.
(2) 	The Committee on Climate Change shall, in particular, have the following functions: 
(a) 	Scrutinise all Bills presented before Parliament for inclusion of aspects regarding climate change mitigation and adaptation. 
(b) 	Coordinate parliamentary activities related to climate change and its mitigation and provide a link between Parliament and other institutions in combating the effects and impact of climate change. 
(c) 	Fast-track the effects and impact of climate change and make recommendations to Parliament to address them. 
(d) 	Make recommendations to Parliament on legal and institutional mechanisms to address climate change. 
(e) 	Supervise the implementation of climate smart practices in the public and private sectors. 
(f) 	Monitor technology transfers in order to mitigate effects on the environment.

 (3) 	The committee shall report to Parliament at least twice a year. 

Justification: to provide for the functions of the Standing Committee on Climate Change.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. I have an issue with sub rule (c). How do you fast-track the effects and impact of climate change and make recommendations to Parliament to address them? You might want to consider saying make recommendations to Parliament on how to mitigate something. Fast-tracking is a heavy thing.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are indeed worthy of that chair to catch this which I had not seen. I propose that the committee be allowed to redraft sub rule(c) to capture the spirit of what the Speaker has just proposed and we will do it accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we deal with that? The technical people will adjust accordingly. I put the question to the new insertion of the new Rule 182A that it should be part of our rules of procedure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: The committee also proposes an amendment to Rule 183 of our Rules of Procedure to read as follows: 

Rule 183: Sectoral committees 
In sub rule (2), paragraph (i), insert the words “environment and” before the words “natural resources” so that it reads “Environment and natural resources.”

Justification: the committee on natural resources also handles matters regarding the environment; however, the environment is not a natural resource.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: The committee proposes an amendment to Rule 185 on functions of sectoral committees by inserting a new paragraph (g) as follows:
“(g) To monitor and report to the House the progress made by the sectors covered by them on the sustainable development goals.”

Justification: to mandate the sectoral committees to monitor progress on implementation of SDGs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: The committee proposes on amendment to Rule 201 

Rule 201: Report to be signed by chairperson and Members Replace sub rule (2) and insert new sub-rules immediately after sub-rule (2) as follows:
“Sub-rule (2): The report of the committee on a Bill shall -
    a) be uploaded on the Parliamentary Information System for the information of all members before it is laid on Table;
    b) only be debated after the expiry of at least three days from the day it was laid on the Table by the chairperson or the deputy chairperson or a Member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker.

(2)(a) Notwithstanding sub-rule (2), debate on the report may, in the discretion of the Speaker, ensue -
    a) if three or more days have elapsed since the report of the committee was uploaded on the Parliamentary Information System and a notification of the existence of the report has been sent out to all members by the Clerk;
    b) after it has been laid on the Table by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or a member nominated by the committee or by the Speaker.”

The justification is that the three days are intended to allow time for members of Parliament to read and internalise a report of a committee on a Bill so as to enable them debate from an informed position. Therefore, once a report has been uploaded on the Parliamentary Information System and a notification sent out to all members informing them of the need to read the uploaded documents, debate should ensue once the report is at least three days laid on Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that clear? Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: That brings us to the end of the proposed amendments by the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Congratulations, honourable members. We have been able to handle this matter and finish it. Let the other processes continue. The other questions that have been asked will now be dealt with in good time.

As I had earlier asked, I am requesting that we resume tomorrow at nine o’clock so that we finish with the Budget and its proposals. We will also be able to supply and conclude with the Appropriation Bill. Honourable members, let us be here at nine o’clock. House is adjourned to tomorrow, 9.00 a.m.  

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 24 May 2019 at 9.00 a.m.) 
