Monday, 23 May 2011

Parliament met 10.39 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to our first sitting. Today’s business is for the orientation of the Members to the Rules of Procedure. When you took oath, you were given a copy of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. The Rules of Procedure are what you are going to use in your debate and you are expected not only to know them but to also utilise them. 

If you want to raise a point of order, you should tell me under which rule you are raising that point of order; if you are raising a point of procedure, you should also tell me under what rule you are raising that point of procedure; if it is information, then you should also be able to tell me. 

If you want to stop somebody who is talking nonsense, you should be able to quote the rule under which you can stop somebody from talking nonsense. So, this is why we have invited you here today and the honourable members of the outgoing rules committee will guide us through the process.

There are some other matters that I shall want to communicate probably tomorrow but for today, I want us to focus on the Rules of Procedure. I thank you very much. 

Hon. Peter Nyombi was the chair of the rules committee in the Eighth Parliament and so he will take us through the Rules of Procedure and he will be assisted by other Members. 

Perhaps I should add that each Parliament has an opportunity to review their rules and so we are going to have a rules committee and if there are areas you will want to amend; our rules committee will handle it. But for now, we are going to look at the rules of the Eighth Parliament, which are the subsisting rules of the House.

10.41
MR PETER NYOMBI (MRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My name is Peter Nyombi and I was Chairman of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for about two and a half years. I will try to go through the rules although not one by one but just an introduction to these rules.

Before the expiry of our term we did make a report recommending amendments to these rules, which I think will come a bit later. So, I will go through the rules generally. These rules are like the Bible to a Christian or the Koran to a Muslim for a Member of Parliament. These are the rules that regulate the business in Parliament. 

This is the manual that we use in doing business in Parliament and it is segmented in various parts. Everybody should have a copy of these rules and as you read them, you will eventually learn what they are about.

First of all, these rules have an interpretation. You will find throughout these rules certain terms that are used in this booklet. When you go to the interpretation, some of the terms that are used in the rules are covered by Section 1, on interpretation, which attempts to interpret some of the terms that are used in the rules of Parliament. For example, the word “question” is interpreted on page 7. What the word “question” means - for example when the Speaker asks, “Shall I put the question?” the meaning of “question” is interpreted here.

So rule 1 is about interpretation of certain words that are used in the parliamentary language and rule 2 is about something you have already done; the oaths that you take when you are sworn in as a Member of Parliament and so you complied with this rule when you were swearing before the Clerk to Parliament – this is the rule that was applied. 

The language of Parliament is covered by rule 3. The language, proceedings and debates of Parliament are done in English and not in Lusoga or anything like that, hon. Wafula-Oguttu. The parliamentary language is English. 

We went through the election of the Speaker they made an extract from these rules, which you read through recently and so this part has already been covered. When we are electing a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, we follow these rules and this has already been covered. 

The general authority of the Speaker: if you want to know the powers of the Speaker, then you go to rule 6 and then you will know the powers of the Speaker. Parliament cannot conduct business, hon. Akena, unless there is a Speaker or Deputy Speaker in the Chair. So rule 6 does talk about the authority of the Speaker.

Rule 7 – you see these rules lay down the procedures we follow in Parliament; in committees and the general plenary. But in case a certain situation is not covered by these rules,  rule 7 says that in case of any doubt or for any question or procedure not provided for in these rules, the Speaker shall decide having regard to the practices of the House and the constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth parliaments. The Commonwealth parliaments have fora in which all speakers regularly meet to share their experiences.

On the sitting arrangement, I would like to say that normally Members of Parliament from the Government side sit on the right side of the Speaker while the Opposition sit on the left hand side of the Speaker. The Independents –(Interjections)– thank you very much – I believe the Speaker will give them the option of which side to sit.

I know that we have about 30 Independent Members of Parliament? Those Independents that are leaning towards Government may opt to sit on the Government side while those leaning towards the Opposition may opt to sit on the left hand side of the Speaker.

Rule 9 talks about the Chair of State for the President. When the President visits Parliament, he has a chair that is provided for him. 

And in rule 10, it is said that the business of Parliament is regulated or governed by a Parliamentary Commission that comprises of the Speaker as the chair, Deputy Speaker and Leader of Government Business. It is that commission that determines your allowances. It is the one that will determine whether you should have a car or not. 

There is also the election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly. On this, you are the electorate for the candidates vying for the positions of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. I want to guess that some of them have already started lobbying for support. The composition is regulated by rule 11.


There is also what we call the Pan African Parliament. Some of us will be sent to the Pan African Parliament to represent us. Rule 12 regulates how those are picked and what they are supposed to do when they report.

On whips, I want to inform you that yes, we have whips; the Government Chief Whip who is supposed to whip you to attend and deliberate on national issues. Similarly, from the party that has the majority members, an Opposition Chief Whip is elected. That is regulated by rule 13.

There are instances when these rules may be suspended. In such situations, rule 14, which provides for a situation that calls for the suspension of these rules applied. For example, there may be a matter that is very urgent and a notice of say seven or 14 days - a grave situation will have happened. So, these rules provide for the suspension of the rules when an urgent matter is to be decided upon.

Part II regulates the sittings and the adjournments of the House. Rule 15 gives the Speaker powers to determine the days on which Parliament should be sitting. For example, during the Eighth Parliament, if I remember correctly, it was decided that House plenary should only sit on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. This decision was arrived at in regard to the fact that on Fridays Members may be travelling up country. Anyway, all this depends on the decision of the Speaker although my experience is that normally the Speaker agrees with the Members on which day Parliament should be sitting considering the committee meetings, which usually take place in the morning hours.

Rule 16 is about emergency meetings. Under this rule, the Speaker may call a special meeting – we may have agreed that Parliament meets only on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays – but there may be times when the Speaker can call upon you to sit on a Friday at a time that we do not normally sit. You should know that is all within the powers of the Speaker. What you have to take into account is the fact that Parliament is a very important arm of Government. It may be called upon at the most awkward time to sit and decide on some matter.

Rule 17 is about commencement and conclusion of sittings. All sittings are presided over by the Speaker and in her absence, the Deputy Speaker. The sittings are regulated –

THE SPEAKER: Please, one minute. Can I remind Members that the House is in session; your telephones must be off. You will not be allowed to use telephones during the session. 

MR NYOMBI: Rule 18 talks about the suspension of sitting and the recall of the House. It says that the Speaker may opt to suspend sittings for a number of days or weeks, but also has the powers to summon members to come for a special sitting.

Rule 19 covers public holidays. In this rule, it is stated that the House shall not ordinarily sit on public holidays. This means that if, in the wisdom of the Speaker, there is urgent business that the House should sit, and the Speaker has the powers to call the House for a sitting.

Rule 20 refers to sittings of the House while rule 21 is about the quorum and it states that the quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote. Ordinarily business may continue, but if there is a crucial matter that has to be decided upon, there must be quorum. I believe the Speaker will plead with us to attend Parliament so that business can go on.

Part III is about the order of business. Normally before the sitting you will receive this paper, which is called the Order Paper; it is not called the agenda. The Order Paper lays down the business for the day. Again it is within the powers of the Speaker to determine what business is to be conducted on a certain day. But under rule 22(1) the Speaker gives priority to Government Business. So, for the business of Parliament, we have rule 25, the modalities of prioritising that business.

Rule 23 provides for the procedure of business. How we conduct business in Parliament. “Government business shall consist of public business in the name, or in the charge of a minister.” But rule 23 regulates the procedure of business in Parliament and Rule 24 provides for this Order Paper which lays down the business in Parliament. By looking at this paper, you are able to tell what business is going to be done on a particular day. However, the Speaker has powers to vary the Order Paper.

Statement of business by the Leader of Government Business: rule 25 provides that, “Every last sitting of the day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the house regarding the government business of the succeeding week.” So, the Leader of Government Business who is the Prime Minister will lay down the business that he anticipates will be conducted the following week so that Members can have time to think about that business.

Rule 26 is about weekly Order Paper and the business that is going to be done in a week.

Rule 27, petitions. Members of your constituency for example, may want to present a petition to Parliament. Rule 27 provides for the procedure as to how petitions can be presented to Parliament say, by your constituents. You have to comply with this rule if a petition from your constituents is to be presented to Parliament or else the Speaker may say that, you do not surprise her by bringing business that you have not presented to her.

Part V, presentation of papers. “A paper shall be presented to the House by only the Vice President, the Prime Minister, a minister, a commissioner, a chairperson of a committee or a Member.” So, a stranger cannot present a paper. These are the people who present papers in Parliament. They may be papers on different matters. So, it is those provided for in this rule who present papers before Parliament.

Mode of presentation: rule 29 provides for the mode of presentation of papers.

Part VI is on presentation of reports of parliamentary delegations abroad. Rule 30 provides for presentation of reports. When you travel abroad, you are required by these rules upon your return - I think within 30 days - to prepare a report and present it to the Speaker who will determine when that report will come before the House. You may have some recommendations that you think Government should adopt or that the House may adopt. You present that report to the Speaker and the Speaker will - it is not a question of going abroad, you come back and then you go to your house and you forget all about it. You are required to present a report.

Part VII, questions to ministers and other Members. Ministers are supposed to be in the House to answer questions. So, if you are new Member of Parliament and say you are named in Cabinet, you are required to attend the sittings of Parliament because questions may be raised that you have to respond to. Otherwise, it will be very embarrassing if a question is asked and the minister has disappeared for five days and nobody knows where the minister is. This is particularly for you new Members of Parliament that if you are appointed a minister, you are required to attend the plenary so that in case a question is asked, you can respond to them. What has been happening in the past is that, it was agreed in the House that every Thursday afternoon, questions which may have been raised are answered by ministers. So you can raise questions - in the past what has happened when you raise those questions, ministers prepare themselves and on Thursday, they respond to those questions.

I think you will read the details. Of course that part covers even the manner of asking questions. There is a procedure you follow in the way you pose a question and then when the Speaker is sitting, she calls out a number; you should know your number, you stand and then the minister responds to the question.

Part VIII, statements by ministers: “A minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by rule No. 22 with prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter.” So, ministers do normally make statements explaining, for example if something has happened involving police, you will see the Minister of Internal Affairs making a statement explaining a situation. If it is a question of hunger, say hunger has struck a certain region; the minister may come and explain what the ministry is doing about the situation in a particular area. So part VIII, rule 40 provides for ministers to come and make statements before the House.

Part IX is about statements by members and personal explanations. There have been at times, for example, allegations against a Member of Parliament and he feels he must offer some explanation so that his colleagues do know what actually happened. 

Part XI provides for a situation where a Member of Parliament may want to offer some personal explanation say an allegation has been made against you in the newspapers, you want to explain. So this part IX gives you the procedure that you have to follow in making a personal explanation of a situation.

Part X is on motions and amendments to motions. It provides for notices of motions; if you want to move a motion, part X provides for notices of motions. You do not bombard a Speaker with a motion without -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I think the presenter is using the old book and the new Members have got new books. So, there is a bit of confusion. I would request that possibly he uses the new book so that everybody can follow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it substantially different?

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, although this one is old, there are amendments that were actually put there. It may be old -(Interjections)- yes, I have rule 42; it is an old book but the content is the same.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you get the re-printed one just for the comfort of the Members.

MR NYOMBI: Let me use the new one. So, as I said, part X covers motions. If you want to move a motion, part X provides for how you move a motion. You may in fact seek to get the assistance of parliamentary staff to have it drafted before being taken to the Speaker. So, it provides for notices, when you can make an oral notice; ordinarily it is in writing but you may also make oral notices. 

It provides for oral notices; it also provides for amendments of motions and you may have moved a motion in a certain direction but the House feels that the motion should be amended; the rules provides for amendment of the motion. This part also provides for withdrawal of motions and the manner of debating the motions. I believe I do not have to go through it rule by rule.

It also contains a part on rules of debate. These rules regulate the manner in which the debate should be conducted. You can imagine if there were no rules regulating the manner of debate; there would be a lot of confusion. But the rules do provide for the manner in which the debate should be conducted; the time and manner of speaking, the terms you use; for example you are supposed to address a colleague as, “honourable Member of Parliament”; you do not just address him as “Wamai”. The time and closure of debate are all provided for in these rules.

Then there is the sub-judice rule; when a matter is before court, it is not supposed to be debated. That is rule 60. “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending in such a away as may in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” So once a matter is before a court of law, that matter is said to be sub-judice; and it should not be debated because there is a pending decision on the matter.

Then newspapers, rule 62: “Subject to these rules and except with leave of the Speaker, Members shall not read newspapers or periodicals or books in the Chamber.” So for heaven’s sake, do not come with newspapers; when the Speaker is in the chair and debate has started, it is prohibited to read newspapers. When you come to plenary, you come to conduct business. So you are not supposed to come with newspapers or periodicals or books. Your attention is required by the Speakers.

Reading of speeches by Members: “A Member shall not read his or her speech, but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her arguments.” So you are not supposed to come with a speech and instead of debating, you start reading to the Members; that is prohibited. 

However, you may, during your debate wish to refer say to an article that is allowed. But preparing a written speech is not allowed. You are supposed to prepare yourself beforehand. You may note a few things from what we have done in the past; but you are not supposed to stand and begin reading a speech.

Rule 64, the Speaker is not supposed to participate in debate: “The Speaker shall not take part in any debate before the House, but may give guidance to the House on any matter before it”. So take note of that rule.

Interruption of the debate is covered by rule 65, which is for a motion that a speaker be no longer heard; I think the Speaker alluded to that when she was making her opening remarks. If you feel what a Member is saying does not make sense; I think the English word is “Nonsense”, or is off point, or digressing, the procedure as to how you may stop that Member is provided for in rule 66.

Let me go to part XII: Behaviour of Members during debate. Dress code: “All Members shall dress in a dignified manner; that is to say, a suit, a pair of long trousers, jacket, shirt and a tie; a Kanzu and a jacket or a Safari Suit for male Members.” So you just cannot come putting on a jacket with the shirt open. The Speaker may opt to tell you, to your embarrassment, to get out and dress properly. There is a dress code that we must always comply with and it is provided for in rule 69. I believe you do not want your constituents to read in the newspapers that you were sent out of Parliament because we were not dressed properly.

Behaviour of Members in the House: “All Members shall enter or leave the House with decorum. No Member shall cross the Floor of the House or move around.” So when the House is seated, you do not go around talking and moving from left right and centre; there must be order in the House. 

Rule 71 is on general behaviour: “In all other matters, the behaviour of Member of the House shall be guided by the code of conduct of Members prescribed by Appendix F”. You will read that. 

Order in the House, the Chair is to be heard in silence. When the Speaker is speaking; say you have been debating and you are standing, when the Speaker is speaking, you are supposed to sit down and keep quite. When the Speaker is speaking, you are not supposed to respond until the Speaker is through with whatever she is saying. When the Speaker addresses the House, any Member then standing shall immediately resume his or her seat and the Speaker shall be heard in silence. 

We have had instances when the Speaker is speaking – even when you are in the middle of a sentence - for heaven’s sake, sit down. We have had instances where the Speaker is speaking and the Member decides to ignore the Speaker and he goes on to speak. That is not allowed by our rules. When the Speaker is speaking, you resume your seat until the Speaker is through with whatever she is saying.

Rule 73, “Decision of the Speaker or chairperson. The Speaker or the chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon substantive motion made after notice.”

Rule 74, order in the House - you will read that on your own. 

Naming and suspension of Members; if you misbehave in the House, the Speaker or the chairperson of the committee – you are going to be divided into committees that you are going to be attached to - if the Speaker believes that your conduct is not in order, she or he may send you out of the House. It is within her power to order the sergeant to take you out of the House. So you need to be very careful when we are conducting business. 

If the Speaker, or the chairperson of any committee considers that the conduct of a Member cannot be adequately dealt with under sub-rule (2) of rule 74, he or she may name the Member and eventually the Speaker may order the sergeant to take the Member out and the Speaker may go ahead and tell you not to step within the precincts of Parliament. 

Defamatory statements to be investigated by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline: If you make defamatory statement, the statement may be referred to this committee that handles discipline in Parliament. There have been instances in the past where Members have made statements against their colleagues and allegations have been referred to this committee. 

What is tragic is that some Members have been called and they have not come – and when the matter is referred to this rules committee, somebody has made a serious allegation against another one and along the way when the matter is referred to this rules committee; somebody abandons the complaint or the allegation.

Part XIV is on voting in the House. Questions are to be decided by the majority, except as otherwise prescribed by the Constitution or any law consistent with the Constitution. “All questions proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting.” So that’s how – ordinarily, decisions are made by “ayes” or “noes”; but there are instances when a vote may be called so that you vote on a particular issue.

Rule 80 provides for declaration of personal interests in any matter before the House. “A member shall not in or before the House or any committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of that interest.” If you are in a committee, a corporation is appearing and you have pecuniary interests in that corporation, make it clear at the earliest opportunity that look, “I have pecuniary interests,” so that they know and decide whether you should continue sitting in the committee or you keep quiet. Make it clear to the committee. 

The roll call and tally are provided for the following: “(a) The voting at the second or third reading of the Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend a provision of the Constitution.
(b) The censure of a Minister.
(c) The decision on an appeal ....” - so, roll call or tally are provided for by rule 84. 


The division of the House is provided for by rules 85 and 86. 

I want to move to Part XV, Votes of censure and removal from office. If you want to censure somebody, Part XV covers the procedure as to how a person or a minister or whoever can be censured from office.

Rule 90, “The House may pass a resolution for the removal of the President from office, or pass a vote of no confidence in the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, or pass a vote of censure against a Minister as prescribed by the Constitution or for the removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner.” If you want to censure or remove any of those officials, Part XV covers the procedure you have to follow.  

Part XVI is on leave of absence – this is rule 96: “Every Member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker.” For example, if you want to travel abroad, you must inform the Speaker to give you leave of absence or else you will face the consequences. You do not just move away from the country, you must inform the Speaker that, “I will not be in the country, I will be visiting such and such a place”; then the Speaker ordinarily writes a letter giving you leave of absence. That is covered by part XVI. You do not just move or absent yourself from Parliament.

The same is true for leave of absence from committees. As I have said, you are going to be attached to different committees. If you are not going to attend for some time, inform the committee chairman. Write a letter or when you write a letter to the Speaker, a copy should be given to the chairman of the committee to which you are attached.

Attendance of sittings by a minister: For any ministry, the minister – this is particularly to you new Members of Parliament if you are appointed a minister because the old ones know - “For any Ministry, the minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and when none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.” Ministries must be represented at the sittings in Parliament.

(2) The Leader of Government Business who is the Prime Minister shall ensure that sub-rule (1) is complied with.” 


You will see instances when business is conducted, the Speaker looks at the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of Government Business has to respond to some question; the Leader of Government Business may come out  and say, “Madam Speaker, give us two days. The Minister will respond to the issue that has been raised.”

Bill’s form, publication and introduction of Bills. The most important work that Parliament does, one of the most important tasks, is to pass Bills into and Acts of Parliament. The form of Bills is provided for – their publication – they are provided for under part XVII of these rules. The form of Bills, subject matter of Bills – when you receive a copy of the Bill that is going to be considered, the Bill will follow this form. Form of the Bill, subject matter of the Bill, Bill to be published in the Gazette – you know, you will read this to acquaint yourself with the procedure on how Bills are introduced in Parliament. Quite often, when a Bill is brought, the Certificate of Financial Implications is attached to the Bill. The Minister of Finance should certify whether there will be financial implications. 

Rule 103 provides for urgent Bills. There are Bills that are urgent. The Bills should be delivered to the clerk for distribution to Members – normally when a Bill is coming, you will find them in your pigeonholes – those small boxes where notices from Parliament, letters, periodicals, whatever, will be dropped. Each of you will have a pigeonhole. These Bills will be slipped into your pigeonholes so that everyone has a Bill before you go for plenary. When the Speaker calls for consideration of a Bill, you have a copy and have had the opportunity of reading it. You are expected to be prepared to make your contribution.

If you want to move a Private Members’ Bill, the procedure is provided for by rule 105. Most of the Bills come via Government. Ministries originate Bills until they eventually come to Parliament. But an individual Member of Parliament may want to originate an Act of Parliament. So rule 105 is what you have to follow. 

Read rules 105 and 106 - and then the introduction of Bills – normally when Bills are introduced in Parliament, the Speaker may refer the Bill to the relevant committee for scrutiny and consideration depending on which committee will prepare a report, and the report will be read to the plenary. When I talk about the plenary, it is when we all sit as one House. That is what we call plenary.

Rules regarding settlement of financial matters - so Bills are covered by that part. Part XVIII, progress of Bills and first reading. When Bills are introduced in Parliament, there will be a first reading, a second reading and a third reading – I think the last reading is when the Speaker moves from her chair, goes and sits on one of the chairs with the two clerks - and then you go through the Bill, before they are passed into an Act.     
    
The Speaker goes through the - let me call it section by section and if there is an amendment -(Interjection)- yes, clause by clause. Yes, clause is the word I was looking for. The Speaker will go through the Bill clause by clause so that each clause is considered by the time she comes to the end the entire Bill has been considered. So, the progress of Bills, first reading, second reading is covered by part XIX. 

Bills in committee: I have said the Speaker normally refers Bills to the different committees depending - if the Bill for example is about women, the Speaker may opt to refer the Bill to the committee. If it is about education, the Speaker may opt to refer the Bill to the Social Services Committee to consider that Bill because these different committees, as you will see later, handle different business. 

So, Bills quite often are referred to committees and rule 116 provides for functions of the committee - what the committees will do when they receive the Bill - and rule 117 provides for the committee of the whole House. That is when the Speaker moves from her chair and comes to the chair just behind those two clerks and you consider the Bill clause by clause. The ordinary language should be section by section but before it is passed into law, it is clause and not section.

So, when we say that the Bill is before the whole House it means they have received a report, the report has been discussed and the Speaker comes and chairs the whole House to consider clause by clause of the Bill.

Part XXI is recommital and third reading of the Bill. I have said Bills are read the first, second and third time. Now, this part covers the third reading of the Bill. 

Rule 120, report of the committee after the Committee Stage: “Immediately a committee of the whole House has reported, the House may proceed to the third reading of any Bill reported.” 

Rule 121, third reading and passing of Bills: “The House shall proceed to the third reading of a Bill upon a motion, ‘That the Bill be now read a Third Time and do pass’”. 

Sub-section (2), “A Bill shall pass upon a motion ‘that the Bill entitled … do pass’.” So, this part covers the third reading of the Bill. 

Part XXII: Delays with a Bill. In case there has been a delay in handling the Bill, part XXII covers that situation. “Subject to the Constitution, no Bill introduced in the House shall be with the committee for consideration for more than 45 days.” 

So, ordinarily the Bill should not exceed 45 days but should that situation arise, part XXII covers that situation as to what has to be done. “If a committee finds itself unable to complete consideration of any Bill referred to it in sub-rule (1), the committee may seek extra time from Parliament.” Say you are given 45 days but the Bill may be so big and within 45 days you may not be able to dispose of that Bill then the committee has to come back to seek for more time to complete the Bill. 

Sub-rule (3), “Where extra time is not granted or upon expiry of the extra time granted under sub-rule (2), the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill without any further delay.” 

And rule 127, once the Bill has been handled by Parliament and it goes to the President there may be a situation when the President sends it back for the Bill to be reconsidered. The President may return a Bill if he is not satisfied that a situation has been - “When a Bill passed by the House is returned to the House by the President with a message requesting that the House should reconsider the Bill or any specific provision of it or any such amendments as are recommended in his or her message, the Speaker shall read the message of the President to the House, or if the House is not in session direct that the message be published in the Gazette.” So, that part covers a situation when the Bill is returned. 
 
Part XXIII, the Budget and the Committee of Supply. Now the budget, this is a situation that you are about to go through, the reading of the Budget. Part XXIII provides for the presentation of the Budget. 

Rule 128 provides that, “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the statement of the estimates of annual revenues and expenditure of the government required to be laid before Parliament under Article 155 of the Constitution, in this rule referred to as the ‘Budget’ shall be presented to the House on such day as the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, appoint.” 

This one you are going to see probably next month when the Minister of Finance comes and presents a statement on behalf of the President and then you will hear this term: “Committee of supply”. “There shall be a Committee of the whole House designated ‘the Committee of Supply’ to which shall be referred the annual estimates, any supplementary estimates and any vote on account.” So, part XXIII covers matters regarding the budget. 

Part XXIV on page 200: Parliamentary committees. A lot of business in Parliament is done in parliamentary committees. Parliamentary committees are very good because you are a small group, everybody has an opportunity to give an in-depth contribution to a matter that is being considered by a committee. So, I believe shortly each of us will be attached to certain committees. 

Part XXIV covers parliamentary committees. There are a number of - clause 1, “In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution, the House shall appoint parliamentary committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.
2) For the avoidance of doubt, these Rules of Procedure shall prescribe the powers, composition and functions of the committees.” 

There are two main committees. There is what is referred to as standing committees. Standing committees have the duration of two and a half years and sessional committees have the duration of one and a half years -(Interjections)- one year. “The House shall have standing committees and sessional committees as provided in this part of these rules.
(2) The Vice-President or a minister shall not be a member of a standing or sessional committee; and if a member of any such committee becomes the Vice-President or a minister, he or she shall cease to be a member of the committee.
(3) Except as provided in these rules, a member may not be a member of more than one sessional committee.” 

What has been happening is that each member is a member of one standing committee and also a member of one sessional committee. With increased numbers, I do not know whether the situation is going to remain like that but otherwise you become a member of one standing committee and a member of a sessional committee.

Rule 132 provides for standing committees; there is the Public Accounts Committee – that is a standing committee for two and a half years; there is a committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline of which I was the chairperson for -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe the clarification should be given by you on the point which you - if I got the Speaker very well, she communicated that any amendment to be made will be handled by the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee which will be constituted later. But I noticed that there may be amendments which are required at the beginning of Parliament. Like the Member said, we are now many Members. Probably, the committees may have to be constituted by more than 20 Members unless we create more committees. Maybe some of those decisions should be made at the beginning of Parliament to accommodate all these interests rather than waiting for a committee to be put in place. So the clarification I am seeking is whether we are going to have an opportunity to make some amendments in this orientation meeting before the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee is established.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for now we shall use the existing rules as they stand and after the committees are constituted, we shall call upon Members to propose amendments. 

Having said that - because the Speaker is aware that all Members must belong to some committees - we may have to move faster to make some changes about the composition and the numbers. You leave that to the Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Maybe to make some additional clarification to what hon. Peter Nyombi is raising about membership of the committees. I think you needed to have added that although the rule provides that you belong to two committees – the standing and sessional committees, it also allows you to be ex-officio member to other committees. The only difference is that you will not be a voting member. So when he says you belong to only two committees, it does not mean that you cannot go and attend any other committee meeting. You still belong there and it is only if there is anything that needs voting that you cannot participate. Thank you.

MR NYOMBI: I was going through them one by one. There is the Public Accounts Committee which is a standing committee; the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; the Business Committee; the Committee on Budget; the Committee on National Economy; the Committee on Appointments; the Committee on –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point raised by hon. Baryomunsi and you responded to unless I am mistaken, I am not aware that we fixed the numbers in the rules. [HON. MEMBERS: “We did.”] Are they fixed in the rules? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Which one? 

HON. MEMBERS: 135. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: 135? Yes; because the interpretation rule is that when you are interpreting a statute, you must interpret all of it together. So, in rule 134 sub-rule (2), it says that: “The parties in Parliaments through their whips shall designate Members of the committee in accordance with representation of the party in the House.” So this means that your numbers as presently computed even with these rules are a factor. So in terms of achieving what the Speaker has said, I think it is still achievable even if we have not reached the stage of amending these rules in accordance with these current rules. We can then amend the 20 later to be consistent with what we have in rule 134.

THE SPEAKER: Members, this session is for orientation; it is not for amendment of rules. We shall have a session and we shall have an item on the Order Paper. If we want to make an amendment to the rules, we shall say, “We need to alter a, b, c and d.” But for today we should just allow the Members to be oriented to the existing rules. We shall settle the issues of numbers later.

MR NYOMBI: So, sub-section (2) of rule 132 provides: “Except as provided by these rules in respect of the Business Committee and the Budget Committee, a Member may not be a member of more than one standing committee.” Therefore, this rule provides that you can only be a member – but hon. Okupa clearly said that you can attend other committees but you do not have voting rights; you can deliberate but you are attached to only one standing committee. 

The general functions of these committees are provided for in rule 133. What these committees are supposed to do is provided for here. So read it. And how members to these committees are chosen are provided for in rule 134. This is a multi-party Parliament, so how the committees are subsequently constituted can be found in rule 134. 

However, you need to note sub-section (12) which says that: “In selection of members of standing committees, the parties represented in Parliament shall designate through the whips membership to committees on the basis of party representation in the House.” 

So party representation is a factor in determining how many Members representing a party are attached to a particular committee. Also read rule 135, especially in view of the increased numbers. Vacancy on standing committees is provided for under rule 136.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyombi, I think you need to address the issue of the Independents; they do not have whips and are, therefore, under the care of the Office of the Speaker. So they will have to apply to the Clerk to indicate which committees they want to serve on and they shall be distributed.

MR NYOMBI: So when you read these rules carefully, they take into account how Independent Members of Parliament are taken care of in these committees. Specific functions of the standing committees are found in rule 137 but maybe let me read it: “The Appointments Committee shall comprise 20 members designated by the party whips on the basis of proportional party membership in the House taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and interests of the Independent Members.” So Independent Members are taken care of in this rule. 

Rule 138 provides for the Chairperson of the Committee of Appointments. The Speaker shall be the chairperson. I believe this committee will have to be constituted soonest because when eventually the Cabinet is named, the names come through the Speaker and end up with the Appointments Committee which is chaired by the Speaker to consider name by name. So, this is a very important committee and the Speaker shall be the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee, which Appointments Committee is going to consider appointments to the Cabinet, probably shortly. 

The person presiding over a meeting of the committee shall have neither an original nor a casting vote. 

Rule 139 is about the meetings of the Committee on Appointments.

Rule 140 is about the quorum of the Committee on Appointments and then rule 141 is about the functions of the Appointments Committee: “The Committee on Appointments shall be responsible for approving on behalf of Parliament, the appointment of persons nominated for appointment by the President under the Constitution or any other appointment required to be approved by Parliament under any law.”

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Member has not explained rule 139(2) and I think these are some of the areas, which need revisiting by this House where the proceedings of the Appointments Committee shall be closed and I think he should explain the justification of this, as to why the proceedings should be closed. And even other subsequent provisions, for example, where the decision of the Appointments Committee is final. It is not open to debate by the House. The House needs an explanation on all these. For the ten years I have been in this House, I think these are the provisions of the rules, which we should revisit. 

Since the Appointments Committee is actually a committee, like any other committee of Parliament. They are just our agents; why should those proceedings be closed even to Members of Parliament? And why should their decisions be final and yet at the same time, as Members of Parliament, we are bound to defend their decisions outside Parliament? If they say, “We approved Katuntu as a minister for fish”, you will have to defend it. But the proceedings of this committee are closed; you don’t have access to their minutes and their decisions are not debatable.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, you have just guided us that this session is not about amending the rules but about understanding what the current rules are. What the Member is raising are pertinent questions but they should be raised at an appropriate time. For now, let us understand what the rules say. 

MR KATUNTU: I don’t know whether my colleague got me because hon. Nyombi had omitted rule 139(2). He had not explained it and he was already on rule 141, and that is the point I raised; that he had omitted a very fundamental provision under the rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should not stampede the new Members. Let them first understand the existing rules and then when we want to amend – because we are going to have the rules committee. Those are some of the areas that we may amend. I think what you want to say is to justify the closure but we should not talk about amendment at this stage. You cannot stampede these Members. I think it is not fair. Let them understand the rules first and then they can think about it, and give their views to the rules committee at the appropriate time. And hon. Member, I want you to justify the position of rule 139.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, as you may have noted, I am not reading all the rules. I am just giving an introduction. What hon. Katuntu is suggesting is placing a duty upon me to justify – it is not really my duty to justify. These are the rules. This is how they exist. If you want them amended, that opportunity will come. I am just making an introduction to these rules so that you know where to find what. 

MR RUHUNDA: I want to know by way of explanation why a committee has to be closed. It does not mean that we are going to make any amendments but as a new Member, I would love to know about this matter.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let the Member complete and then we shall go to the questions. Let him first run through all of them. We are noting the areas which you want us to address.  

MR NYOMBI: Rule 142 is on the submission of names to the Committee on Appointments: “Names of persons nominated for appointment shall be communicated in writing to the committee through the Speaker.” So, when for example the Speaker receives the names of the new members of the Cabinet, they will be communicated to the Appointments Committee through the Speaker for consideration. 

In sub-section (2): “The Chairperson of the Committee shall communicate to Members of the House the names of persons submitted for approval and the date of sitting of the Committee ….” So, when the Speaker receives the names, I presume the names will be read to you in the plenary and then you will know who has been proposed and then the committee, on your behalf, will consider these names one by one. 

Sub-section (3): “Every decision of the Committee shall be by open vote.” That happens within the meetings of the Appointments Committee. You can read the rest but otherwise the Appointments Committee, which is chaired by the Speaker, will for example, when the President submits the names of new members of the Cabinet, scrutinise those names and approve them for appointment. It is a very important committee.

Rule 143, nominations which are not approved. It is possible when the names are submitted that the appointments committee may not approve them. We have had a few of such instances in the past. This is how you deal with that situation. The committee will eventually report to the House and there will be a report to the President -(Interruption)  

MR KATUNTU: I think there is another important rule, he is missing, rule 144: “The Chairperson of the committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subjected to debate.”

MR NYOMBI: Just note that, maybe we will discuss that later but this is what the rule says. The report will not be subject to debate. 

Part XXV, Select Committees: some of the business of Parliament is conducted by the standing committees. Another set of committees, which is very important, to which all of you will be members, are called Select Committee. 

Rule 162, “The House may, at any time, upon a motion made after notice given, appoint a Select Committee to be nominated by the Business Committee, for the consideration of such matters as the House may refer to the committee and to report on any such matter to the House.”

The constitution of the select committees is provided for by rule 163.

Part XXVI says that Parliament may set up ad hoc committees. These are committees that may be set up as and when a situation arises. 

Rule 164 provides that, “The House may at any time, on the advice of the Business Committee, appoint an ad hoc committee to investigate any matter of public importance that does not come under the jurisdiction of any standing or sessional committee or that has not been dealt with by a select committee.”  So, Parliament may set up an ad hoc committee to consider a particular subject which may not have fallen within the ambit of the other committees to probe a certain situation and then report back.

Part XXVII provides for the operation of committees generally. The rules to apply; the chairpersons of committees; the removal of chairpersons from committees and the quorum of committees; how you conduct business, what the quorum of the committees is; that is rule 169. When you eventually retreat to your respective committees, you should have a quorum particularly if there is a decision that has to be made.

Rule 170: “The Clerk shall be the Clerk to every committee and may delegate his or her duties to a deputy clerk or any assistant clerk.” So, each committee is facilitated with a clerk. 

Scope of deliberations within the committee is provided for by rule 171; rule 172 talks about duration of the committees; rule 173 talks about decisions by the committees. So, that part covers the business of the committees. You will have to read those provisions by yourself. 

Special powers of the committees are provided for by Rule 181. The co-opting of members to these committees is covered by rule 182; and rule 183 provides for counsel to the committees.   

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, may I request hon. Nyombi to highlight rule 178 in his presentation – the minority report is quite important for new Members to know what they would do when they disagree with the majority in the committee? 

MR NYOMBI: Rule 178 provides for minority reports. You will find situations where you have had meetings as a committee and a report is made for the whole committee but a few members disagree with that report, rule 178 provides for a situation where the minority disagree with the report of the rest, and how they can make a minority report. 

Rule 178(1) states that: “Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. 
(2) The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of consideration of the report.” 

So, if a Member or two disagree with the report of the committee, they can make a minority report which should be attached to the main report and at the time of consideration of the report by the plenary, such a dissenting Member or Members will be given opportunity to present their report. 

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps what I could add on that is that the minority report should be known to the committee itself and they should be stuck together. You don’t wait for the majority report to arrive and then you say, “I have a minority report.” You should say it in the meeting, “I don’t agree with this report. I am going to write a minority report,” so that they are brought together and when we finish the main one, we go to minority report. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What could also be emphasised is that given the composition of the House, where we have the Government side and the Opposition side, it would have been ordinarily expected that on every contentious issue, there would be a minority report. It is the work of the chairperson of a committee to ensure that in the course of the deliberations of the committee, all views are as much as possible accommodated in the main report. Where dissent views come in, it is the real opposite of the views that are being reflected in the majority view that may require that a dissenting report comes in. Otherwise, in most cases, most committees produce a single report with a compromised position. I thank you. 

MR NYOMBI: You may find when you are handling a particular subject where you have to record evidence. Rule 184 provides for the recording of such evidence: “(1) The evidence of every witness shall be taken down in writing and a copy of it sent to him or her.
(2) A witness may within seven days from the date of receipt of the copy, suggest correction his or her evidence due to the inaccurate reporting of the evidence and the shall be printed with such corrections as may be approved by the chairperson .
(3) The committee may at its discretion refuse to hear any irrelevant evidence or listen to any recalcitrant witness.”

So, there are incidences when you may be required or may deem it necessary to record evidence from witnesses and the examination in rule 184 may be done on oath. That means that the witness who has been called may take the oath to confirm that the evidence he is going to provide to the committee is the truth and nothing but the truth. 

Rule 186 provides for expenses of any witnesses before the committees. When witnesses come before committees, they may need to be covered in terms of expenses they have incurred. 

Rule 187 provides for the issuance and serving of sermons to witnesses.  

Rule 188, withdrawal of documents before committees: “(1) No document received by the clerk of a committee shall be withdrawn or altered without the knowledge or approval of the committee. 
(2) A document may be released to a witness by the chairperson or clerk to a committee after the conclusion of the deliberations of the committee.”

Rule 189; please take note of this rule. “Publication of evidence before reports of the committees: All Committees shall have power to authorise the Clerk of the House to supply copies of their reports to officers of government departments to such witnesses who have given evidence to the committees or their sub-committees as those committees consider appropriate to the lobby journalist and such other representatives the committee deems fit after those reports have been laid on the Table but before then no Member or any other person shall publish such a report.” 

Take note of this because you will be tempted to release reports or evidence that has been tendered before the committee.  This rule prohibits you from releasing evidence that has been collected or evidence or reports that have been compiled by the committee before it has been laid on Table. So, take note of that rule. 

“(2) No evidence or document received by a committee shall be published or otherwise disclosed to any person other than a Member of Parliament until the report of the committee is presented to the committee.” So, take note of that rule; it provides for the confidentiality of the evidence that is being assembled by the committee. 

Part XXVIII: “Ceremonial speeches and speeches by distinguished guests and personalities: Ceremonial speeches may be allowed by the Speaker but any such speech may be confined to speeches commemorating special events and occasions of death of distinguished persons.

Distinguished persons from within or without the nation may be allowed by the Speaker to address the House on any matter of importance.” 

For the new Members, you know that the Queen visited Uganda a few years ago and she came to Parliament and because of the powers that the Speaker has, the Queen was able to make a statement before Parliament. This is where the Speaker derives authority and power to allow a distinguished person or a President to come and make a statement before the House.

“Complaints of contempt of Parliament: 
1) 	A member may, at any time appointed for complaints of contempt of Parliament under rule 22, bring to the House any complaint of contempt of Parliament if he or she has previously notified the Speaker. 

2) 	In urgent circumstances, a complaint referred to in sub rule 1, may, with prior permission of the Speaker, be made at a time other than that appointed for it.”

These are general provisions that you need to acquaint yourself with. Notes of meetings mean records, official report, and electronic coverage of parliamentary proceedings. Rule 200 stipulates that parliamentary proceedings may be broadcast by electronic media having due regard to the dignity of the House.

Television coverage of the proceedings of the House shall be regulated by the rules set out in Appendix G. It is at the end of the rules. 

Custody and production of papers; admission of the public and the press into the House and committees - for heaven’s sake when we go for plenary do not march into the Chamber with your visitor to sit next to you. That is not allowed. Members of the public or the press may be admitted to debate in the House under rules that the Speaker may make from time to time.

“(3) The Clerk and the Sergeant-at-Arms shall ensure that all rules made under this rule are complied with.”

(4) No member shall bring any stranger in any part of the House reserved for Members while Parliament is sitting. So if an overzealous constituent wants to come with you to attend the deliberations, you are not allowed to bring such a person or else the Sergeant at Arms will throw him out.

(5) No person may carry into the galleries, a briefcase, firearms or weapon, a camera, a tape recorder, a transistor radio, mobile telephone or any other electronic device.” You need acquaint yourself with these provisions. 

Rule 205 is on adjustments in the numbering of the Bills. 

Rule 206, “Employment of Members in Professional Capacity: No Members shall appear before the House or any Committee of the House as counsel for any party or in any capacity for which he/she is to receive a fee or reward in any matter to be deliberated upon by the House or a committee.” 

I am a lawyer and this rule prohibits me from appearing before a committee on behalf a client when I am going to be paid. This applies to a lawyer or an accountant.

The rest of the booklet has appendixes which I think you can look at. Madam Speaker, I think I have given an introduction and I want to say that we had agreed with hon. Asuman Kiyingi to share this time, just in case he wants to add anything.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Nyombi, we shall ask hon. Kiyingi to come in later. I just want to point a few areas that Members may want to know. 

The accountability committees; because we do not want the ruling party to carry out oversight on itself, the following committees are chaired by the Opposition: the Public Accounts committee, Government Assurances Committee, Local Governments Committee and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. That has been the practice in the Eighth Parliament.

Members may also wonder why the President gets involved in our legislation. Legislation is made by Parliament and the President. There are circumstances under which he may refer the Bills back to the House. There was a time here when we were dealing with the Local Governments Act. We had set the qualifications for LC III chairperson to have at least O’ Level and the President rejected it. He said that we have leaders who may not have O’ Level but they are able to lead. So he asked us to reflect on it and sent it back to us. That is one of the instances where the President referred a Bill back to us.

I also want to inform the Members that you will be provided with stationery, because you have been told about writing; every Member will have a pigeonhole labelled with your name where all your items will be kept.

The standing committees - when we are doing the budget session which I think we shall start in June or July - we will ordinarily require the standing committees to go into abeyance so that we can deal with the issue of the Budget. So for about four months the standing committees will be in abeyance while we are dealing with the Budget.

Why do we give priority to Government business? Article 94(4) of the Constitution requires that we give priority to Government business. However, Thursday as has been mentioned, priority is given to Members’ business for the first one hour of the sitting. 

Questions may be answered but supplementary question which arise must relate directly from the answer given by the minister. For instance, if the question was about a road, you cannot now ask about Uganda airlines. You would have gone out of the subject.

No Members shall speak more than once on any motion except in a committee. You are not supposed to speak repeatedly on the same matter.

On the points of order or procedure; once a point of order or procedure has been raised, no other matter may be raised until the Speaker has made a ruling.

We shall have ex-official members of this House but they do not vote.

Internal leave; if you are going to disappear to Karamoja to do some work during the week, you must inform the Speaker that you are not able to attend Parliament for that period. I think now we can take the questions.

12.18
MR STEPEHN CHEBROT (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want your clarification on a few issues. The first one is in connection with the Rules of Procedure. As you note there are certain provisions that are directly lifted from the Constitution. What I want to know is the extent to which we can amend those provisions?

There are times when we sit in the House and we find that the ruling made by the Speaker on any subject is wanting. To what extent can we call the Speaker to order? This is important because you will find that Speaker is wrong. This may be in or outside the House, to what extent can we call him/her to order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think there was hon. Opendi. Let us hear from hon. Opendi, hon. Baka and hon. Obua. But you know that you will have to stand up because I cannot see you when you are seated. 

12.21
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It has been said time and again that this is a multi-party Parliament and while hon. Nyombi was making presentations, he actually did say that Members are actually picked by the party chief whips to represent the various parties in the committees. While he was making that presentation, you actually did say that the Independents apply to the Clerk to Parliament to join the committees and they are under you. In here, we have army officers and I would like to know where the army officers fall when it comes to the committees. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we take all the questions first and then they will be answered. 

12.22
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The first one is on whether the proceedings of today are recorded as provided for in the Rules of Procedure for the records of the House. I do not know whether this conference hall has machines to record for the Hansard.

The second is on rule 70. Madam Speaker, as you are aware, this is the biggest Parliament we have had since independence and very soon, our people will be waiting to hear the quality of debate and our output from this House. There are small things that the public will be quick to notice like decorum in the House. We can achieve decorum by strict observance of rules 70 and 71; and Appendix F as attached. 

The reason I am raising this is to request hon. Nyombi and hon. Kiyingi to go into the details of explaining to us the issues around rule 70. Since we are very many, we are likely to have a market situation in the House where people just come in, they are not maintaining decorum - for example the idea of a Member coming and bowing to the Chair is very important, issues of dressing and so forth. I would wish that further clarification is given on this rule such that as the public waits to hear the quality of debate and output from the House, they can be able to see decorum in the House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I hand over to hon. Obua, I want to assure the Members of the House that the proceedings of today are being recorded on the Hansard and you do not have to worry about that one. Please, mention your name and constituency because Members need to know each other.

12.24
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you. As indicated on our Order Paper for the day, this is the second sitting of the first meeting of the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

It is important that much as the rules will be reviewed and amended, the application of certain rules are so crucial and fundamental especially at this initial stage and some of these rules, I think, are not contentious as it is important in addition to the guidance that you have given to the House for the Members to get to know them.

Specifically rule 8 talks about the sitting arrangement in the House. I know that due to lack of space, the Ninth Parliament will be forced for sometime to sit in this conference hall as opposed to our Chamber and in conformity with rule 8 sub-rules (2) and (3), there are supposed to be two sides; the left and right hand side of the Speaker. It is important for this House to get guidance from you from the very onset which rows in this hall will constitute the right hand side of the Speaker and which row or rows will constitute the left hand side of the Speaker.

Still under the same rule 8(4), you have ably guided Independent Members of Parliament on the issue of their procedure of getting into committees. But rule 8(4) makes it mandatory and it reads, “An Independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit.”

I think it is important, Madam Speaker, that you do guide these Independent Members of Parliament such that they indicate to you in writing as required by our rules, which side of the House they intend to sit at individual level. I thank you.

12.28
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto South, Rwengo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I need a clarification on Rule 96 part XVI on Leave of Absence. Does it also apply during weekends that Members of Parliament have to seek authority to travel over the weekend? 

THE SPEAKER: Pardon?

MR MBABAALI: Rule 96, Leave of Absence. Does it apply to weekends as well whereby Members of Parliament have to write to you seeking their absence from the country? I thank you.

12.29
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): I thank you. While we are proceeding to debate the presentation by hon. Nyombi, which was so competent, I only wish to register a simple request basing on what some new Members of Parliament went through last week, especially when we came here to conduct the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. It is crucial that we get somebody to come and give a brief presentation about the internal geography of these premises. This is very crucial to enhance Members’ mobility because this is going to be a home for all of us for the next five years. 

Members for instance do not know where the office of the chief accountant is. I want to tell this honourable House on a light note that I bumped into honourable members arguing amongst themselves. One was saying, “This area of convenience is not accessed by members of the Opposition.” (Laughter) And these are simple facts. So, I just want to register that request that probably we get somebody to come and give a brief presentation about the internal geography here. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let me respond to hon. Balyejjusa immediately. Hon. Members, I think you were given a handbook which was in your bags and we expect you to have read. After we have finished with the rules, we are going to arrange for the Clerk to induct you in groups and give you a guided tour so that you are able to know where all the facilities are located. There will also be departmental briefs. Okay, let us hear from hon. Kiwanda, hon. Asamo and hon. Katoto before we hear from the others.

12.31
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification on rule 127, where the President can return a Bill, which is okay. But in a situation where Parliament may have passed a bad law, is there any provision under our rules to cater for that?

12.32
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think the previous speaker has brought out one of the issues that have been on my mind. I want to seek clarification on when Parliament becomes independent of the President. For example, there is that Bill on women that has stayed here for long – we have been told that it has delayed because of men and having a President who is a man, we may have problems in having him assent to such a Bill. Where are the powers of Parliament in such a situation?

The other one is about the standing committees. I am wondering, after two and a half years, does it mean the entire committee is dissolved? I am only seeking clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Okay those will be answered. 

12.34
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I stand to seek clarification on two issues. One is about the forms that we have been given to use to apply for committees that each one would wish to sit on. In the Rules of Procedure, there are standing and ssessional committees. From that position, may I now know the difference between ssessional and standing committees in terms of mandate and scope?

Two, in our first sitting, a Member suggested that the Rules of Procedure be amended, but another Member objected to it saying that these are Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. However, when I read through these rules, it is stated that they commenced on 14 June 2006 – the interpretation would be that they started with the Eighth Parliament.

I am aware that there have been the Seventh and Sixth Parliaments back up to the First Parliament. This morning, hon. Chris Baryomunsi talked about the amendment, but another Member said that we are now still studying the rules. May I know if the debate on these rules is intended to let us make our own Rules of Procedure as the Ninth Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let me start with that one. The Rules of Procedure that we are using are the rules that have been used right from the First Parliament as amended by every subsequent Parliament. When the time comes for us to amend, through our rules committee, we shall issue a new set of rules that will indicate the date of commencement. Otherwise, we are using the old rules right from the First Parliament. Members will respond to the other questions.

12.36
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point is about what hon. Yaguma has said. I would like to seek your clarification on when – because there is an urgency of amending – there is word about committees being formed with chairpersons being chosen by the respective chief whips. I am opposed to that. My point is that since we know each other, why don’t we elect the chairperson from amongst ourselves?  Because of that, I think it is important that we amend these rules before we even proceed with registration. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katoto, I do appreciate your desire to have some changes, but I also would like to draw your attention to the Order Paper for today. There are only three items: Prayers, Communication from the Chair, Orientation of the Members of Parliament on the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and adjournment. That is the business we have for today. 

12.38
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the issue of the Independents. Some of us are Independents by circumstances and not by choice. But when you look at the rules, you realise that we are discriminated against – most of the rules, apart from saying that Independents have to apply through the Office of the Speaker and Clerk to Parliament to belong to certain committees, they are silent on most issues. The fact that we have a constitutional ruling that affected the Independent Members of Parliament in the Eighth Parliament – I heard one of the Members saying that Independent Members of Parliament have to apply to have a side to sit - I find that very discriminative because when you – like today’s sitting was supposed to start in the afternoon – I personally did not receive any messages yet other Members got those messages through their respective chief whips. It was only a Good Samaritan who informed me that the sitting has been changed to –(Interjections)– kindly let me make my point.

THE SPEAKER: Order, please let hon. Nyakikongoro make her point.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I believe that since the Constitution provides for the Independents, these Rules of Procedure should also consider the participation of Independents in this Ninth Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro, on the issue of the Independents, I would like to say that every Independent Member of Parliament is independent. That is the problem, but also that is why you all are whipped by the Office of the Speaker; the Speaker is your whip. I think you have a better whip than the others. 

12.40
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to say that last year we sat in the Parliament Chamber, but now we are sitting in the Conference Hall. And as we speak, whoever wants to speak puts up his or her hand and I think that is not the parliamentary procedure. We normally stand up and we catch the eye of the Speaker. So I would like us from the word go - we do not believe that when we go to the Chamber we shall be putting our hands up to catch your eye. I think we are not changing the norm.

Secondly, I am looking at rule 30: “Presentation of Reports of Parliamentary Delegations Abroad”. Fortunately or unfortunately, our rules do not seem to have punitive measures. If somebody breaks rule so and so, what sanctions do we have in place? For example, I have been in Parliament for the last five years but hardly have we had reports from people or from groups and committees who go abroad. People come from these trips with information and hardly do we get feedback from these people who go on these delegations. So, I would like us on this -even other rules where there is a need to have a punitive measure taken - if this is not done, what happens? We would like those clauses appended to our rules. Otherwise, I thank you, Madam Speaker for your ability to know the names of the Members sitting today in this Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have to stand up, you know if you just put up your hand, I will not see you.

12.43
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise. The first one is on rule 113 which relates to reference of a Bill to a committee. The rules are very clear that once the Bill has been read for the first time, it is referred to a committee and the committee should consider it in a period of 45 days. If the committee is not ready, it should seek leave of the House for extension and if it is proceeding, then we can consider the Bill the way it is. That is one area where we have not performed very well in the Eighth Parliament. 

You do know that we have over 20 Bills which have spent more than a year and they have not been completed and concluded in the Eighth Parliament.  I would want that when we come to amendments, we put measures where we shall ensure that once Bills have come to Parliament then the chairs of the committees must be put to task to ensure that the work is concluded. Otherwise, you have the Marriage and Divorce Bill, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill and the HIV/AIDS Bill which have been considered for over three years and we could not complete them in time.

The other clarification I want from the chair of the rules committee who presented is on rule 168 which I think hon. Katoto also referred to; removal of the chairperson from office. Our rules provide that members of a committee can actually censure a chairperson or a deputy but we also know that the rules provide that the chairpersons and deputies are designated by the parties. I want the chair to interpret whether this is practically possible in our setting that the members can actually vote out a chairperson because we had this problem at the beginning of Parliament when the NRM withdrew some chairs - hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Lyomoki - and they were referring to this rule. They were saying, “No, it is the committee members to remove us.” I want the chair to interpret whether within a multi-party setting it can be possible that members can withdraw a chair or deputy. 

Finally, I also want a clarification by the chair of the committee on rule 128 which talks about the Budget and the Committee of Supply. In 11(a), when we are considering figures in Parliament in the Committee of Supply, it says, “Any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such a motion shall take the form that, ‘I beg to move that the sum of Shs 10,000 be reduced from the vote ....”

Our understanding is that if we are considering figures, a Member might move and say, “No, we reduce this estimate from Shs 4 billion to Shs 2 billion” but the interpretation from the chair in the House has always been that you only move to remove the Shs 10,000 which is stated and I thought Shs 10,000 is just used as an example. If for instance Government brings a budget like we had contention on some supplementaries when the people were not comfortable with the swearing in budget, the chair has been ruling that we use that reference of Shs 10,000 but I thought this statement only gives an example and a guide on how you state the motion but you can suggest any figure to be reduced from the estimate. So, I want to get the interpretation from the chair on what actually that sub-rule means if I want to propose that an estimate brought by Government or anybody can be reduced. Am I limited to Shs 10,000 or I can even reduce it by any amount as I see fit?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Baryomunsi and the many Members of Parliament who raised some very important but a bit complicated issues for the beginning session of Parliament. I just want to assure my colleagues in Parliament especially those who have just joined that being in Parliament is like driving a car. You can be in a driving school but until you begin applying and using the rules every day, you are not going to learn everything at a go. Whereas some of these issues look a bit complicated, I know progressively, all of us - even some of us who have been here a little bit longer - there are issues that we have not comprehended that we keep learning as we apply the rules. So, as you see, the older Members of Parliament applying the rules and asking some bit of complicated questions, I just want to give you an assurance and encouragement that progressively, as we apply the rules, we shall learn them. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.48
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on rule 96 of our Rules of Procedure: “Leave of Absence from Parliament”. I was wondering whether this is even applicable for maternity leave for women in this House because it is not very clear here. (Laughter)

My other clarification was on the criteria of selecting Members to lead various committees. This may not be necessarily applicable in the Office of the Speaker. As new Members of the Ninth Parliament, when we tried to express interest or discuss with Members whether we want to be leaders of the various committees, we were told we are still fresh and we cannot be in position to lead these committees. So I was wondering, are these Members elected professionally to lead committees or by age or experience in Parliament? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think let me deal with the issue of leave immediately. I will combine hon. Mbabali’s issue with hon. Amongin’s. You are entitled to maternity leave. You write to the Speaker and the Speaker will give you leave. As for the weekends, as long as your weekend does not carry forward into Wednesday and Thursday when we are sitting, you are free to go wherever you want but I want you back on a Tuesday. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, you talked of maternity leave. How about paternity leave? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members are entitled to four days of paternity leave, but I have not been seeing applications; I have only seen some from the staff. I encourage hon. Members to ask for paternity leave.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, under rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure, I remember you are supposed to declare personal interest. Should I take it that hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana has got some interest in the question he asked? (Laughter) 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, let me declare my interest. My interest is to make sure that there is equality between men and women and that some men may have more paternity leave days than others. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me assure the male hon. Members of the House that I will take into account your various paternity leave needs and give you the days. 

12.52
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the presentation, it sounded automatic that all of us members of Parliament will have two committees. But in the Eighth Parliament, we were a bit few compared to the Ninth Parliament and yet some of us could not have two committees. Sessional committees were a must but some other people did not get standing committees. According to the presentation, it appears as if all of us are going to have two committees; we need clarification on that.

Number two is about summoning the indiscipline cases who do not appear before the committee. If I am summoned before the Committee on Rules and Discipline, can I choose to appear or not to appear before it? In the presentation, we heard that some people were summoned and they never appeared. We need clarification on that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.54
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, this being my maiden speech in the Ninth Parliament, I want to congratulate you upon having been elected our Speaker for the Ninth Parliament. I also want to congratulate our colleagues who have made it back after some recess. Members like hon. Atwooki, hon. Chebrot, hon. Tim Lwanga; these colleagues were with us in Parliament and we missed them a lot. 

This is a multi-party Parliament and the Independents can choose the side which they want to associate with. There are some Independents that feel they are NRM but were not elected on NRM ticket. There are those Independents who feel they belong to FDC but were not elected on the FDC ticket. And there are others who feel that they are either DP or UPC and they do associate with those political parties. And this is how the House is divided. 

But in a practical sense, we have a category of hon. Members of Parliament who do not belong to any of these; that is the UPDF. At one time we were informed that they are a listening force but past experience has shown us that when it comes to voting on serious matters, the whip on the Government side whips them to turn up in big numbers and come to Parliament. 

My suggestion is that to have a reflection of a balanced House of a multi-party Parliament – there are ten UPDF Officers; let five sit on one side and five on the other side –(Laughter)– because they do not have any interest. They are just a listening force. Let them watch the Government side and the Opposition as we speak. But leaving all the ten on one side of the House gives a bad image, unless we create another sitting facility in Parliament where the ten of them can sit. 

12.57
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will make some additions which I feel are necessary then I will ask for some clarifications. One is regarding the statements by the ministers or the Executive. The presenter should have added that the statements made by the ministers attract debate. That is the difference between a private Member’s statement and a minister’s statement. Statements by ministers attract debate for thirty minutes but a private member’s statement does not attract debate. 

Two, there was a question here by one Member, I think it was hon. Amama Mbabazi, asking about the numbers. The number “20” is specified in our rules. Rule 135 specifies 20 for the membership of the committees. 

The other issue regards decorum and our behaviour. Honourable colleagues, we were bombarded in the previous Parliament about the way we conduct ourselves in the House. There is what we used to call, “A Member consulting himself”; that is sleeping in the Chamber. Please avoid being caught (doing that). It will embarrass the House and it will embarrass you personally. If you feel sleepy, at least just get out of the Chamber because the cameras are very attracted to you. It will embarrass you. You remember the time when the members of the Executive were portrayed sleeping as the President was delivering his speech? The Red Pepper showed a number of Members on the Front Bench deeply asleep. 

The other is about rule 70(h). If you want to applaud a Member’s contribution, you are not supposed to clap. Rule 70(h) is very clear; we are not supposed to clap. You can do foot stamping, but avoid clapping.
 
And on the issue regarding a Bill returned by the President, when we look at rule 127(10)(c), it talks of what happens when there is a stalemate between the President and Parliament. If the President sends a Bill back and Parliament says, “No, it must go back”, and we also send it back; if he sends it back twice automatically it will become law should we also refuse it. Rule 127(10)(c) provides for that. It automatically becomes law without the assent of the President if that happens.  

About the appointments committee, I want some clarification. When I look at rule 142(2) about the constitution of the Executive; I think you need to transmit this message to the appointing authority because 142 talks about the submission of names to the Committee on Appointments. The chairperson of the committee, of course who is the Speaker, shall communicate to Members of the House the names of the persons submitted for approval and the date of the sitting of the committee to consider them. There is that provision in our rules that the appointing authority must present the names to you and you give them to the House. If we sit tomorrow and the President says, “No, I need a Vice-President and a Prime Minister very fast”; what happens to this rule? We would have violated this rule.

I think the appointing authority should help us adhere to the rules by submitting the names on time. I know it will also reduce pressure among ourselves, among those who are very – we are sharing this. It should not really be -(Member timed out.) Madam, I beg that we compensate from those who have talked for one minute, two minutes to those who may speak for more than one minute.  

Before we wound up the Eighth Parliament; there was almost a stalemate in the House regarding the Executive because the time had expired but they were continuing to sit. They had handed over. At that time we ended up with a win-win situation and said, “There is no more Executive; so no one should come masquerading that he is a minister”. That is why today, you saw the Vice-President was here and the Minister for Security because there is no minister. 

In that meeting that we had with the Attorney-General, Prime Minister and the Speaker, we had agreed that the President gets back and after he is sworn in; he communicates to Parliament that these ministers can continue in acting capacity. That has not happened. Yesterday, I got a call from a Member of Parliament in Arusha who was asking me, “Hon. Kategaya is here committing the Government of Uganda under the COMESA law. Under what legal regime is he conducting that business?” I could not answer. That issue needs to be sorted out. This can be transmitted to the appointing authority.

Even back home here, we have seen people still conducting themselves as ministers, yet they expired. They have not been approved for this Parliament. That needs to be clarified to them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: My team will answer the others; but let me allay the fears of the Members that Government is conducting business legally. In the final week of the Eighth Parliament, His Excellency the President communicated to me and said ministers who have been there may continue acting. If you want, I will bring the letter in the afternoon. Hon. Kategaya is lawfully in Arusha.

1.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election to the third highest office in this country. Congratulations! I look forward to working closely with you in implementing and forming the rules for this country, which are going to give hope to our people in the whole country. 

I stand to contribute on rule 139. It was unfortunate that the Eighth Parliament or the rules committee did not look at that rule very seriously. All Members of Parliament are ex-officials of all committees; they own the work of Parliament; they own all decisions taken by Parliament. 

Sometime this week, the President will submit the names to you; and the Appointments Committee is going to vet these names. What happens to Members of Parliament if they are locked out? It means we are not part and parcel of that committee, which is going to vet the new ministers. Why should a Member of Parliament be locked out? We should own these ministers because they are going to work for the whole country and we should be party to the vetting and approving process of these ministers. I intend to agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu that the Eighth Parliament should have amended – and Madam Speaker, this is the first session of Parliament where you are in full attire as a full Speaker and with me; it is there. Why couldn’t we amend this so that we get the ministers whom we are going to approve? What happens if some minister comes in and possibly has a lot of question marks? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I appreciate your message of congratulations; but I do not want to jump the gun. This session is for orientation. I do not want to start by amending the rules. 

1.09
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am here regarding rule 8, especially about the sitting arrangement in the House. The rule states that, “The House shall be divided into two, the left and the right. The Independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit.” 

As he has just said, some of us are “independent Independents”. We do not lean towards any party. If you remember what transpired in the last Parliament, a situation where some of the Parliamentarians were taken to court, we are Independents; how come we lean towards a party? Is there any provision that your chair shall give us as Independents because the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that there shall be parties and the Independents shall also exist? It does not stipulate that we lean towards a particular party. I want clearance from your desk, where are we supposed to sign a memorandum of understanding with some particular party; can we have clearance somewhere which says that we have to sign a memorandum of understanding with such a party? If not, shall we just sit on the Opposition or on the Government side like that without signing any memorandum of understanding? We need clearance about that. We are new.

Another one is -(Interjections)- can I have protection, Madam Speaker? I need protection. Another one is on the weekly Order Paper. Here it states in rule 26 that a weekly Order Paper, including relevant documents, shall be made and distributed to every Member through his or her pigeonhole and where possible, electronically. We do not know where the pigeonhole is. At this particular moment, can we be guided where it is and can we be allocated our pigeonholes? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Ongom, I want to rest your fears. If you are not willing to align - and you are not obliged to align with any party - the Speaker will take into account your status as an Independent. That is why I said you have got the best whip who is the Speaker. You will indicate to me whether you want to be aligned or not and I will take into account your issues. But the others, the Members will answer. 

1.13
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to congratulate you upon being elected to shoulder the entire responsibility of this Parliament. 

I am concerned about rule 80 on page 114 which talks about pecuniary interests of Members of Parliament whether in committees or on the Floor of Parliament. “Pecuniary” is a word connected to money. I do not know whether we can expand it to more than that. Members of Parliament have various interests. Some are personal, others are tribal, and others are religious. Can we look very seriously at this rule so that we encompass all these interests? Because we have come to this Floor of Parliament many times and some people bring personal interests, say one wants a district as an individual and one wants something which is personal. Can we really - for example, a Speaker, with due respect, Madam Speaker, belongs to a party although I hear you will not sit in the caucus. The caucus is just one of the many institutions of parties. Supposing you have an interest in a given area and you are chairing us, what do we do? I need guidance from you, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much.

1.15
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Congratulations are in order upon your elevation to the highest office of this Parliament. I rise to make an inquiry about rule 206 which states, “No Member shall appear before the House or any committee of the House as counsel for any party or in any capacity for which he or she is to receive a fee or reward in any matter to be deliberated upon by the House or a committee.” 

Suppose I connive with hon. Nyombi or Mwesigwa Rukutana that they shall act pro bono. Is that allowed? Because it would appear it is only when the professional is acting and is expecting to receive payment. Suppose I make an arrangement with him to come and represent me pro bono, I want to know whether this is a rule of strict applicability or there is a way I can negotiate with somebody to come and represent me without any requirement of payment. Thank you.

1.17
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, rule 8: “Sitting arrangement in the House. Numbers (2) and (3) are clear about the members of the party in Government and the members in the Opposition. And the law is clear about the workers. I want to know at this point where the Workers’ MPs should be sitting. Is it the other side or this side -(Laughter)- because they are representing both? Thank you very much. 

1.18
MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My interest is on rule 69 on the dressing code. I have been following this Parliament before I came in and in the Eighth Parliament I saw one Member being sent out because of wearing a kitenge. When he went out he got that kitenge and put on a tie and came back. Then when we were electing you as Speaker, there is a General I saw putting on another type of shirt. I do not know whether it is a kitenge? As I talk, I can see hon. Alex Onzima putting on another kind of attire. Now, how do we classify these bitenge lest I am caught off guard?

Then also for the UPDF, I was among those people who swore in last. I saw the way these generals were dressed when they were coming to their swearing in ceremony. In the same Army they have many types of uniforms. There are those which are called ceremonial uniforms and then there are the operational uniforms like for Ssewungu, a farmer, who goes to dig and wears gumboots and any other type of cloth. And now, I can see Gen. Owoyesigire dressed very smartly. How do we classify the uniforms because, God forbid, we do not have representatives of police officers here but if a police officer came here wearing that kind of uniform that they put on these days beating people around, I will not be comfortable. So, I would like to know what type of uniforms we classify for Army officers to come in here. Do we have their combats? Because I know there are operational uniforms, which we put on when we are going for war and there are those which are ceremonial. I beg your guidance in that area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.20
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As I congratulate you, I want to also inform you that we expect a lot from you as a lady and really we expect a true reflection of a democratic parliament in this Ninth Parliament.

I am standing up to call our attention -(Interjections)- I am calling our attention to rule 21 about the quorum of Parliament. Here it states that the quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote. Now, in a situation that we are in today, being a multi-party parliament, one third can only comprise of the ruling party. If by any chance the Opposition is not represented at all, shall we consider that as a decision of a democratic Parliament? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I think that needs – probably this is not time for revision of laws but we want to make a difference in the Ninth Parliament because the public expects a lot from us. Shall we kindly have another look at this at the right time? Thank you.

1.21
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a question: rule 84 talks about roll call and tallying. I would like to know something; we have been doing registration outside there – is it part of roll call or part of registration? Please, I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will clear that one right away. That one is registration of the Members so that we can have your details. We are going to publish a directory, which has all your information. It is not a roll call.

MS SANTA ALUM: No, Madam Speaker. That one is different. There is always where we write our names before we come in.

THE SPEAKER: We have an attendance register but we are not using it for this business. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Is it part of the Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: You must register everyday to show that you have come to Parliament.

1.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I am looking at rule 8. It provides for the sitting arrangement in the House. And when you look at sub-rules (2) and (3), they provide for both sides; the Government side and the Opposition side. It is quite unfortunate that we do not have an Attorney-General now. If we had, I would seek clarification from him whether [HON. MEMBER: “We have an acting one.”] We do not have an Attorney-General in this country. It is not your wish, Sir; it is what the law and the Constitution says. There is nobody who can serve as Attorney-General without approval of this House. The Attorney-General who was approved by this House was approved for the last government and the new government has a President sworn in but he has not appointed his ministers. Anybody acting as a minister or Attorney-General is contravening the Constitution and –(Interruption)

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, you just guided this House a few minutes back on the situation in Government as pertains to this issue. You referred to a letter His Excellency wrote to you and you said that ministers are operating lawfully. So in view of your communication and hon. Katuntu’s view, which is which? Can I seek guidance from you?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will produce the letter in the afternoon session but I think we should not try to confuse Members with very many issues. Let us understand the rules – that is today’s work. We shall deal with the legalities another day.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you. I will agree that we do not have to confuse some of our colleagues. But for those who seem to be learned in the law – and I am sure there are some this side – would agree with me. I challenge anybody to say I am not correct legally. It is not about debate but what the law says. 

Having said that – and you see we need to help our colleagues - let me tell you why; if we had assisted some of our colleagues in the last Parliament they would not have fallen into the trouble they fell into during nominations. But because we sought the view like that of my colleague, hon. Baka, they fell into a trap – and they are supposed to pay money back to Parliament from where they were thrown out. 

So my view is that in light of that decision by the Constitutional Court, do we have anybody – I heard one Member say that “We are independent by circumstances.” Does the law recognise somebody being independent by circumstances? Or is it a conscious decision taken on which political platform you want to stand? Because there are two sides; you are either on the Government side under rule 8(2), therefore, you sit that way or if you have not been elected on the Government side, you are actually this side. You can only move to that side under a provision of a coalition – some sort of a coalition – and then there should be documentation for which you must notify the Speaker. For example, you could have a whole party like UPC moving that side if they have a coalition arrangement or they would just vote for that side but they would remain this side. So this particular aspect should be looked into and the gentlemen assisting in interpreting the rules should really guide this House. We do not want a situation where one of our colleagues is sued that he joined another party because the consequences will be dire. We have opponents out there who are not happy with our being here; it is in your interest that you have a legal position. You may either take wise counsel or leave it. 

Madam Speaker, we need clarification from the gentlemen guiding us about pro bono. Under our rules, it is of course prohibited. But does the law allow pro bono circumstances except under the Advocates Act? Under the Advocates Act, pro bono services can be offered but strictly only under certain circumstances. The reason we would have that rule is not to have a conflict of interest; you come here as a Member of Parliament then you start practising law in Parliament? I think that is the mischief this rule intended to cure – that if a lawyer wants to practise law, he should not come to this House; you can practise law outside there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I will now invite members of the rules committee to respond but on the sitting arrangement, for now I want to clarify that on my extreme left are the Opposition seats and from where hon. Nyombi is seated up to this side are the Government side seats. Because we are not inside the Chamber, it is difficult to divide it equally but for now, that is how we shall sit in this hall.

MR NYOMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will attempt to respond to some of the issues that have been raised and hon. Kiyingi who was the chairman of the rules committee before I became chairman will probably, with your permission, also attempt to respond to some of the issues.

I do not want to engage myself into a legal argument with hon. Katuntu but I wish to point out that the former Speaker, upon receipt of the constitutional ruling, attempted to implement a statement in the Constitutional Court ruling that was made obiter dicta. Madam Speaker, as you know, when judges make a statement in passing, we lawyers call it “a statement made obiter dicta” and I have never gone to any school of law where a statement is made obiter dicta and implemented as a ruling. I do not want to go into that.

Secondly, hon. Wamanga-Wamai wondered why the Eighth Parliament did not amend some of the provisions of these rules and he particularly referred to rule 139(2). As you remember, when I was chairman, I did write a letter to all Members of Parliament to propose amendments to these rules. I think we got about two responses. So, really, hon. Wamai, as a Member of the Eighth Parliament –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Nyombi, for giving way. By then I hadn’t come to the House. 

MR NYOMBI: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, because I am not able to check that but I remember getting only two responses from Members of Parliament. We did go through the rules and we made a report. I don’t know whether it was considered because I was requested to vacate my seat basing on a statement that was made obiter dicta. Members of Parliament had the opportunity to make these proposals. Nevertheless, we can still go ahead and make amendments as the Speaker said.

Hon. Mugabi talked about the numbers and the necessity of maintaining decorum in the sessions. This calls upon us to be very disciplined and to adhere to the rules so that when the Speaker says, “I am giving you three minutes,” we stick to three minutes. 

I had the opportunity of attending the British Parliament and I was surprised. Every Wednesday the British Prime Minister comes to Parliament for 30 minutes, from 12.30 p.m. to 1:00 p.m. and I was amazed at the amount of business that was done in 30 minutes. Unfortunately, when we are given the opportunity here, we say, “I want to thank the chairman for this report; I want to thank so and so”, and five minutes are gone. We could do a lot of business if we got straight to business.

To be clear, the intention of this meeting today was to go through these procedures and not to thank the Speaker, but again the temptation keeps on coming – “I want to thank you, hon. Speaker, for having gone through … we the women … blah; blah; blah”.  I pray and hope that as many Members of Parliament are enabled to go and visit some of these parliaments and see what is done –(Interruption)   

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. I am even surprised - international standards in all parliaments – surely, when you are taking the Floor for the first time, be it at the UN, AU or international conferences, you must as a courtesy express your gratitude and extend congratulations to the person chairing. And, Madam Speaker, when I was extending my congratulations, I took into consideration that this is the third most powerful post in this country. So, I divided my time. I know how many minutes I am spending on congratulating the person elected. It is internationally recognised. So, Members of Parliament, he is not in order to tell you not to congratulate the person who has been elected to the chair. I thank you.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Wamanga-Wamai was an ambassador and he travelled widely but I have had the opportunity of visiting a number of Parliaments. They go straight to the point and respond to the issues. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyombi, let me inform Members. Some time in the Eighth Parliament, there was a Member who during the State of the Nation Address – we normally give you five minutes - the Member spent all those five minutes talking about himself and never even touched on anything to do with the State of the Nation Address. He talked about what he had been doing and the five minutes elapsed. So take that into account.

MR NYOMBI: My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that when we are given opportunity, we should go straight to the point, and also listen to the Speaker. When the Speaker says, “Stop”, you stop. Otherwise, we may have a problem.

Rule 127, where the President may refer the Bill back to the House; most of the Bills are originated by Government and so it is only reasonable that after the Bill has been considered by Parliament, it goes to the President because the President is the Chief Executive of Government that originates these Bills. If he is not –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. Basing on what hon. Nyombi is telling Members of Parliament about when you are given opportunity to move straight to the point – in our Rules of Procedure, you are required for instance - because many of us are still new and the Hansard writers will need to know who is debating and where he or she comes from and his or her constituency – to say who you are. According to the Rules of Procedure, a Member of Parliament is required, when you stand up, to mention your name and where you come from. Supposing somebody stands up and goes straight to the point, won’t that interrupt or prevent the Hansard writers from recognising them?

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, the point hon. Dombo is raising – one rising and speaking out his or her name is legitimate. 

On the issue of the President referring back a Bill to Parliament, as I said, most of the Bills are originated by Government. It is only legitimate that after the Bill has been considered by Parliament and passed, it goes to the President for either assent or if he has an issue, it is at that moment that he may raise it because he does not sit with us in Parliament. 

On the issue of Independents feeling that they are left out - if you read these rules, because we did not read all the rules in detail - but when you read the rules, you are not forgotten.

MR KIWANDA: I think the honourable member was responding to my question about rule 127. My question was about Parliament rescinding its decision, leave alone before the President brings back the Bill. This happened some time back. I want to find out whether Parliament has the authority to rescind its earlier position on a certain Bill before even the President brings it back. Is Parliament allowed to rescind its decisions? That is what I wanted to know.  

MR NYOMBI: I think hon. Kiyingi will respond to that but somebody else had talked about rule 127.  Independents, if you look at the rules, you will find that at every stage, whether at committee level or even at the plenary sitting, you are considered. The Speaker is your chief whip. So, you are not ignored. But as the Speaker rightly pointed out, an Independent is independent. He or she is not allied to any party. But at every stage, right from the sitting arrangement, Independents are taken care of.

Reports from abroad: I remember I led two delegations to the British Parliament, Scotland and EU. We did compile, I think if I remember correctly, two reports and we submitted them. In those reports I thought we made very good recommendations. One of them is what I have just pointed out that we tend to waste a lot of time on things which are not really relevant to the point. That is one of the observations we noted when we went abroad. We made a number of recommendations in those reports but the reports have never been considered. Otherwise, some other reports have been written but they have not been considered. 

MR KAFEERO: Hon. Nyombi has just talked about the issue of Independents. We have read the rules and these rules keep talking about the interests of the Independents. Our concern as Independents is who champions our interests? Are you trying to tell us that it is the Speaker? 

If I may also ask, there are proper rules of procedure suggesting as to how someone could become a chairperson or a vice-chairperson of a particular committee; they do it through their whips. How does an Independent become one? Do we as well go through the Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe I have mentioned this twice or thrice that the Independents are independent of each other and, therefore, their interests are catered for in the Office of the Speaker; the Speaker is their whip. I don’t know whether I should say it again, the Speaker is their whip. 

MR NYOMBI: Could I add, Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, you would possibly inform the House on how we give out the offices of the chairpersons of committees so that we allay the fears of the Members. Like what the hon. Member has raised, I know that in the Eight Parliament, there were a certain number of chairpersons from the ruling party and others that went to the Opposition. But then those Independents who had allied with the ruling party like my brother, hon.  Nyombi - he actually got the chair from the Government side because he had signed a memorandum of understanding with us. So, possibly you could inform the Members on how the number of chairpersons will be allocated to the different parties. Thank you. 

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, I beg the indulgence of Members that we allow hon. Nyombi to finish answering questions and if there are any other questions to be asked, they should be asked later. We are in the process of learning; we are missing a lot of things if we keep interjecting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let hon. Nyombi make his responses and then hon. Kiyingi and then we shall break off for a while reflecting on them and if there are issues that are still not clear, we shall take them on in the afternoon session. 

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, let me add on the issue of Independents. I came to the Eighth Parliament as an Independent and I was appointed Vice-Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee in 2006 and then later appointed chairperson of that same committee. Upon the expiry of my term, I was appointed chairperson of the rules committee until I was asked to vacate my sit.  So, I was ideally an Independent and on the basis of that, I would like to allay your fears that as Independents, the Speaker will take into consideration your situation. 

On the issue of Members who were summoned before the rules committee and failed to turn up, we had a number of complaints or allegations by Members of the Eighth Parliament raising very serious allegations against others in the same House. On a number of instances, we called them a number of times to come and substantiate their allegations and they didn’t come. So, we compiled the reports and submitted them although they have never been considered. But that situation has happened - and Mr Wabwire was the Clerk to the rules committee - so, it happens. Somebody makes a complaint; the complaint is considered by the rules committee and when one is called time and again to substantiate the allegations, but they fail to turn up, we compile a report and submit it to the Speaker. 

As far as Independents leaning to any party is concerned, I would not like to add anything more to the constitutional decision that was made. My understanding as a lawyer, and I think I am a good lawyer, is that the statement of the Constitutional Court upon which a decision was made to tell us to vacate the sits was made obiter dictum; it was not a ruling. The rules don’t prohibit a Member from working with another party. I have not seen anything in the rules which says, “You cannot work with NRM; you cannot work with FDC.” The Constitution clearly defines what crossing that will result in serious implications means in Article 83. But if you decide to work together with DP or UPC, provided it does not fall within the meaning of crossing as provided for by Article 83, there will be no implication.

The rule on pecuniary interests -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to invite this House and the hon. Nyombi to make this House understand the issue of obiter dictum and judicial dictum. You know he is over dwelling on that point and many of these people are not lawyers. Many of us do not know the difference between obiter dictum and judicial dictum. 

MR NYOMBI: Judicial dictum is a statement or statements that are made by the learned judges in their adjudication of law or when they are holding cases that may be used pertinently in the extraction of decrees whereas obiter dictum are some of their opinions during their arrival at decisions in holding cases that might not be used pertinently or that may not be extracted as decrees when some judgements that are called “by-the-way statements” are being taken. 

As we also continue with those two issues, it is important to note that the committees we are talking about, like we said, under rule 135, strictly talk about 20 members. I would like this House to address itself to how many Members we are. We are already 375 and from what I see, there are only 12 standing committees and 13 sessional committees. So, even if you were to divide 375 by 20, some of us may not be able to appear in two committees as stipulated by the rules. I, therefore, think that it is within your wisdom as the Chairperson of the Business Committee that we be ably told the other committees that shall be put in place or the one presiding over this session comes up with suggestions as to when we shall come up with new committees where all Members shall be catered for or else we increase the number to say, 30 or so. You should address that, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there will be a session at which we shall sit to approve the membership of the committees. It is not our business for today; that is going to come. So, leave that to the Speaker. 

However, I also want to invite hon. Nyombi, you know the matter you are talking about is in the Supreme Court. This is subjudice; we should not dwell on it here. Do not dwell on that matter because it is in the court. Please, leave it. 

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I will go on to the honourable from Lira -(Interruption)
 
MS KIBOIJANA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification on membership of standing committees as per rule 135. Rule 135 says, “Subject to these rules, each standing committee apart from the Business Committee - understandably because chairpersons of other committees are part of this committee, Budget Committee, equally chairmen are part of the Budget Committee - but then they mention the Appointments Committee - the other committees shall have 20 members” - but these three committees have no specific number of members. I am wondering how the Appointments Committee comes to be part of these three committees yet under rule 135, it talks about the composition of the Committee on Appointments. The Appointments Committee shall comprise 20 members. I think there is some discrepancy there, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You know I said that let us try not to confuse Members about proposals which we want to make for amendments. Let us state the rules as they are; Members understand them and when we come to forming the committees, we shall explain the composition of the Appointments Committee, composition of the rules committee, and the composition of the sessional committees. You are rushing the other Members and I am really appealing to you to take it one by one. Today is for orientation.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, hon. Baryomunsi raised the issue of the removal of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons from committees. The rule he read falls under the part entitled “generally” which means that that is a general situation. But when you look at rule 134(2), it says that; “In selection of members of standing committees, the parties represented in Parliament shall designate through whips membership of committees on the basis of party representation in the House.”

This one is dealing with a specific situation, the other one is dealing with a general situation. My interpretation is that he/she who has the authority to designate members to a committee may have the authority to withdraw that designation.
 
Lastly, I think a member from Lira talked about the –(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: I draw your attention to rule 134(5) where they say that parties have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees. This sounds a bit outrageous because when you look at the concept of separation of powers, Members of Parliament being put on committees, if the party chief whips and the party can relocate members at their will and wish, it is very dangerous not only to the Members of Parliament but also to their activities and their performance. I would suggest that in the event that a member has been relocated to a committee by a party, let there be a time limit to which a party can be able to withdraw or there should be reason to that effect. Otherwise, this clause can always be used to remove a person who they feel cannot serve their interests on a committee.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I think you have already ruled that any amendments to these rules will come at a later time. So this is not the time to consider what the honourable member feels.

MR SSALI: Madam Speaker, I wish to know at what time we are supposed to break off and come back for the afternoon session. This is because my sugar levels are going down and I am sure some of these honourables around here are about to collapse. I request that we break off for lunch.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members when we break, we must also break in an orderly manner. I was allowing hon. Nyombi to close his session before I make my ruling on what we are going to do next.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, lastly before hon. Kiyingi comes in, I think a honourable member raised a question about a situation where all the Opposition marches out of Parliament and whether it be democratic if the ruling party remains in Parliament. These rules do not talk about parties, they talk about quorum. It is quorum that matters and this is what is covered by these rules.

MR CHEBOROT: I raised a very pertinent issue, which may not have caught the attention of hon. Nyombi. I raised the issue of some provisions which are in the Rules of Procedure which are lifted directly from the Constitution. To what extent can these provisions be changed? This happened when we were electing the Speaker. So I would like to know from hon. Nyombi or from you, Madam Speaker, to what extent can Members change those provisions?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, presentations are being done by two members of the rules committee. Hon. Nyombi has done his part and we are going to listen to hon. Asuman Kiyingi. If he does not address it, I will address it. 

For now, I would want us to break for lunch and I suspend the House to 3.30 p.m. When we return, hon. Asuman Kiyingi will make his presentation and then we start with hon. Onzima followed by hon. Todwong, hon. Mulimba, hon. Baryayanga and hon. Kataike. Then I will get the others. The House is suspended until 3.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.59 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.38 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we suspended the House at lunch time, we were due to receive the second part of the responses from hon. Asuman Kiyingi, an outgoing member of the rules committee. 

3.39
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (Independent, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, hon. Nyombi, took the House through all the rules and left out the appendices but maybe before I proceed, for the benefit of the Members who are new, my name is Asuman Kiyingi and I represent the people of Bugabula South in Kamuli District. I am an Independent.

My colleague took the House through the rules and exhausted them. What was left out were the appendices but perhaps before we look at the appendices, which are equally important, I can by way of general remarks make comments on some of the issues that were raised this morning.

There was the question of who sits where. There are two sides in the House; the Government side and the Opposition side. There is actually no neutral side because you are either on the Government side or the Opposition. The only neutral side would probably be the Chair which is in the middle. So, one is either on the Government side or the Opposition side. 

With respect to Independents, one has to apply to the Speaker indicating which side he or she wishes to sit and that is it. I am not aware of any incident where any member was denied an opportunity to sit on the side of the House he so wished to sit on. 

There was the issue of the UPDF. There was one honourable member who was suggesting that maybe for the UPDF and some should sit on the Opposition and others on the Government side. The UPDF representation in the House is a constitutional matter. Under Article 78, they are supposed to be ten of them and subject to review every five years. The UPDF is non-partisan, patriotic, impartial and subordinate to civilian authority under Article 202 of the Constitution. It definitely cannot sit on the Opposition side when there is a Government in power and that is why they sit on the Government side.

There was also the question of the Appointments Committee. Issues were raised as to why it is closed and its decisions are not debated by the House. What Members should know is that the Appointments Committee does not deal with just the appointment of ministers but also judges, commissioners on statutory commissions; Electoral Commission, Uganda Law Reform Commission, Uganda Human Rights Commission – all these appointments made by the Executive come for vetting before Parliament and I think the rules were well thought out because by its very nature, debate in the House at times takes an acrimonious trend; there is mudslinging and unnecessary intrusion into people’s private lives. 

By the way, some of these appointments by the Executive are not even applied for. A judge is appointed because some people, the law society or the Judicial Service Commission feels this is a distinguished citizen who should serve in that capacity. Now, it would be very unfair to generate such appointment to mudslinging and unfair allegations some of which cannot be substantiated as if someone has even applied for the job. 

To protect the integrity of some of the offices and the persons who are appointed, in its wisdom, the House adopted this rule with respect to appointments. 

In any case, the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee is actually the Speaker who has the mandate of the whole House and so the collective power and dignity of the House is brought bear on these appointments by the Speaker presiding over the committee. 

The practice has been that actually the committee is very powerful and at times rejects names that are presented. In many instances, they have rejected some names presented by the President and they say, “Look, we do not accept this person for these a, b, c and d reasons.” The President has revisited some of those nominations rejected by that committee. I want to allay the fears of members that there is nothing abnormal about the Appointments Committee conducting its sessions in private outside everybody’s view. 

There was a comment on rule 168: “Removal from the chair of the committee”. My colleague, hon. Nyombi, made a comment on it. A Member had raised the contradiction between the power of committee members to remove a member and then the power of the party. There is basically no contradiction because the member can actually move under rule 168 but the party whips can also exercise their power under rule 134 and re-designate a Member either in the position of chairperson of the committee or just a member of a committee. So, there is no contradiction. Nobody has ever refused committee members from proceeding to remove a member if they so wish.

Perhaps I should also mention that under rule 14, if circumstances so demand, these rules can be suspended. That section states: “Any member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended. But this suspension does not apply to rules 4, 5, 10, 11, 12 (1) and 83.” So, if you want to suspend any rule, it should not be one of those.

I have already indicated that my colleague took the House through all the rules in a summary form, but did not touch the appendices. This is not to say that the appendices are not important; they are equally very important. Let me take off some few minutes and start from page 283. 

Appendix A, which is made under rule 22, is an inter-denominational prayer which covers everybody including atheists. Appendix B provides for the Rules of Procedure for the election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. Shortly, this House will be electing Members to the EALA because the term for the current Members is expiring soon. 

What I can mention is sub rule 3 of this Appendix, which says, “Elected Members of the Assembly representing Uganda shall be nominated by the parties or organisations represented in the House on the basis of proportional party membership taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties or organisations and gender.” That is the formula that is usually agreed upon.

The qualifications are of course mentioned down there. As you will see, a Member of Parliament cannot vie for such an election unless they have those qualifications. The tenure is five years subject to another five years according to sub rule 5.

Members may also wish to know that under sub rules 3 and 5, Members of this Parliament can recall a Member elected to the East African Legislative Assembly for physical or mental incapacity; misconduct likely to bring hatred, ridicule, contempt or disrepute to the office or the state; persistent neglect of the issues relating to the development of the people of Uganda and so on.

Also in there, we have the procedures for nomination of candidates, campaigns and transmission of the results by the Clerk to Parliament of Uganda to the Secretary-General of the East African Community.

In Appendix C, which is made under rule 11(2), we have the procedure for submitting reports by the Members elected to the East African Legislative Assembly. 

We then have the procedure for the election of Members to the Pan African Parliament. Unlike the East African Legislative Assembly, we send sitting Members of Parliament to the Pan African Parliament. As a Member of this House, you can vie for a position of Member of the Pan African Parliament.

Appendix E gives us guidance on how petitions are drafted and presented. As representatives of the people, we are normally approached and asked to move motions in the House to present petitions. So, I would like to urge every Member to know how petitions are drafted, the basic ingredients of a petition and how they are presented. 

Most importantly, honourable members, there is the code of conduct for us. I would like to urge every Member to read through this code, internalise it and apply its content. The purpose of this code is to assist Members in the discharge of their obligations in the House, their constituents and the public at large.

The rule on public duty says that by virtue of the oath of allegiance taken by all Members, they have to be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and to uphold the law and act on all occasions in accordance with the public trust vested in them. Members have a general duty to act in the interests of the nation as a whole and a special duty to their constituents. 

On personal conduct, what is required of a Member and the principles therein are specified. They must be selfless, have integrity, be objective, accountable and as open as possible about all the decisions and actions they take. They should give reasons for their decisions and restrict information only when the public interest demands.

On honesty, Members have the duty to declare any private interests relating to their parliamentary duties and take steps to resolve any conflicts arising, in a way that protects the public interests.

On leadership, Members should promote and support good governance by leadership and example. Public interest is once again emphasised in sub rule 4 where it is said that, “Members shall base their conduct on full consideration of the public interest, avoid conflict between personal interest and the public interest and resolve any conflict between the two, at once, and in favour of the public interest.”

We also have a provision on public trust and another provision on corruption. It is clearly stated under sub rule 6 of our code that, “The acceptance by a Member of a bribe to influence his or her conduct as a Member, including any fee, compensation or reward in connection with the promotion of, or opposition to, any Bill, motion or other matter submitted or intended to be submitted to the House or to any committee of the House is contrary to this code of conduct.”

Sub rule 7 says you should declare your interest. Do not act as though you do not have personal interest and mislead your colleagues either on the committee or even in the House. You can say, “I have this interest in this matter but all the same let me make my contribution” and people will take your contribution with some caution. We have already talked about openness; we have said we are not expected to act as paid advocates. 

Sub rule 10 is on improper use of payments: “No improper use shall be made of any payment or allowance made to Members for public purposes and any rules which apply to such payments and allowances must be strictly observed.” 

Sub rule 11 requires you to take the information you receive here as important and in confidence. Do not use it to blackmail or cajole or intimidate anybody or for any other purpose like financial gain.

Matters not provided; this is important for you to know that if you look for a rule to apply to any particular situation in these Rules of Procedure and you cannot find one, seek the advice of the Speaker or the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. If the code of conduct is violated and anybody complains that it has been violated, the matter is usually referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Appendix G is not really for us. Basically, it is for how parliamentary proceedings are covered, but what you should know is that the moment you are in the Chamber, you are in some sort of “big brother house”. Everything is amplified and recorded, so it is incumbent upon everyone to behave in a dignified manner and in a manner that does not bring the House into disrepute. 

Of course under sub rule 2, the people who are covering the proceedings of the House are required to also be responsible and not be unnecessarily intrusive in the private affairs of Members of the House. In fact, sub rule 2 says, “In covering proceedings of the House, the Public Relations Manager shall have regard to the dignity of the House and its functions as a Legislature rather than a place of entertainment”.

The rest is in respect to covering the proceedings and I do not think we should spend much time on that. What I should mention to Members is that it is not possible to internalise these rules by just going through them like we are doing now. The rules and the Constitution which we were given in our bags on the day of swearing in are actually the bible. It is incumbent upon all of us to take time, to read through them, internalise them and observe the practice. It is only when you see a rule being applied that you will understand it fully. So, I would encourage Members to take time to attend proceedings in the plenary and even in the committees. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kiyingi. I just wanted, before I invite hon. Onzima, to respond to hon. Chebrot’s issue. He was wondering whether the provisions - honourable members, switch off your phones please. He was wondering whether the provisions of the Constitution which relate to removal of certain persons from office are part of our rules. Yes, they are. I draw your attention to Part XV, rule 90, 91 up to 95. In case you disagree with the Speaker’s decision, you must object via a substantive motion. That is what I wanted to inform hon. Chebrot. 

4.05
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Indepedent, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we are still in the honeymoon of a new House, I take this opportunity on behalf of the people of Maracha to congratulate you on your latest elevation to the third highest office in the land. To all of my colleagues, I congratulate you on becoming Members of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. 

You will excuse me if I did not pick hon. Peter Nyombi well but there is one thing I want to bring to the attention of the new Members. The way our Speaker is seated now, that chair which she occupies right now, is the same arrangement you will get in the actual chamber. So, while she is occupying that very important seat, the way it is arranged, you address her as “Madam Speaker”. 

When she is not presiding over the House herself and it is her deputy, you do not address the deputy as “Mr Deputy Speaker”. No, this is because the deputy is there occupying that seat on behalf of Madam Speaker so you address the deputy as Mr Speaker. There is no deputy when we are in plenary because we are addressing the chair.

When we get to the second reading of a Bill, as it was pointed out, as we consider clause by clause, Madam Speaker will not be seated where she is seated now; the sitting arrangement will change. She will leave that chair and come to sit - in fact displace one of these clerks, the one who is on her right. This one will find his level and go to sit somewhere behind there so that the chair of authority will remain vacant. When Madam Speaker moves from that chair and sits where one of the clerks is sitting, you now do not address her as Madam Speaker but she becomes “Madam Chairperson”. In case of the Deputy Speaker, he becomes, “the Chairperson”. These are the two things which I did not hear Mr Nyombi saying. I just wanted to bring them up for the consumption of our new colleagues. 

Finally, when a Member is on the Floor of the House and he or she utters something which is actually a lie and you want to object to it, you do not refer to that Member as a liar. The parliamentary word or phrase you use is, “misleading the House”. That is the parliamentary language. The phrase “telling a lie” is not entertained in parliamentary language. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank hon. Onzima for enriching the presentation. 

4.10
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is on rule 64. I know we are not here to amend these rules or to introduce anything new but we are in the process of understanding things as they are and as they are put into practice. 

Under this rule, a Speaker is not supposed to participate in debate. I know that the Speakers we have now came to Parliament as Members of Parliament for their constituencies; I just want to know how you would effectively represent your constituencies without debating in the House. Do you represent them in silence –(Interjections)– influence; how? In the event that in future we consider having a Speaker who does not represent a constituency – that is debate for the future; but for now, I want to know how you effectively represent your constituency. 

My final request is that in future, we might need to give new Members ample time to interact with the officials you select to present orientation procedures to them. We get lost when Members who have stayed in the House for a long time start interjecting and bringing in new issues. We are here to learn for the first time and we want to learn and understand these rules as they appear.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Todwong, I agree with you and that is why I have been telling the Members not to stampede you. I appeal to the senior Members to allow the new Members to move with us. 

4.12
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw your attention to rule 134(5) which says, “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate members...” I want to get more clarification. At this point in time, we have all been requested to indicate to our party whips our committees of interest. I wonder whether at the point of withdrawal and relocation, members are still consulted.

Two, if the party wishes to relocate a Member and he is not interested in the committee he is being relocated to, is the party decision final? Can one appeal? 

I would also like to get more clarity on rule 69(c) about the dress code on decent traditional wear. Like one Member observed, I think it was in the Eighth Parliament where some Members were thrown out for being indecently dressed, but in their opinion they were probably decently dressed. So, we would like to know the definition of “decent traditional wear”. I could have a personal definition of decent traditional wear, but in his or her definition, I might be indecently dressed.

Lastly, some Member raised a question here whether male Members of Parliament are free to apply for paternity leave. I want to know whether we have a limit to the number of times a male Member of Parliament can apply for paternity leave in a year.

THE SPEAKER: I know the other Members will answer, but I want to say something small about traditional wear. I do not know whether you have seen our Karimojong colleagues putting on their traditional wear; they have a suka, but the rest of the body is naked. So, if a Member arrived here in that type of dress, I would not say it is decent although I know it is their traditional wear. 

On paternity leave, we have not had instances where Members have applied several times, but if they do, I think the Speaker will take a decision on that. 

About whether the Speaker can contribute, fortunately, we all come from areas where there is more than one representative. I can either request my colleague to say something of common interest to us or I can sit here and say, “Minister of transport, the people of Kamuli want their road done; what do you have to say about it?” That is enough for the minister to take action. I do not have to say much, but I just say, “They are asking about the road” and the minister will take action. 

4.16
MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on issues of the Appointments Committee and the procedure of getting the membership and chairperson of a committee. If I recall well, we have been told that the whips of the different parties guide the appointment of the members and chairpersons. However, since we have privileges to change or to bring up ideas that would make us more functional, I feel the nomination of the chairperson of the committee should be left to the members. 

Our old colleagues may be aware of each other’s backgrounds but for us who are new, even our whips may not have the full profile of our background. Furthermore, we the young parliamentarians are very ambitious; when shall we get the opportunity to also be elected as chairpersons? So, I would like us to consider new avenues. We should not carry on with everything we found in place. There are new challenges and new ideas. Madam Speaker, you may observe that two thirds of the House are now new Members, so we would want this new energy to be tapped into.

Another observation is that I am still not very comfortable with our code of conduct. Personally, I need to be guided once more. When people violate that conduct, what is a strong control that can be put in place to ensure that people do not abuse regulations? Regulations are here to guide the House and help us work properly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.19
MR JOHN MUYINGO: (Independent, Bamunanika County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I carry very warm greetings and congratulations from the people of Bamunanika to you. I am seeking clarification on two issues; commencement of parliamentary sittings and the whip for the Independents because I am an Independent. 

You may be aware that I come from the teaching profession where discipline is key to the success of anything. Discipline begins with time management. It is indicated in the rules that sittings begin at 10.00 a.m. For the last sittings, I have been here five minutes before 10.00 a.m. but I have been shocked to see or to note that we do not start after 10, 20 or 30 minutes. Even when we are seated, I keep seeing Members coming in and going out. Some people came in after 2.00 p.m. 

When I read through this booklet, I do not see any provision to check that kind of indiscipline. I do not know whether in this House it is indiscipline –(Laughter)- that is why I wanted to share with you the background where I come from, the teaching profession; it is very important that we keep time. I want to know when the Speaker says the sitting begins at 10.00 a.m., what does it exactly mean, so that next time I keep time? 

The other thing is that I am happy you told us in the morning that you are the whip for the Independents. Last time, you told us that this sitting would begin at 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon and actually I took that. Today, I came in to continue with my registration just to be shocked with an invitation to begin the morning session. When I inquired from my colleagues how they got the information, I was told that their party whips sent them SMS messages. Was it supposed to be the Speaker to have sent me the message? Where do I go as an Independent? Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am your whip, hon. Muyingo, but I work through the Clerk who sends my messages. If he failed you this time, I am instructing him to comply with my instructions to notify my constituency about meetings. I hope the Clerk will not make those errors again. We shall answer the issue of time keeping. 

4.23
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know hon. Nyombi has outlawed congratulating you, but let it be on record that maybe I was the last person to congratulate you upon ascending to that seat. 

Most of us are just new MPs from the village -(Laughter)- and you know that from the villages, we have voters’ issues to present. First of all, I have to thank the Members who have submitted their contributions. What I am missing is guidance. What is important for me and what I want to hear is guidance on how a Member can submit one of these hot issues I am referring to. For instance, if you have an issue – in the villages I told you we have so many; like in Mayuge we have crocodiles eating our people and so many other issues - when and how do you present such issues? That is what I want to know as guidance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Majegere, I will answer you right away. Our first major debate is on the State of the Nation Address. During that debate, you raise all the problems in your constituency in five minutes. You can speak on anything. If you find that it is taking long, you can ask the minister in charge or the Prime Minister who will direct one of the ministers to answer that issue. 

The State of the Nation Address debate will be an appropriate time for you to raise that. You can speak on any subject from your constituency - the roads, the hospitals, teachers, anything. Each of you will be given your five minutes to raise those issues from your constituency. Later, we will follow that with a debate on the budget. You also have another five minutes. So, there are two occasions. 

After that, there is question time or you can rise on a matter of national importance if yesterday the crocodiles ate somebody in Mayuge. When you come to me and say “Speaker, I have a very urgent issue”, after my communication you can stand up and since you would have told me, I would allow you to say it. I would then call upon the minister in charge to answer immediately if it is very urgent. You will learn as we go along. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The new Members of Parliament will realise that whereas we come to the House to debate a lot of issues of national concern, there is a lot that is not done on the Floor, but within the respective ministries. 

There are times when Parliament is not sitting; there are times when you are on recess and committees are sitting, but some important issue happens in your constituency, which requires your immediate action. Under such circumstances, you must take it up with the responsible minister in order to get quick action other than waiting for the Floor when Parliament may not be in session. That is the only information I wanted to give. 

4.27
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am commenting on rule 134.  What I want to comment on here is under sub section (3), “Unless otherwise provided in these rules and so far as reasonably practicable, the overall membership of committees shall reflect proportional membership in the House taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and the interest of the Independent Members.”    

Here, I want to bring out the fact that this rule is silent on a Member or Members who may wish to participate as ex-officio members on the committees. It would be proper to have some guidelines that should be able to assist these ex-officio members as they get into that committee.

First of all, what is the limit of the number of people to be in that committee? If it is limitless, what if a bigger number comes in? Two, whom do they contact to come to this committee; is it the chief whip or they go directly to the chairperson of that committee? This is very important. I saw the experience in our committee and during some other PAC discussions where some people who had particular interests would come in sometimes even to derail the members of the committee. So, there must be some guidelines in this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is a good suggestion. I will ask the clerk to keep track of all those and when the rules committee is constituted, we shall look at it. 

4.30
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, My concern arises from Part XXIV on the Parliamentary Appointments Committee, Rule 143 - nominations not approved. I see that the only parameter here clearly stipulated is that one may not be approved if he or she possesses qualifications that are not prescribed by law to hold an office. The rest of the parameters are not very well stipulated. I think it would be good for all the Members to know the kind of parameters that are followed to approve or not to approve. 

I can see under No.2 that the committee shall expeditiously carry out its duties, but that expeditiousness is a bit wide; people may never know where it starts or stops. 

Another situation arises where the committee can throw back a name to the President for having failed to get enough information about someone. This is failing to get the good things about someone or the bad. So, to allay fears and for the purpose of transparency, since this committee stretches even to commissions – there was a situation where a couple was nominated and the wife was not approved on the basis that the husband was already a beneficiary of the Electoral Commission. There might arise another situation where a husband and wife might be working also in high authorities and it could bring bad blood and debate. 

I feel if the parameters are very clear, someone who is thrown out will go away knowing very clearly, “Yes, in my heart I was unethical when I was a headmaster; I cheated exams and that is the reason they are rejecting my becoming a commissioner on the Teaching Service Commission.” I beg to get clarification. Thank you very much.

4.33
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we go on with the orientation, as far as the Rules of Procedure of Parliament are concerned, I have a concern that people are not talking about orientation of emoluments. (Laughter) We are very broke, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know the public has this view that as soon as we meet, we talk about emoluments. That is why the orientation did not touch on the issues of emoluments because it is not our first priority. However, I want to assure you that the Speaker will inform you about the rain shortly. (Laughter)

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I do not know whether in the course of the induction we shall present counsel or guidance to Members regarding the issues of finances. We saw how colleagues suffered. We have seen how banks are moving around. We do not want our colleagues to fall into that trap. You could be hard hit. 

Madam Speaker, I think your office can organise so that we can guide Members not to get into situations of financial embarrassment in the Parliament. It can be so demeaning to the Members of Parliament, if you saw how colleagues were humiliated by court bailiffs. We appreciate that there could be that problem, but I think they need to be helped very fast such that they do not fall into that trap. Otherwise, there are so many venture capitalists around and by the end of two or three months, you will be in problems. So, I think if we can have a closed session to help guide Members such that they do not fall into that trap, we would really appreciate it for our colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know I had not really wanted to talk about these issues, but the last part of our orientation will touch on that, and it will be a closed session without all these cameras so that we can talk freely and understand each other. So, do not worry; we are going to handle that. I told you that we shall deal with your welfare. I am going to handle it. 

4.37
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is approaching 5 O’clock and some of my honourable colleagues and I have an engagement at 5 O’clock. However, in the morning you had promised that this afternoon you would give us a letter from the Executive concerning the issue of the ministers. As you may appreciate, some of the questions being asked would best be answered by the ministers who are not yet in place.

Right now, people posing as ministers are presiding over swearing-in ceremonies in different districts. Last Friday, for example, I saw a lady who came and presided over the function to swear in the Lord Mayor and she was being addressed as the Minister for Kampala. Some people have even been fired by these ministers, like at UBC.

Madam Speaker, I do tender in a request that if you have the letter from the Executive, it would be better if we receive it. If there is no letter, I would propose that this House constitutes itself into a committee and the President sends names to be approved and we assist him because the whole country seems to be in a crisis. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do have the letter and it is here. I will give it to everybody at the end. It was written on May 16th, but I want us to deal with our business first.

4.39
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were going through the orientation, I think because of the time factor, some elements were skipped. I have special interest in voting in the House. There are various types of voting according to the Rules of Procedure. When I went to the part of secret voting, I saw that they are talking about division into lobbies and all kinds of things. I request that we get more information on that. 

Also concerning voting, the day we elected you, Madam Speaker, we spend a lot of time on that process – about three hours voting for you, and another two hours voting for the Deputy Speaker. Is there a plan to introduce some technology so that the voting can be done quickly, say in 10 minutes? You just press on the buttons on the console and you have indicated whom you have voted and within 10 minutes, the House is through with voting; if we had such technology, on that day by midday we would have probably been through. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall answer that; but hon. Kabajo, I thought you were happy to spend that day with your colleagues? (Laughter)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, there is a problem with some copies of the Rules of Procedure. If you look at some copies, with specific reference to what my colleague has said, they are incomplete. Specifically, look at rule 85 which talks about division; it goes from sub rule (1) up to (12) yet in the many booklets that I have looked at, there is only (1), which is also incomplete. 

I found out that it is incomplete because of the question that hon. Chebrot had raised. He had asked if the Speaker can be called to order. Whereas calling the Speaker to order requires a substantive motion, there is a provision in the rules on how somebody can show that he is not satisfied with the voting, which is in rule 85. Can the Clerk’s Office make arrangements to provide for Members whose booklets are incomplete so that they can have complete information as they go through orientation? Thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Dombo raises a substantive question. These are the rules which were given out in the hand-outs and if they are faulty, we cannot proceed with them. I thought you would direct the Clerk to produce a new set of rules with everything inclusive, other than to proceed without us knowing whether the proper rules will be issued or not. For me to have incomplete rules while my colleagues have complete ones can lead to problems arising on the Floor of the House when you are chairing.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is fully my intention to get a new set of complete rules for all the Members of Parliament. Let us go through the orientation; we have noted the lacuna, we shall issue a new set of complete rules which will be proof-read so that we know everything is there.

4.44
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned with rule 14 which deals with suspension of rules. I had a chance to watch the parliamentary proceedings, especially in the last quarter of the previous term of office, and that is when most of the seats were empty in this House. At the same time, that is when most of the crucial Bills were dealt with. When you look here, the few rules that are not subject to suspension include the issue of quorum. I am looking at a day – though it is very unlikely – when we on the Government side decide to walk out and only return to find our friends in the Opposition have agreed to suspend the rules to lock us out. Is there any way we can withdraw this rule to do with a number of other rules? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members - although hon. Kiyingi will explain - you may have a situation where you are required to give a minister 14 days’ notice before he can answer. However, if the matter is very urgent that you cannot wait for the 14 days, you can say, “I am applying to suspend this rule so that the minister answers immediately.” I do not think we should close the doors, but hon. Kiyingi will explain later.

4.46
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and congratulations at that. My concern is on rule 63 where a Member shall not read his or her speech. I would like to be guided whether this is also going to apply to the maiden speech. 

On rule 202, I am very concerned about allowing the public and the media to attend parliamentary proceedings. I would like to be clarified about how they are going to conduct their business when they are allowed in. I remember seeing in some press the legs of female MPs published, and I wondered where they collected all those legs if it was not in Parliament. I asked myself whether that is not in the protection of the dignity of the House. As female Members of Parliament, we are bound to stretch ourselves like any other human being who is entitled to fresh air and you may put your legs apart and then the press is at it. (Laughter) So, Madam Speaker, can we be assured about whether we shall be protected? Thank you.

4.48
MS SEZI MBAGUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring you hearty greetings and congratulations on your elevation to the Office of Speaker from the people of Rukungiri. Rule 3 is talking about the English language but I would like to link it with rule 59 which refers to the type of language being used – whether it is offensive, abusive, insulting and so on. I hope that this rule will be extended to sessional committees because we have had occasions where in sessional committees bad language has been used, to our surprise. So, I hope that this rule will be abided to by the sessional committees in particular. 

I would also like to link it up with time management. Sessional committees generally meet Government departments and Government departments bring in all their staff, but the time management component is very worrying. You bring 10 or 15 officers and if you calculate the man-hours spent waiting for these officials, it is prohibitive. So, I would like to echo what hon. Muhingo has said, that we should look at time management - time utilisation and make sure that those who are summoned to a sessional committee are also able to go back and attend to their work.  

Lastly, on gender; I think it is very important to respect the female gender. I am referring particularly to when Members come out and say, “You woman” or “You man”. I think it is very offensive, particularly to the ladies, when you are in a meeting and somebody is pointing a finger at you and saying, “You woman.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you. I need clarification on rule 11 which talks about Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. A number of people are approaching us now and again requesting us to consider them when the time comes for electing them to the Assembly. My question is, can anybody come from anywhere to contest for such a post or is there a certain category of people meant to contest for such posts? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will answer that, but basically, you should be qualified to be a Member of Parliament of Uganda first. You should have the same qualifications, but he will give you the details. 

4.52
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you. I would like to seek clarification on rule 70, sub rule (g), where Members are not allowed to bring into the House a number of items. My specific concern is about electronic devices. 

Madam Speaker, we work with electronics very much. This is an ICT age. I use electronic notebooks. I do not actually carry physical literature; most of them are digitised, be it books, reference materials like the Constitution, and I believe with time even the rules. It becomes easier to refer to and retrieve information and even take notes. So, I wonder why this rule can be so prohibitive that even such a device that is supposed to facilitate my work in the House can be denied. Thank you.

4.53
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you. Congratulations from Bulamogi. Madam Speaker, we have noted that there is urgency and a need to amend the Rules of Procedure and we know, and we have been assured that it is going to be done. However, taking into consideration the formulation of these committees, I am putting forward a question: Is it possible to have the rules committee constituted first to consider some urgent amendments? This is such that we can have the Independent Members of Parliament compete for chairpersons of committees because they are not catered for under the current rules; also, so that we constitute other committees when the urgent amendments have been addressed by the rules committee? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I shall answer that right away. We shall have a session where we shall deal with the composition of all the committees, both standing and sessional, in the plenary. We will then give them instructions on what to do. It is when we have constituted those committees that we shall give them all these ideas that you are bringing and give them a timeframe in which to come back to us and present the amendments for debate in the plenary. Now, we cannot say rules committee comes first and then sessional committees on agriculture or finance wait. We shall have a session for all those, probably early next week. 

We are waiting for the parties to give us the whips. Many parties have not told us who their whips are, so I do not know who to contact for that purpose. We do not have a leader of the Opposition and we do not have a Leader of Government Business. So, everything is tied up together. Just be patient and we shall handle it. 

4.55
MRS IRENE MULONI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you very much. I wish to add my voice to that of the previous honourable members in congratulating you upon your election as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. The people of Bulambuli asked me to let you know that they are proud of you and that they wish you every success in your new assignment. 

Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification or guidance on rule 10, on parliamentary commissioners. Part (f) talks about four backbench Members who would be part of these parliamentary commissioners. I realise that our chief whips were able to give us forms to fill in to indicate which committees we desire to serve, but I do not recall any form or request where one would express interest to serve on the commission. So, I am seeking clarification and guidance from you; at what stage, level or procedure will the four backbenchers be nominated by their chief whips to the Parliamentary Commission? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will answer you. Hon. Tumwine wanted to give clarification on the dress code but let us have hon. Isabirye first. I will get to you all.  

4.57
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, I equally bring greetings and congratulations from the people of Bunya South Constituency. 

I want to draw your attention and the attention of the Members to rule 102, which requires a certificate of financial implication to be accompanied on all Bills tabled here. There may arise a situation when we are in a financial crisis and at the same time we have Bills to be presented here. I want to be clarified on the process of obtaining this certificate of financial implication. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I will answer that right away. The certificate is brought by the minister presenting a Bill to the House. This is because we used to have a time when we made laws and they could not be implemented due to lack of money. So, we would now want you to come and say, “I have brought this law, but also the budget is here.” If the budget is not necessary, you say, “It is budget neutral; I do not need more money in order to implement it.” If you have a Private Member’s Motion, you also need a certificate to say whether it is budget neutral or give the implications on the budget. So, it comes with the Bill and is issued by the Minister of Finance. 

4.59
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a gender expert, I congratulate you and I am happy that you are in the Chair. I have got three issues to raise. 

The Rules of Procedure have gone on very well since morning, but I am at crossroads because I belong to a party and I am wondering at what point I will be able to display my loyalty. This is because here in Parliament if you follow the Rules of Procedure, you might come up with incidents where you are not in line with the party. So, my proposal would be that since this is a multiparty parliament, we would right from the beginning get a proper orientation from the parties because they have their stake. 

When I come here and follow these Rules of Procedure, my chief whip might take me to be a rebel. I have heard that there are some “rebel MPs”, so I do not want to begin right from the onset as a “rebel MP”. I hope that this will be handled because it is quite important. 

When it comes to the Independents, I would really be of the view that since they are recognised, they should have their own section in the middle such that they are not so alienated and end up attaching themselves to parties, so as to have a sense of belonging. I know that it is this thinking that really put quite a number of MPs in trouble during the last elections. So, we have seen that as a problem. 

When Members sign memoranda, they take it for granted that they belong to whichever parties they have signed up with and yet the voters voted them in as Independents with their Independent symbols. So, it would be very important that right from this point, the Independents are properly oriented such that they do not create problems of breaching the rules right from the beginning. 

I would also love that in the next orientation of the Tenth Parliament, it would be important to have a detailed map of Parliament provided to the Members such that one does not have to keep asking very many questions, but can easily follow the map. 

With that, I would request that we could again be guided during this orientation of new Members to know the limits especially when it comes to the Bills. At what point do you represent the voters? Many of the parliamentarians have had challenges from the voters saying that they do not consult them and yet according to the Rules of Procedure, the time that is given is quite limited. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: About consulting the voters, the Parliamentary Commission facilitates you to go back to your constituency to speak to the voters twice a month. So, we have that arrangement and I hope that you will comply with it. As for the others, the Member will answer. 

5.05
MS DOROTHY MPIIMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification on rule 26. This morning we were led through some processes and I am particularly intrigued by the weekly Order Paper. 

I got to know about this morning’s meeting over the TV and I was wondering as to how we are going to proceed after this. Are we going to continue moving by chance or are we going to have an itinerary presented to us so that we can plan? Somebody mentioned in the morning that people used to come to Parliament between Tuesdays and Thursdays. Could we please be guided so that we can have ourselves organised to attend all these meetings? 

Secondly, when I look at the Order Paper, it talks about the “Second Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session”; could you lead us through what a meeting is and what a session is so that we can come on board? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will answer that.  

5.06
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot resist congratulating you and your deputy and all the Members who made it to the Ninth Parliament. I have been in this Parliament for the last 25 years -(Applause)- so, I have seen the different changes that have taken place here since 1986, but I will only comment on the dress code. 

When we came to Parliament, I was sent out of Parliament twice for not putting on a tie. The second time I had actually put on the national colours of Uganda from down to up and I had thought that I was representing the nation. (Laughter) At that time the rules said, “You must put on a suit”, as it appears in rule 69 on page 101 and 102. It only said that, “You must put on a suit” and this included a long jacket, a long trouser, a shirt, a tie and a jacket. 

However, what is crucial in that rule is “dignified way”. I want to say that dignity starts from the brain. Even the way you sit - like the honourable member pointed out - must be dignified.  Even the way you conduct yourself must be dignified. So, I think the most important word is “dignified”. Later on, I did not accept to be put down and we had to convince the Committee on Rules and Privileges of Parliament to change the rules.

Rule 69 (a) refers to the male Members and in addition to the known suit, which somebody designed about a century ago when the Europeans were trying to keep away their cold and had to tie all the underwear with a tie. That was the first one. So, we added a kanzu and a jacket and then added what we called the safari suit. This was mainly to take care of the environment of the tropics because you might have seen that many of the people - like the other day when we had a bit of a problem with air conditioning, a Member had to move that we change the rules so that we could remove our jackets and feel free.

Our old leaders in the Pan African Movement such as Nkrumah, Kaunda, Nyerere, Mobutu and Mandela tried to resist what looked like a colonial character and identity of colonialism on the Africans, which was to tie their necks, make them buy their suits from Europe permanently up to today, and keep them tied when they are free men. How can a free man be tied? So, we added a safari suit; in the description, you do not even have the detail like you have in the other suit. 

A safari suit - for your own information because many people have been missing enjoying the fresh air – is a suit; the word is “suit”. Some Members were putting on bitenge and it was because it was not matching. As long as it is dignified, it is matching, it blends very well, - the top and trouser - and is decent, like I have been for the last many years –(Laughter)- to the extent that even now in Kenya they are more of my customers than Ugandans because even the Kenyans had to change their rules.

In Israel, they go in short sleeved shirts and in many other parliaments such as Brazil and Australia, I did not find them tied to the tie. I want to inform you that for the male Members, feel free; if you do know where to get the best designs, I can give you information and guide you.

About the attire; my constituency is UPDF and in 69(d) it refers to military attire for the armed forces. It explains military attire. We have three types of dress; we have what we call ceremonial dress, work dress and then combat. I would like to inform you to feel free with whichever.

In 1986 when we came to Parliament, one Member of Parliament spent six months without greeting me because I was always in combat. It was after six months that she said “I have watched you and I can now greet you.” She said that in her life she had promised never to greet a soldier in combat. Now, I am bringing that up to say that the reason we are in this Parliament is actually to relax all of you civilians about the military combat. The armed forces have no problem and they are not a threat to anybody. They are just citizens like you. Most of the military attire is dignified. I would like to relax your mind that whether we come in combat, work dress or ceremonial - feel free because it is as described in (d).

5.13
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and congratulations to you. I am seeking your clarification and guidance on rule 144, which states that, “The chairperson of the committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.” When you read rules 144 and 146(1), in my view there is a contradiction because rule 146(1) states, “Where the President’s nominee is not approved by the committee, the President may appeal to the House to take a decision on the matter.”

My concern is that under rule 144 the House is not allowed to debate but under rule 146, the President may appeal to the House to take a decision on the matter. I need clarification on these two rules. 

5.14
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): My concern is on rule 134(2), “In the selection of the Members...” I want to underline where it says that they shall be designated through the Whips, which some of us have done by filling in forms for both the sessional and standing committees. While filling in these forms, however, we had not got access to this book to understand what is involved in each committee, so some of us could have just filled in to be on a committee. Now we have seen another clause which says that parties may withdraw; can Members also withdraw themselves and opt for other committees? 

We are looking at another orientation aspect. At the time of entry into the precincts, you find that the security have a big problem because of the issue of identification. Is there any promise of clear identification of the Members of Parliament? Some of us are new and we change attire so that we cannot be easily identified. So, how can we solve the issue of identification at the entrance so that we can share a smile with the gate keepers?

THE SPEAKER: Let me answer you on the issue of identities. When you took oath, all these requirements were in your bags; one of the reasons why we want you to register is to get your details and your photographs and the directory will be at the gate so that when you say I am from Buhweju, they can easily check and identify you. So, the sooner you finish the registration, the better. Even for the other “rain” which the Member talked about, it is important that you register. 

5.17
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): I am drawing the attention of the House to rules 70 and 71. Under rule 70, I am interested in (b) and (c). Sub rule (b) says that “...no member shall cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily”. Sub rule (c) says, “...while a member is speaking, all the other members shall be silent and shall not make unseemly interruptions.” These somehow look closed statements. My concern is, who interprets or qualifies unnecessary movements and unseemly interruptions and how does that person do it? 

Related to that, one honourable member mentioned that the rules are laid down but the enforcement seems to be a little silent, so it does not adequately bring out the whole package. I am saying this because at the moment we are few but when this House is full, even our breath alone has the potential of making noise. If you add a word from my mouth, then it is worse. So, we need to be very clear on enforcing the discipline that we are stipulating under this rule. A number of times people are saying something, others are in conversation and others are booing and, Madam Speaker, you are not capturing that and maybe the Sergeant-at-Arms is also missing on that and yet somebody is hindered from completely and competently presenting his or her view. So, can we see ways of mutually improving on that? 

The other bit is still on rule 70(g) - “...no member shall bring into the House any camera, arms or weapon, tape recorder, transistor radio, mobile telephone or other electronic device.” Earlier in the day, Madam Speaker, you advised us to switch off our phones meaning that either you recognised their existence here or you wanted us to first go through the rules so that we apply them later. However, if we are to apply them, who ensures that my phone does not come with me into this House?

The other bit is that we acknowledge the fact that we are in a multiparty Parliament and here we have caucuses, as already talked about. Unfortunately, when I was taking my oath, I took it as, “I, Opolot Jacob Richards…” So, I was committing myself to that oath. That is why I am reading here that Members have a general duty to act in the interest of the nation as a whole and a special duty to their constituents. Now, how much is this in harmony with the interests of the caucus? How will I be able to perform that special duty to my constituents without being hindered by the caucus? Here it is clearly specified, “…special duty to their constituents….” 

Going to Appendix F, which relates to rule 71, there are provisions that are put there to do with personal conduct, where you are supposed to exercise selflessness - “Members should take decisions solely in terms of the public interest. They should not do so in order to gain financial or other material benefits for themselves, their family or their friends.” When you go to (b), on integrity, it says, “Members should not place themselves under any financial or other obligation to outside individuals or organisations that might influence them in the performance of their duties.” 

I am bringing this up in relation to what one honourable member brought up in relation to the financial institutions which are bombarding honourable members with invitations to get loans. Madam Speaker, is this not going to compromise the performance of honourable members and yet they need the money? I would imagine that by the time this provision was put in here, the Parliament by then had in mind that there could be some provision for Members of Parliament to safeguard the integrity of Parliament and protect them from influence by those other outside individuals or organisations. Is there any arrangement by Parliament to do that? I thank you.    

THE SPEAKER: I will respond briefly to what you have said under Appendix F, 3(h) on integrity. They are not looking at a situation where you borrow money but a situation where you are paid to come to this House and promote a particular issue. For instance, if a certain body has an interest in making a certain law and they pay you to come and move a Private Member’s Bill; that is the situation we are talking about. 

MR OPOLOT: I am sorry to rise up again, but if you read that provision, “Members should not place themselves under any…” 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member –

MR OPOLOT: Why I am saying this is because I imagine that Parliament has the oversight role. If you are – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opolot, I am explaining –

MR OPOLOT: I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am explaining the thinking behind these rules. You are free to take loans, and as I said we shall talk about it in the last part of this orientation. 

This provision is intended to stop you from getting money so that you can do a certain thing for that institution; so that you are paid specifically to do a certain thing for that institution, whether to pass a loan or guarantee. Somebody may want a loan or guarantee from the Government and they pay you and say that, “You go and speak for us; we give you Shs 5 million; speak for this guarantee and make sure it is passed.” That is what this rule is talking about. You will get them as we get along.

Now, I need to hear some ladies’ voices first.

5.26
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification on rule 164 on the ad hoc committees. It states, “The House may at any time, on the advise of the Business Committee, appoint an Ad Hoc Committee to investigate any matter of public importance that does not come under the jurisdiction of any Standing or Sessional Committee or that has not been dealt with by a Select Committee.”

I understand that we have got a Public Accounts Committee which is categorised as a standing committee. I wish to have further explanation on what conditions we appoint ad hoc committees.

Madam Speaker, I have noticed an element of concern; I think I am not the only person who has been bombarded with phone calls during this last weekend by people claiming to be working in Parliament. They claim they have the influence and provided we satisfy some of the financial conditions, we shall be given some of these new positions coming ahead. This is just a request; for security purposes, I think it would be better if maybe one day you introduce the staff members in Parliament to us because now the way things are moving, we have got to be very cautious on our security. I thank you very much.   

5.28
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, just this afternoon I got a call from somebody who wanted to give me a deal in which I would be able to get the recording of all the functions that were taking place from Monday to Wednesday last week in here. Unfortunately for this person –(Interjections)- of course for a fee –(Interjections)- video recordings on television and all that. 

Unfortunately for this gentleman, he had done the same last Parliament; he had conned me, but could not remember me. They have all your phone numbers – every one of us. So, he called me and I also wanted him to come because I remembered the name and the accent, but he refused to enter Parliament. This forced me to go outside to the parking. But when he saw me, he tried to run having recognised my face. It was at this time that I grabbed and handed him over to the Police. 

So, it is true that Members of Parliament are being conned. I had written a document to that effect, unfortunately, the secretariat never published it. But you are yet to receive many of such complaints.

In last Parliament, for example, a colleague of mine lost Shs 250 million. Please take note and I think the concern is genuine. In that regard, let me alert my colleagues that this business is there. We need, especially the new Members, protection.


THE SPEAKER: Okay, I am glad that you have brought out that matter – is it on the same issue? Yes, hon. Netalisire.

5.30
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I would like to say is that it is not only about the Opposition Members in this Parliament. There are so many Members who are going to be conned. For example, we are now receiving calls from people who claim to be working in State House telling us to give them a certain amount of money in order for us to be appointed ministers. And I know that some Members of Parliament have already given money to these people. (Laughter) Yes, it is a serious issue and that is why I want to say that the appointing authority is different from those gentlemen. Please, be careful. 

During our primaries, I abused someone and I was deleted off the list because they wanted Shs 5 million from me even after I had won elections in the primaries. I had to go through petitions until my form was signed on the last day of the nominations.

So, my brothers and sisters, those people do not work at State House and are not part of the appointing authority.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me first clarify that the Parliament of Uganda will issue every Member who took Oath, a recording of the proceedings of your Oath. You are not required to pay anybody. The Parliament of Uganda has funded it. So, don’t pay anybody.

Secondly, you need to know that you are very attractive to everybody. So, ensure you don’t accept calls from people who claim to be working in State House; they are just thieves. And when you get into your offices with computers, you might receive emails from somebody saying they have some US$ 2 million and that they need your help in collecting that money. They might ask for your account details and if you dare give them, they will take your money. So, please don’t respond to such. 

5.32
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to convey greetings and congratulations from the people of Kongasis County who were very happy (especially the women) upon your election as the Speaker of Parliament. 

As we do orientation on the Rules of Procedure, there are equally important issues that may not wait. In this forum, I would like to be guided on how these issues can be handled. I am saying this because, for example, I could not make it here in time because I had to spend a night in the car due to the bad roads that we have in my area. 

I know that you might have heard of the Kapchorwa-Swamu Road. On my way, I got about 12 vehicles stuck on the road. So, my car could not pass. I had to spend the night there. Now that we are still doing orientation, and with Government still sorting itself out, I thought I should bring this issue to your attention so that you can advise on how to take care of that situation.

In my constituency, there is still a fundamental right that is not being respected in regard to my people. For example, there are quite many people who continue to lose their livestock at the hands of the wrong people from a neighbouring country. Just on Thursday, I lost three herds of cattle which have not been recovered to date. Those are some of these things that are so pressing. I just wanted to let you know that much as we are here to be orientated, there are problems in some of our places. I hope those issues will be channelled.

Finally, while I was struggling to get here in time, I got a message that the House was supposed to meet at 10.00 O’clock instead of 2.30 p.m. of today. In that regard, I also would like to be informed on the method of conveying information to the Members of Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wouldn’t like you to delve into the issues of your welfare. In my acceptance speech, I was diplomatic and I said that we anticipated your arrival and were handling your welfare. We do not want the issue of welfare to be brought here. If we have to talk about it, we shall have a closed session in order to brief you. Otherwise, this is not the time for it. So, just trust us. We are going to handle all those issues you are talking about.

5.35
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I rise on two issues in reference to rule 144, which my honourable colleague raised. My clarification is: When the Eighth Parliament made these rules, it appears there were fears that were raised. That is why this rule was subjected to no debate when appointments are made. Can I humbly request the Chair to tell us some of the fears that were raised then, so that when it comes to the time of amending these rules we do not bring out issues that were already discussed? For example, in here it reads as follows: “The chairperson of the committee shall report to the House any appointment approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate.”

A statement was made by one of the profound American Presidents, John F. Kennedy, that one thing that you would fear is fear itself. So, if there are fears, we need to know them.

On Rule 96 about the Members’ leave of absence, I do recall that in the morning you guided Members who raised issues about this. For example, you said that if a Member went upcountry, such a Member is not supposed to overlap the working days – Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.

Now, given a situation in which some of us operate from 500 miles away from Kampala with roads that are not tarmacked already messed up with the rains, which may cause a Member to get stuck on the way – in reference to rule 96, which says that application for leave of absence shall be in writing. I seek to be advised if there is any other humble way I can communicate to the Speaker or the Chief Whip, for example, through the telephone, about my absence.

Lastly, looking at the Order Paper, I notice that the business for today is: Prayers, Communication from the Chair, Orientation of Members and Adjournment. I don’t understand the limitation of orientation of Members of Parliament. I thought that Members would come here to listen to these rules and determine if there is need for amendment, in which a committee should have been put in place. I am saying this because I recognise the fact that Members are raising profound issues that would have been captured for response. Now that Members are only here for general discussion, who is capturing the key issues that Members are raising? I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at the end of this week, you will receive a copy of the Hansard of these proceedings. You will then read and make use of the extracts you find essential. So, it is not true that we are not recording.

And about notifying the Speaker, if you are stuck somewhere, really you can telephone me and let me know that you have got a problem and you will not be able to arrive in time.

5.40
MS JUDITH MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to congratulate you so much and thank God for having prepared you for this task. I also congratulate my colleagues, honourable members of Parliament, for having met here in this august House.

I am known to be a voice of Pallisa District. I do not want to bury my fears, but to express them here. I have heard and I have read about how the Appointments Committee shall be working, but when we were filling the forms there, it was stated, “First come, first served”.

So, my worry is, supposing the people to register first to be on the Appointments Committee fall in one region, they may work in a biased way and that will not help the nation. People of Pallisa for a long time and during my campaigns were telling me that this time round, they should benefit from the national cake. I, therefore, urge you Members who are going to be on the Appointments Committee -

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Allow her to express her views.

MS AMOIT: Thank you for the protection, Madam Speaker. As they are executing their duties they should value and look at the economic imbalances in the country and put Eastern or Pallisa as a priority because for a long time there are shortcomings we have realised. 

Recently, during the recruitment of Police cadets - I will request that the committee does not only end at appointing the bigwigs in Government, but also to foresee the activities out there. In Pallisa District, we did not even realise one cadet. It is very unfortunate! So, this time round, it is my prayer that we shall all work together co-operatively to see that we all benefit from the people who are going to be appointed. Thank you very much.

5.42
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is on rule 12(2), which talks about Pan-African Parliament. According to what other Members have been submitting, I believe this is the first session and according to that rule, the election of the Pan-African Parliament shall take place in the first session. I have been thinking about it and I got worried that could these people have put the Members there already. When you realise the way people have been submitting, it is as if some things have been done and we are not all aware. You may find that some Members are interested and so I would like to know; we may be behind schedule; that is my worry.

Then another issue is that we heard rumours that the offices here may not accommodate all of us, so there is a likelihood of having offices outside this Parliament. Some new Members whom we have been sharing with are of the view that, at least offices of new Members should be here, except if they do not want, but we should be given the first priority of having our offices here. Our old colleagues can go outside. So, Madam Speaker, help us put that into consideration and it will help us so much. 

I also want to add a voice to that of the Members who talked about the committees. Madam Speaker, do not worry about us. Our people elected us knowing that we are competent enough and we can also chair these committees. I am happy with hon. Dombo. There is a submission he responded to and he said that we learn slowly. We do not come here and learn all these rules at the same time. So, I realised that there are even Members who have been here but do not know everything meaning that if I become serious I can know much more than them. I would beg you, Madam Speaker, that when you are looking for those committee chairpersons and even ministers, do not leave the new Members out.

THE SPEAKER: I informed you that the issues of your welfare shall be addressed towards the end of this orientation, but I want to allay your fears that the session is a parliamentary year. It started on the 19th May and it will end in June next year so nothing is being done behind your back. The session has just began. We run the first session up to June when we start a new one. So, do not worry, hon. Karungi, nothing will happen without your knowledge.

5.47
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want some clarification on rule 70 about behaviour of Members in this House. These books were given to us immediately after our swearing-in and we took some trouble to read them, and there is something about clapping in the House when you go to (h): “No Member shall clap in the House”, but people are clapping. I do not why? (Laughter)

I want to talk about rule 74; order in the House and committees. In the morning, hon. Peter Nyombi talked about people repeating things and I think, this is possibly one of the reasons why we are spending a lot of time here repeating so many things. Because somebody comes up, first introduces himself or herself, 10 minutes are gone and then we end up losing a lot of time. I think honourable Members of Parliament, we must be very topical and hit the point.

Lastly, I want to talk about the appendix on Members of the East African Parliament. We have seen a big number of people campaigning to be Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and we are talking about tenures: 

“Subject to the treaty, an elected Member of the Assembly shall hold office for a period of five years and be eligible for re-election for a further term of five years”. 

However, we are seeing some Members who have been there two times still campaigning. Is there any provision for this thing to be changed so that they can just run for the third term? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will answer the others, but on the question of the introductions, honourable members, this is an opportunity for the Speaker to know you and also identify your constituency. So, it is important you tell me your name and your constituency. We really cannot run away from that; so that I can be able to identify you. 

5.49
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, there was an Independent Member who thought she was not invited to the meeting because she is an Independent. Even me who belongs to NRM, up to now, I have not yet received an SMS inviting me for the meeting beginning at 10.00 a.m. So, I am rising up on rule 15 - many Members have said something on this rule - on time management and changes of schedules of meetings. 

Madam Speaker, I know you are the custodian of meetings in this Parliament. I want to add my voice to the other people and also to let you know that we have a lot of trust in you as our Speaker. In fact, the public out there are saying we are a very big Parliament and we might fail. We should not begin failing this early through poor time management. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my view is that you investigate where the problem arose; this lack of flow of information for today’s sitting. We were supposed to sit at 2.30 p.m. and a decision was taken to meet at 10.00 a.m. yet there was a breakdown in the communication. 

I pray that your chair investigates the cause of that and you take a remedy on it so that in future we do not get such problems. But also, the medium of communication - I was told by my colleague that we would have a sitting, and the colleague heard it from Radio Simba. I wonder how you can communicate a message for 375 people to 32 million people over the radio. Therefore, my humble request is that you investigate to avoid future problems.

THE SPEAKER: Now, on communication, Parliament does use the media to communicate and I understand the Clerk put out announcements. I do not know to which particular radios. But admittedly there was a failing and we shall correct it; we shall use both the media and the other message. As soon as you complete the registration, we shall have you on the Internet. 

5.52
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): I seek to be guided, Madam Speaker. Whereas rule 32 specified 12 standing committees, and Rule 159 also specifies 13 committees categorised as sessional committees, rule 135 states: “Committees shall comprise of 20 Members selected in accordance with the rules”. 

Madam Speaker, unless rule 135 is subsided, I am afraid these committees can only accommodate up to 260 Members for sessional committees and only 240 for the standing committees. What is going to happen to the over 100 remaining Members. I am very sure we cannot have 100 ministers; so what is going to happen in case all these Members are not absorbed on these committees?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to allay your fear; every Member will be accommodated. And I have informed you that we shall have a session where we shall compose the membership of the committees and everybody will be taken care of except the Members of Cabinet. Do not worry, everybody will be accommodated.

5.55
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): My concern is on rule 59, which talks about the content of speeches. It is unfortunate that when we were here for elections, there are certain words I heard about some Members of Parliament and I was sickened; and I imagined that was the state of affairs here. I beg to be corrected if I am wrong. When one of us was going to vote, certain words were hauled at him. People were saying: “Thief, thug...”. That really perturbed me and I wondered whether that is the type of language that we use in Parliament. I thought that was the order of the day; but when I look at Rule 59, I realise that it is quite absurd for Members in this august House to use such language. 

If there is a problem out there, then we can solve it amicably following the right rules. And in Appendix F - Rule 71, Code of Conduct – I have read the Code of Conduct, but there are certain things which we need to know. For example, when we go out there, some of us have been in the villages, and have not be used to town. We do not know which places to go to; we do not know how to conduct ourselves in certain places. For example, I had gone to shop somewhere, and my sister told me Members of Parliament should not go to such places. 

So, some of us should be orientated on the places we may go to because we may land in wrong places. So, with the help of the House, I request to be guided to know where we may go or not go.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Galiwango has raised some very important points. One, I want to assure the Members of the House that this is only the beginning of the orientation. We shall have several workshops, we shall have other inductions and we shall have seminars where we shall continue updating you on the issues. Today we wanted to focus on the rules. 

Now, about the language in the House, that is one of the occasions where you Members can rise on a point of order and say, “Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to refer to the other one as a thief?” Then I would make a ruling and then it would stop. But that was a special session. The Chief Justice is not a Member of this House and I do not think he wanted to create a scene during that exercise. 

But when we get to day-to-day business, you will be able to rise on a point of order and stop that type of language.

5.59
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I rise to seek clarification on only two issues: One is rule 70 of the Rules of Procedure, which talks about the behaviour of Members in the House. It states: “All Members shall enter or leave the House with decorum; no Member shall cross the Floor anyhow”. But it did not put in place a provision for Members who have health problems. The Rules of Procedure have not covered the part where a Member either has diabetes or any other problem which needs going out for either a call or whichever thing that will require him to go out.

Then, the way I have seen the discussions here in Parliament, there is no respect for one’s issue because a Member can be talking and other Members are rising up and giving points of order, procedure, or voice –(Laughter)- I wanted clarification. Which law takes precedence over which? When point of order is given, is it automatic or it is upon the Member to accept it or not? If it is point of procedure, how many laws are there that take precedence? We want a clarification about which points are mandatory so that whenever they rise, a Member is supposed to sit down and those ones where it is upon the Member to allow or not.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me clarify the issue of walking around. We are not in the main Chamber. If we were in the main Chamber, you would understand that rule. You are not supposed, let us say, to come from the Opposition side to go and whisper to the minister while we are in session then go back and talk to the Leader of the Opposition; that kind of disorganised movement. If you want to send a message to a colleague, you call the stewards, that man in white; you give him a note and he will take it to the other person and that person will respond. That is the kind of movement which is not allowed within the Chamber; disorganised movement. If you want to send a message, look for that man, he will take it and you get a response. You do not go there to say, “Owange, what about this evening?” No, you do not do that. 

On that point also, the mandatory one where you must sit down is a point of order or a point of procedure. For the point of information, if you want to take it, you may sit down or you may reject it. Even information, you may sit down, accept it or reject it. You have a choice. But order and procedure, you have to sit down.

But as I said, we are in the learning process. I hope that when we get into the real nitty-gritty of the work, you will know which one takes precedence.

MR OKUPA: The honourable member was raising the issue that the Chamber does not make a provision for – she quoted the issue of ill-health or diabetes. I think in the main Chamber, there are four entrances; two on the side of the Government and two on the other side of the Opposition. If you have a problem, you use those access points freely. If you want to go and help yourself, if it is a medical problem, you can get out through those four points. There is only one which is meant for the Speaker when entering the House. You can also use that one when the Speaker is leaving the House. It is not true that they have not made a provision for evacuation, or any emergency. If you just want to get out for a short call or you are called out, you can use those. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe in so doing, you stand up, bow to the Speaker, so that I know that you are getting out then leave quietly. 

Hon. Members, even here, you do not have to go to the other side. There are facilities behind here. If you want to wash your hands, they are just here. You do not have to go to the other side of the Chamber.

6.04
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to offer this free information in regard to the concern raised by the honourable member from Fort Portal Municipality. 

The honourable member is wondering, how do I reconcile my freedom which is given to me by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to speak and debate freely and the party position, which might not be something I agree with? I know this is not a party caucus, but I thought since it is just for orientation, we could also benefit from it. 

First of all, I do not think there is somebody called a rebel MP. There is no rebel MP in Parliament; but there can be dissenting views in party caucuses. You can dissent from party positions in party caucuses. Even when you dissent from party positions, this is a new system we have been developing and Members on your right side will be informed of what we have – in subsequent conferences and orientations – on what we have been trying to do in terms of having procedures on how you can dissent from party positions. 

First, in the different caucuses, you have the freedom to debate as you have heard before and agree on a position. If you want to dissent from that position, there is a provision where you write to the Government Chief Whip and say because of reason one, two and three, I am not going to support my party position in Parliament. For example, you want a district in your constituency, but for one reason or the other, Government does not want it. If you go ahead and support the party position in Parliament, you are likely to lose during the next election. So, you go to the Government Chief Whip and say, “Because of this reason, I will not support the party position.” The Government Chief Whip should be able to allow you to work with the Leader of Business in the House or if it is a matter of conscience, corruption cases and all these you should be able to say, “You took a decision as a party, but because of this, my conscience is not clear. Government Chief Whip, I want you to allow me to oppose the position of my party when it comes to the Floor of the House.”
 
This is one of the things we do in caucuses. I think there is no contradiction. You should not get worried that you will not divert from the party position. You will do it, but ideally, you should be able to inform the Chief Whip.

In the Rules of Procedure which we will be adopting for the caucus, there is what we call the Three-line Whipping Mechanism. There is one line where it is absolutely important for any party member to support the position of the party. For example, the NRM is the party in power at the moment. If you are a Member of the NRM party and you are opposed to approval of the budget or national security for that reason, that becomes very important for the party. But there should be other issues where Members should be allowed to debate freely and vote freely. 

So, there are those procedures that will be approved as we move forward. In the Eighth Parliament, we had developed them; but they remained a draft. We have not approved them. You are lucky you will have the opportunity to approve them in this Parliament.

Then a colleague said that he had been called by different people that he will be put on committees when he pays something - I want to assure Members that the responsibility of designating Members is a responsibility of Parliament, but also working through the party whips. And for the five years I have been on the executive of the caucus we have used a number of criteria for you to be on the committee.

The first criterion which is very important is your interest. We do not put you on a committee in which you are not interested. The other criterion which is important is availability of space on that committee because as you realise, we are 375 and maybe on the committee the number of NRM could be 25 or 30 Members. So, if the committee is over-subscribed still in that situation we consult you before we put you on another committee. Therefore, you should be comfortable that you will go on a committee, most likely a committee that you have interest in. I thank you.

6.11
MS FLAVIA NABUGERE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you on the landmark achievement of leading this august House. I also want to congratulate all of you on your achievement. 

I have a comment on Appendix G, Rule 8(4) which talks about advertising. It says: “No extracts of parliamentary proceedings may be used in any form of advertising, promotion or other form of publicity, except in the form of trailers for programmes which use extracts within the requirements of these rules and where the trailers also comply with those requirements.”

When we see words like “trailers” we understand them differently and so I need clarification and guidance on what the meaning of “trailers” might be. Thank you. 

6.12
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification on the dress code, that is, rule 69. Rule 69 talks about the suits and the traditional clothes, but there is some dress it is not talking about. I am seeking clarification on some of that dress code some people put on and you get uncomfortable when you sit near the person. It is the dress code that is not seen, but is also part of the dress code that a Member of Parliament must put on -[Hon. Members: “Which one?”]- But people put on what is called under pants. People put on bras. People put on socks and at times this rule does not specify what type of dress code that is. (Laughter) At times our weather is not good and that kind of dress code some people put on causes discomfort to other Members. So, what rule shall we use to dispense that? If I sit near someone and maybe the dress code is not seen but I can know it from the smell, what do I do and yet this is an honourable Member of Parliament? 

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me it has happened before and it happens, and it is something that we should not keep quiet about. And this is orientation that we as Members must know what to do about. What happens if that kind of dress code is nearby? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabasharira, on matters which are not provided for, the Speaker rules. But if it is that kind of uncomfortable dress code, you will send a note to the Speaker and the Speaker will address the person quietly because these are televised proceedings and we do not want the voters to hear that that other dress was not appropriate. (Laughter)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank you. These rules are there to help streamline our discipline maybe inside here, but extensively also outside, and we are not robots or machines. It is not a bad idea to find a colleague and take that colleague away or in a certain corner and talk to that colleague as a matter of courtesy. You do not need to write to the Speaker over that because it is possible many times we wear ties and the collar gets turned up. You write a note or you tell a colleague, “Please, arrange yourself properly.” So, let us not think that everything is going to be in the rules, and if it is outside the rules you do the opposite. That is what I wanted to add. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Did hon. Amuriat want to add - that is what you wanted to say? Okay. Thank you. You know we are friends here so we can tell each other.

6.16
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My name is Stephen Tashobya, Member of Parliament for Kajara County. I have been chairing the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of the Eighth Parliament.

I wanted to raise one matter for the benefit of the people who are going to chair and officiate on committees, that is in respect of outstanding work. Madam Speaker, as you are aware, in my committee we had some Bills like the Marriage and Divorce Bill, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill and others, some of which Parliament had started debating and others it had not. You guided me, and I agree that there is no rule to the effect that the pending work in the committees would lapse with the previous Parliament. The guidance I am seeking from you is what procedure will be used to bring this business in Parliament?

I am asking this because, for example, the membership of committees is going to change. The reports we had made in respect of those Bills were signed by members of the committees and now the committee membership is changing. I would like to be guided as to how this business is going to be brought up because it is very important. As you are aware, we put in a lot of time, for example, for the Marriage and Divorce Bill, and it was unfortunate that it was not considered by Parliament. 

In the same vein, there is also the matter of reports from the previous committees. For example, on the committees that I used to sit, we had a number of reports like the Auditor-General’s reports and the reports emanating from committees in respect of those reports. Just before we closed, some chairpersons laid on Table the reports from those committees, but those reports were not debated by Parliament. So, Madam Speaker, I need your guidance. Since they were not debated and since Parliament did not pronounce itself on those reports, do we take them as having been adopted and take their recommendations as recommendations of Parliament? I am raising this, for example, because some of the reports are very big. To what benefit are they going to be to the committees which are coming? Or rather can we take them, having been laid on Table in the previous Parliament, as recommendations of Parliament? Or they can be used persuasively by the incoming committees. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I discussed with you before the Eighth Parliament ended, there is no actual law which requires us to lapse business. And also the gap between the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments is about 12 hours. So, I will be expecting you to move a motion – you come and we put you on the Order Paper – even if you are not on the committee - to revive that business and we shall make a ruling on it and it will come back.

6.20
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you were talking about maternity leave - I beg to know a little bit more because I am a victim of circumstances – you talked about men being entitled to four days of paternity leave, but you were not specific about the women, especially those who deliver by caesarean. Do they have the same number of days as those who deliver normally? 

Then about the sessional and standing committees, after the specific period, do I have the right to cross to another committee or do I have to continue serving on the previous one where I used to serve? When you were briefing us about the other committees, you said some of them are headed by the Opposition Members. You mentioned some of them like PAC and others, but you did not give us the explanation. But as a new Member, is it possible to get an explanation why some committees are chaired by the Opposition while others by Members of the ruling party?

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of maternity leave, you are entitled to 60 days and if you require more, you ask the Speaker and you will be given more days. The four days are if the father of the baby is a Member of the House or a member of staff. 

Hon. Kiyingi will answer the other questions. But maybe we could ask him to answer today or – should we finish all of them? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] Okay let us receive them then he will answer.

6.23
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I would like to congratulate you upon your victory. My concern here is on Rule 133(d), whereby it shows the functions of the committees as being, “To carry out relevant research in their respective fields.” I want to be clarified when a committee digresses and deals with issues which are not within their jurisdiction. For example, you find the PAC deliberating on land issues, for example, that a lawful occupant should be evicted. This we had in the Eighth Parliament; will such a decision have a legal implication because they have not researched and do not know how those lawful occupants were given that land? 

6.24
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to those who are congratulating you because it is important. We are proud of you. I am aware that we are not debating these rules, but rather familiarising ourselves with them, but I have a concern over rule 125 on the delay of Bills, which hon. Tashobya commented on a moment ago. Various parliaments have come to be judged both on the number and quality of Bills that are passed into law. There is an outcry out there resulting from reports that there are 17 Bills which had been tabled before the Eighth Parliament, but were not considered at all. When I look at the procedure in rule 125, I do not see how it will help us to act much faster than the Eighth Parliament did. So, I invite my colleagues to look at this rule with a view to amending it by making specific provisions that will help us to be more effective. 

Madam Speaker, in the strategies that you are going to lay down to help us perform more effectively, I think it will also be important for you to look at this rule and see how you can help us pass more Bills than other parliaments have done.

I wish to comment on the issue of the Army sitting on the Government side and as hon. Kiyingi said, it is important that the Army pays total allegiance to the government in power; we cannot have an Army that is divided. So, it is very important that the Army sits on the Government side. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of information pursuant to the contents of the Constitution, Article 208. I was about to answer hon. Kiyingi, so let me combine the two. Reference to the contents of Article 78 does not provide a cure to the anomaly created by the UPDF sitting on the Government side because UPDF is not in the House due to affirmative action. For that matter, under Article 208(2): “The Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be nonpartisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority.” The civilian authority includes the Opposition. Therefore, they should sit with five on the Government side and the remaining five on the Opposition side. Until I bring an appropriate motion to allay the fears of people in this House, hon. Kiyingi should not talk the way he talked. But I am about to introduce that motion to provide a cure. Thank you.

6.29
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the Members to congratulate you for having been elevated to that very important seat. We wish you the best and we shall give you our cooperation.

I want clarification on two points. One is on the issue of representation in the East African Legislative Assembly and the Pan African Parliament. 

Whereas it is clear for representation in the East African Legislative Assembly that the people who are selected or elected are outside this Parliament, those representing Uganda in the Pan African Parliament are part and parcel of this Parliament. My concern or the clarification I want to get is what are the type of remunerations for the people or Members who represent us in the Pan African Parliament? Do they get double payment or they live on the payment that they get from the Parliament of Uganda? 

Secondly, it is here in Africa that the writings of the Bible are fulfilled: “For those who have, more is added to them”. Normally when I visit in the countryside, it is common for the poor man to give me a goat or chicken. My question is, are Members of Parliament allowed to get a gift because I don’t want to be caught up by a group giving me a gift when in reality they may be compromising my membership to the Parliament. I beg to stop here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi will answer the other issues, but on the issue of gifts, you are allowed to receive a gift so long as it is not beyond US$ 100. If it is beyond that you declare it to the IGG.

6.32
MR GREGORY MATOVU (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Bukanga congratulate you and I congratulate you too.

I have observed that all Members of Parliament wish to speak and ask questions and obviously they would want them answered timely.

I would like to make an observation on Part VII and rule 31. We are talking about questions to ministers and other Members. When you go to (3) it states, “A minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.” 

All things remaining equal, it means that he will be efficient. Now, there are so many other questions, rota of questions, subject matter of questions and notice of urgent questions among others. And when you go to (2), notice should be given of at least three days to the Office of the Clerk. It then goes through a process, up to page 56, where the questions are recorded so that they can be admitted or not admitted. According to rule 37, there are conditions for admissibility of questions. 

My surprise is that there is no time limit for those questions to be answered or not to be answered, to be admitted or not to be admitted. 

When it comes to 36, “Order of oral questions to be determined by lot”, still, there is no time limit. I wish to observe that when a Member asks a question, time is very important. It can redeem a situation or render that question irrelevant. If it delays, what can we do, especially now when we are making new Rules of Procedure, especially on the time limit for admissibility or to be thrown out, as it were. 

Rule 36 states, “The question for oral answer will be determined by lot under the direction of the Speaker.” If the question that you get is one, do you still throw it on a lot or do you bring it on board? If they are two or three, do they require a lot? It only pre-supposes that there will be a lot of questions. But supposing for that particular sitting or week, there are only three or four questions, how quickly can you bring them on board?

I wish to stop here, and to thank you for the stamina you have shown today by not relenting, but keeping on answering our questions. Thank you.

6.36
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for clarification on rule 30, which talks about presentation of reports of parliamentary delegations abroad. What happens in a case where some Members of Parliament are assigned duties in some districts? For example, in 2009, you came to Amudat District with some Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa, and Moroto. Now, if such a team is sent to a district, which is not theirs, I would imagine that such Members, under their team leader, have an obligation to make a report because there are pertinent issues that they come across while on the ground. I would imagine that they would also make a report which could reinforce whatever the Member of Parliament from that constituency or district has been submitting. 

I also wish to add my voice to what the honourable Member of Parliament for Moroto Municipality raised under rule 96; leave of absence. Apart from hard-to-reach areas, where I also happen to come from, there are certain circumstances which cannot allow you to pick a pen and seek for permission from the Speaker. For example, I could be a breastfeeding mother and my baby could be sick and on drip, I cannot have the mind to think of writing. Is it in order for me to make a call to the Speaker or the Clerk or Whip? Thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: I had answered hon. Aleper that if you are not in position to write, you could always ring either the Speaker or the Clerk. You could also use the Police to send me a message that you have a problem. But the other areas will be answered.
 
6.39
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek clarification on two issues: One, on the maiden speech. When are we supposed to make a maiden speech? Or can I assume that what we are doing is making our maiden speeches? 

THE SPEAKER: Not yet. I will let you know when. 

MR MBAHIMBA: Two, there are some special committees which Opposition Members have to mandatorily chair and yet you told us that this is a requirement of the Commonwealth standards. I see this as a contradiction. In Appendix F(3) “Personal Conduct” for Members of Parliament; it is stated that every Member of Parliament is accountable for the decisions taken. They are accountable to their electorate and the public. I see that these Rules of Procedure deprive me from the privilege of chairing such a committee and yet I am accountable to the public and to my electorate. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.41
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking you and the people who voted you, especially the Members of Parliament, into that position. And I think you deserve it because of the very many things that you have done for this country, more so in the previous parliaments. 

My concern is on rule 13, which talks about the whips. 13(1) says, “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip appointed by the Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.” And (4) states, “There shall be in Parliament a Chief Opposition Whip appointed by the party in Opposition to the government and having the greatest numerical strength among the Opposition parties in Parliament.” Now, why aren’t the Independents allowed to elect their own whip? (Laughter)  I am not independent; I belong to the NRM party, but as a matter of parliamentary democracy, I think that it would have been important for these people to be given the opportunity to elect their own whip until such a time when they choose to have a Memorandum of Understanding with any one of the parties that is in this House. 

Two, I would like to know from you who is going to supply lists of Members who are to serve on the standing and sessional committees, especially for the Independents?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Awongo. 

6.44
MS BARBARA NEKESA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would actually not waste any second but join the other Members to congratulate you. I would like to pronounce that the people of Busia and myself are indeed very proud of you. 

I would like to seek your guidance on a matter relating to your authority in this House. In my opinion, I understand that the beautiful instrument laid before you, the Mace, is a symbol of authority in your office. What I would like to find out is what would happen if a time came when this House was debating a very controversial issue and a Member from either side grabbed it and ran away with it? 

THE SPEAKER: The House would have to adjourn immediately. We cannot transact business without the Mace. (Laughter) That is how important it is.
 
6.45
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, I would like to echo the voice of the people of Arua Municipality and my own to congratulate you. 

I just have one issue here regarding the committees, that is rule 142(5), but let us start from sub-section (3) which says: “Every decision of the committee shall be by open vote.” (4) states, “The candidate shall be taken approved provided the votes cast in favour of that candidate constitute a simple majority of Members present and voting.” (5) states, “If the votes are equal, the candidates shall not be taken to be approved,” When did 50 percent constitute a pass or a failure notwithstanding the fact that (7) gives the candidate an opportunity to be able to present himself to the committee if there are any matters that the Members who did not vote for him may wish to clarify on? 

One would have expected that there would have been a process just like in any other democracy where if there is a 50-50 vote, there has to be a remedy to try to address it instead of saying, “No, 50 percent or equal vote means you have not passed.” Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to put a close to it so that our presenter can start organising himself.  Clerk, please note the names of the Members who want to contribute. 

6.47
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you. You deserve that position and we are very proud of you. 

I would like to draw the attention of the Members to rule 203 that is regarding Members of Parliament with disability. It is very clearly written that our assistants are allowed to step on that red carpet, but one caution is that they must be very smart. Please, when you see my guide not smart, let me know so that I can warn her and maybe send her away.  So, all the others must be equally very smart because you are now Members of Parliament on the red carpet.

Secondly, the gadget, which we come with – our clutches, white cane - were at first considered as weapons. I remember in the 6th Parliament they carried away the ones of late Mazima because they thought they were weapons. Because our Parliament is considerate, we have considered them and they can come in. Please Members of Parliament when you are angry do not grab it for fighting somebody. It is for our movement not for fighting. There are certain rules which are not written and I would want the Members to be aware of them. 

We as persons with disability, we chose specific places for sitting in, for example, hon. Alex Ndeezi must sit in a certain place so that when you see him do not take that place. And even hon. William Nokrach, he cannot fold his legs so he has his own position. The same applies to me, if I have chosen my place, when I am coming please leave that seat. There is no way I can go somewhere else. Those are not written rules but consider them.

When people are standing in the House, it takes time for us with disabilities to stand up so, Madam Speaker, first wait for all of us to stand up because you may leave us out when we are still struggling with our clutches to stand. For me when people keep quiet I think that maybe they are still talking when actually they have finished. So, give us time. That is on your side.

Outside, we have some parking places for Members of Parliament with disability. In the 8th Parliament, I was very disappointed about the South Wing. Every time I would come I would find a vehicle in the middle of my parking when it is clearly labelled “No parking”. At times I wonder whether I see more than the people with eyes. So, please, when parking is labelled, “For people with disability” please leave it. There is only one slot in the North Wing which is on first come first serve basis.

We are calling upon the Speaker to get each one of us a place in the new parking that is being developed so that we do not roam around looking for where to park.

I would like to inform other Members that in case you have invisible disability - some people may be partially deaf but do not want to accept. Some may be having a problem of sight; some may have terrible limping, but because they have come through direct constituency, they do not want to be regarded as disabled. Please come out and go to the Speaker; you can be assisted with some gadgets, if need be. That is my call to all of you, and disability can come anytime. In case you have become disabled, go to the Speaker, she will give you all the assistance as she has done for us.

It is true that when we start our Parliament, we start very late; the Speaker waits for us to come for about an hour. I would want us as the 9th Parliament to keep time and finish work on time. The other issue is that you should allocate time right from the start of the debate because most times I have seen a tendency to allocate it towards the end when we have wasted so much time. If it is five or ten minutes let it be right from the beginning so that we do not waste a lot of time.

When it comes to ending, our rules say we should end at 7.00 p.m. It is now past 7.00 and we are here. So, please let us keep time. When we are tired, we should not overstay here because some of these young ones have husbands; they have children to attend to. So, let us also keep time both at the beginning and at the end. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We are trying to just receive the views of the Members and then we close. We are not going to answer today.

6.47 
MR VICENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): We have been warned not to waste time in congratulating, but it does a lot of good to my people to congratulate you on their behalf. When I went back after your election, everybody was thanking me for electing you. I do not know whether the cameras showed me voting you, but everybody said that.
 
Many things have been said about regulations, but when you read them you see that we understand them in relation to other books, including the Constitution. Somewhere they mentioned the Parliamentary Act. We did not get the Parliamentary Act. I do not know whether we can get that one tomorrow, but it is referred to.

I want to know whether we have a library and how it is accessed. One may get all the information through the Internet. If we want to go to other institutions, do we go through you, Madam Speaker? 

6.54
MR KENNETH OMOMA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): I rise to seek clarification on two issues. I am not a schooled lawyer but let me quote what some judge once said, “I can see guilt but I cannot point to it”. This book is for the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it will help us in determining the quality of performance and debate here. Complaints have been raised about how much time we waste repeating the same thing. Like that judge said, I see another book that is causing a lot of anxiety among us; it is not seen, but it has caused a lot of anxiety; probably it is also the cause of stampede to talk. Everyone wants to say something whether they are repeating an issue but to make sure that he/she is seen saying something. This is the issue of the Parliamentary Score Card. I am sorry if this is deviating from what is on the Order Paper, but since it is orientation of Members, I would think that you let Members know or help to allay their anxiety as far as the Score Card is concerned so that Members debate in a relaxed mood.

Secondly, like we met in the morning and we were told that we still have acting ministers; I want to seek clarification from you, Madam Speaker, that in this situation like we are now, I would take it that we are in some form of a transition period. If we have some urgent issues of national interest that maybe a particular ministry or minister has to make some statement so that the Members of Parliament get to know, for example, if a disaster strikes or we now have Ebola in Luweero, how do honourable members get to know such very important matters of state? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we need to close now so that Members can go home. 

I want to take note of the Members who want to contribute: I saw hon. Ninsiima, hon. Mwesigye of Nyabushozi. Hon. Ssimbwa of Makindye, hon. Olanya, hon. Olivia Kabaale, Dr Lokii, hon. Bugembe, hon. Chemutai from Kapchorwa, Bukooli Islands, hon. Mubanda from Masaka, hon. Ssali Baker, hon. Sebunya, hon. Kwizera, hon. Kiiza, the honourable from Kabula, hon. Bagoole, hon. Sarah Mateke from Kisoro, hon. Lematia Ruth, Woman Representative for Maracha District, hon. Tony Ayo from Kwania, and then the Member for Kyenjojo. 

So, we shall give you an opportunity in the next session when we resume.

MS KASE-MUBANDA: May I be given a chance to seek guidance now because the information I need is for clarification before tomorrow. 

I thank you very much. I wish to congratulate you upon winning the seat. I would like to seek guidance on how Members of Parliament are called here for meetings because you had told us that we would be coming here at 2.00 O’clock today and then I heard on CBS radio that we are meeting this morning and in a panic, I called the Clerk’s Office for clarification and they told me that I should speak to your office.

I did speak to your office and a lady assured me that we were supposed to come here at 2.00 O’clock, and so I went on my planned business of the day and then suddenly, a message came on my phone that I am supposed to be here at 10.00 O’clock. 

Now, Madam Speaker, you had said that we were going to have meetings today and tomorrow and for the next three days, we are going to be meeting from 2.00 O’clock. 

I have a message on my phone that we are supposed to be somewhere tomorrow morning at 7.30 and I am wondering which information I should take? Should I follow the message I have on my phone or the message that you gave us verbally that we have to be here for the next three days meeting at 2.00 O’clock. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I was going to address that after I finish my announcements. 

I wanted to inform the Members that the pigeon holes for all the Members are being prepared and when everybody has a pigeon hole labelled, you will be shown where they are they are in the lobby and that is where your papers are going to be.

I also wanted to inform you that somebody took off with hon. Andrew Allen’s registration form. I think he had written on it and somebody picked it up. Whoever has taken hon. Andrew Allen’s form, please take it back to him.

MR KYANJO: Information regarding the pigeon holes. I have been informed by the officers at the counter that in the meantime, it is possible for a Member to go and inform them of a name. They have letters there and some of them are urgent and it is possible for them to search and give you the letter.

THE SPEAKER: I am telling them because they asked this morning, “Do we all have pigeon holes?” So, I am telling them that we are labelling all the pigeon holes for all the Members and then we shall tell you, “Now they are ready and you can use them.” You can pick up those other things from the reception, but I was talking about the pigeon holes which they inquired about in the morning.

It is important that you complete your registration because it is holding up certain things: Our payments, directory, identification, allocation of offices and so on. 

I would like you to complete your registration and then we shall meet again on Wednesday at 10.00 O’clock here. There is no Parliament tomorrow and you should go and complete your other formalities so that on Wednesday, all of us are dot.com compliant and then a few things which are pending can start moving.

About the communication system – I am really surprised that the Office of the Clerk can again refer you to me. The Clerk is part of my Office; the Speaker cannot go on radio and say, “The Speaker is calling Members.” It is the Clerk on behalf of the Speaker. So, the Clerk should also organise his office and streamline the communication on radio and the messages.

So, give us all your information so that we can communicate to you adequately and we do apologise for the inconveniences that have been occasioned today.    
      
Somebody has taken hon. Harriet Ntabazi’s Rules of Procedure? We gave you a bag to put your rules but I do not know – they were picked out of your bag? Okay, let the clerk arrange to give hon. Ntabazi another set of rules.

Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for the work we have done. We shall resume on Wednesday morning at 10.00 a.m. starting with the responses from hon. Kiyingi, and then we shall take up the Members who have new issues to raise. I thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 May 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)
