

Friday, 26 May 2017

Parliament met at 11.11 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, we had to adjourn to today to enable us finish with reports from the sectoral committees so that the Budget Committee can now be free to finalise its work. I now advise that all chairpersons must finish with the Budget Committee immediately after this so that we are ready to finish with business of the budget next week.

Therefore, this sitting will only examine those two issues. There is one that remained yesterday, then we have a statement and after that, we will receive some documents that were pending to the ministry of finance, which will just be laid on the Table.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF A REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, there is guidance on this issue; you only deal with the figures and then you highlight the most important thing in five minutes and then we debate briefly.

11.14
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Being independent in this House gives me the opportunity to oscillate. In accordance with Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the sectoral committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs examined and considered the ministerial policy statements of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and of all departments and agencies that fall there under, as well as that of the Parliamentary Commission for the financial year 2017/2018 and now we report to the House. 

For the record, I would like to mention that we have about 10 institutional votes:

    i) Vote 007: Ministry Of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    ii) Vote 101: Judiciary 
    iii) Vote 102: Electoral Commission 
    iv) Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government
    v) Vote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission 
    vi) Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission
    vii) Vote 109: Law Development Centre
    viii) Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau 
    ix) Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecution
    x) Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission 

As directed that we give the summary, it should be noted by this House that we largely deal with JLOS, which has remained heavily underfunded for very many years and the underfunding has crippled the administration of justice in this country.

Moreover, the budget structure for all institutions is towards consumption and limited investments have been undertaken using Government resources.

The committee recommends that the Government lifts the ceilings several of which have remained stagnant for several years.

The committee observed that the proposed sector is greatly affected by the several proposed Bills not coming, which are still with the Cabinet. Notable among them is the Judiciary Administration Bill, which is required to operationalise the mandate of the Judiciary; the DPP Bill; the Witness Protection Bill; the Law Revision Bill; and the Legal Aid Policy Bill. The committee calls for expedited tabling of the above Bills and their enactment because their enactment is critical for enhancing the sector’s performance.

We received the reports from all the agencies on the implementation of the recommendation of Parliament to the report of the Auditor-General; the details are in our report, which should have been uploaded by now.

The committee recommends that the accountability committees clear the backlogs so that these provisions can be satisfied next time.

There was compliance with the certificate of gender and equity. The committee recommends that the Equal Opportunities Commission clarify the indicators of gender and equity responsiveness with respect to each of the institutional votes so that the institutions may ensure high compliance levels.

Mr Speaker, we got a few challenges where some of the institutions do not know what their indicators are.

On the consistency of the budget with the National Budget Framework Paper and NDP I, the committee observed from the certificate of compliance that only four institutions, namely the Judiciary, Uganda Law Reform Commission, Judicial Service Commission and Uganda Human Rights Commission had draft plans that are aligned to the National Development Plan (NDP) but not approved.

Uganda Registration Services Bureau had a working draft yet to be submitted to the National Planning Authority on assessment of alignment to the NDP II.

Three institutions had no development plans and had not started developing their plans. These include the DPP, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and Law Development Centre. The committee recommends that all votes should develop plans aligned to the NDP.

With your permission, I would go to vote-by-vote summary of key recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, I recommend that we go to page 18 of your executive summary and then we see how to proceed after that.

MR OBOTH: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The executive summary makes it easier for me. The committee appeals to the various institutions in the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to prioritise issues in the sector, particularly those that the committee has time and again identified as emerging priorities. These include enhancement of pay for Electoral Commission as well as court awards compensation to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

We concluded with the recommendation that Parliament approves the budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018 as hereunder:

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
Recurrent – Shs 40,091,326,000
Development – Shs 30,915,278,000
Total – Shs 71,006,604,000

Vote 101 – Judiciary
Recurrent – 112,723,245,000
Development – 4,069,500,000
Total – 116,792,745,000

Vote 102 – Electoral Commission
Recurrent – 62,650,080,000
Development – Shs 200,000,000
Total – Shs 62,850,080,000

Vote 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission
Recurrent – Shs 10,676,418,000
Development – Shs 200,000,000
Total – 10,876,418,000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, the way you are reading will make it very confusing for the people who are going to record from the Hansard. If possible, state in billons to make it clearer.

MR OBOTH: Okay. All the figures in the totals – for the record – are in billions and I will attempt to state where appropriate.

Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission
Recurrent –	Shs 17,383,572,000
Development – Shs 411,797,000
Total – Shs 17,795,369,000

Vote 109 – Law Development Centre
Recurrent – Shs 11,008,085,000
Development – Shs 1,123,304,000
Total – Shs 12,131,389,000

Vote 119 – Uganda Registration Services Bureau
Recurrent – Shs 15,775,995,000
Development – Shs 1,140,000,000
Total – Shs 16,915,995,000

Vote 133 – Directorate of Public Prosecutions
Recurrent – Shs 23,573,832,000
Development – Shs 6,455,351,000
Total – Shs 30,029,183,000

Vote 148 – Judicial Service Commission
Recurrent – Shs 3,169,436,000
Development – Shs 238,797,000
Total – Shs 3,408,233,000

Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government
Recurrent – Shs 40,007,920,000
Development – Shs 5,405,449,000
Total – Shs 45,413,369,000

Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission
Recurrent – Shs 416,757,027,000
Development – Shs 24,997,481,000
Total – Shs 441,754,508,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to move for the adoption of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you could help us with the issue of Electoral Commission, especially the money that is for conducting the local council elections because that is what has been in the House for the last two days.

MR OBOTH: The LCI elections - since the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, they have been the ones holding the path. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you meet the Electoral Commission? Did they say the money is there for elections of LCI?

MR OBOTH: They do not have money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the budget? 

MR OBOTH: The money is provided in the budget but it is not sufficient. If I want to get it right, I may need my technical people.

Mr Speaker, Electoral Commission has been making request to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development many times. I cannot remember the last final bit of it but we have been having a struggle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Shs 16 billion that was meant for the elections of the LCI in the budget?

MR OBOTH: It is under unfunded priorities. Probably, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, will bring it as a supplementary. Otherwise, it is not there. Let the minister help. 

11. 33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, yesterday said that Electoral Commission did not have the money for this financial year. However, Government has provided close to Shs 16 billion, for LCI elections for the Financial Year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought this is the budget we are talking about.

MR BAHATI: Yes

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is it there? This is 2017/2018.

MR BAHATI: It is there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the chairperson of the committee has just presented. Is the money there in the figures that he has just read?

MR BAHATI: Yes, the money is in the budget for Electoral Commission. We can get the exact item where the money is, in the minutes.

11. 34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, may I propose that the chairperson and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, get out and reconcile this figure and then come back to report on that? 

Mr Speaker, it looks like there is uncertainty where the money is. Yesterday, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government did tell us here that the money is not there. Today, the Chairperson for Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has stated that the money is not there.

Mr Speaker, before we approve the figures he has read, we want to be sure that the money for LCI elections is included. Let us give time to the chairperson of the committee and the minister to consult before we adopt the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Mr Chairperson, can you consult? Even the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here. Please, the three of you should go out and consult.
 
MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that I can get out and get the figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, all of you should get out so that when you come, we are together. We do not want you coming back alone. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the chairperson of the committee, consult with your technical people and confirm to us whether the money for local council elections is in the budget. It will not take long. It should take about two minutes. 

Honourable members, can I now propose this motion for your debate? Honourable members, the motion that I would like to propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of Sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for those sectors that are in this sector for Financial Year 2017/2018. That is the motion I propose for your debate and let us have the debate now.  

11.36
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this elaborate report. I have many concerns in this report but I will concentrate on the case backlog.

Mr Speaker, the administration of justice in this country is a concern of everyone. While I was trying to find out why there is an outcry - most of the judges where we tend to shift the faults are also complaining that the investigative arm of the police is lacking efficiency. They do not investigate sufficiently in time to feed the Director Public Prosecution’s Office (DPP) so that the DPP can process the case. I, therefore, would like to appeal to this Parliament that we give maximum support to the police to develop its investigative arm because long ago, we used to have a special branch which has either degenerated or collapsed. 

Mr Speaker, the police should re-establish a strong investigative arm up to the village level and cover the whole country so that we see speed in this investigative arm such that cases are processed other than blaming the judges for cases which are not their responsibility.

Finally, when you go further to investigate, you will find that the cost of maintaining prisoners in all these prisons is far bigger and expensive than developing the investigative arm of police. That is another cost that we met in the Budget Committee that was presented by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is a big cost but we do not seem to look at it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11. 38
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): It is unfortunate that the chairperson of the committee is out of the House. However, my concern number one is about the salary of the judiciary especially, those at lower ranks – the magistrates. Of recent, we have been informed that those at higher ranks have had their salaries increased. I am not sure whether the people at the magistrate’s courts have been considered for an increment in their salaries. It is unfortunate that because of the meagre kind of payment this has been encouraging corruption in the country and citizens of Uganda have been suffering in the hands of judiciary. I think it is important for this House to consider good payment for the magistrates other than thinking about those at the higher courts only so that they are taken care of. That is issue number one.

The second issue I am concerned about is the Electoral Commission. Mr Speaker, these people determine how we come here. However, the kind of payment given to them especially, those at lower ranks at the district levels may lead them to accept bribes. Sometimes they do things that you have seen in the last elections. A lot of petitions have been coming here and there. That is important because it will help us make sure that those who determine our future of coming to this Parliament should be given a good pay so that they are not easily corrupted by some of us who have resources. Mr Speaker, I thought this is something that is important and needs to be considered before we pass the budget. Thank you.

11.40
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the lack of funds to organise and conduct elections in six districts that will be created with effect from 1 July 2017. We also have municipalities and town councils that will also take effect. The districts affected are: Pakwach, Butebo, Rukiga, Namisindwa, Kyotera and Bunyangabo. All these districts, Mr Speaker, will take effect on the 1st of July 2017. It is also a requirement on the Electoral Commission to conduct elections of District Chairpersons and District Women Representatives to Parliament within 60 days after the commencement date in addition to municipalities and town councils. However, if you look through, you realise that this activity is an unfunded priority and yet it was known that from 1st July, these administrative units would come into effect.

I do not know how we are going to proceed. I think we need some bit of clarifications here. Government has been aware that this is equally important like the elections of the LC1 Chairpersons. I thought this is important for me to raise, Madam Speaker.

11.43
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commence with a procedural matter. When I looked at the list of the committee members who have signed, the number falls far short of the a third that is required by our rules. It sets a very bad precedence.

Mr Speaker, I applaud the committee on the recommendations of Judicial Service Commissions bringing on board retired active judges because of the backlog of cases that we have as a country. This should have actually happened yesterday. So far so good, if they could be brought on contractual basis, it would be better. Their speed would be much better than the current ones, where litigating lawyers tend to prolong cases for selfish reasons. 

Mr Speaker, this pertains to the Parliamentary Commission. With the additional administrative units, we are likely to go beyond 450 Members of Parliament and the space is not conducive enough for effective legislation. It would require that this commission therefore, prioritises expansion of this Chamber so that we have a conducive environment for effective legislation.

Mr Speaker, the inconvenience some of us go through in those offices - you cannot access internet in the offices we have in the Development House whereas our colleagues in the Parliament Building have internet. It is like some people are more equal than the others. This is Animal Farm at play.

THE DEPUPY SPEAKER: Therefore, can we leave those for the administration of Parliament to handle internally?

MR NAMBESHE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit.

11.44
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two comments. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. My concern is on the issue relating to lack of development plans for three very important institutions: Law Development Centre, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Directorate of Public Prosecutions. I do not know how they operate without the development plans which will show where you are going and what you should do. I need clarification on that matter.

Secondly, I also need clarification on the following allocations in the development expenditures; Electoral Commission has Shs 200 million, Uganda Law Reform Commission has Shs 200 million and Uganda Human Rights Commission has Shs 797 million. What will this money do? I need clarification on this matter, Mr Speaker.

Finally, before I sit down, I would like to say the backlog in court is high. This actually should be resolved as soon as possible because it is not good to have so many people in prisons. We were in Arua and some of the prisoners could not even sleep. Some of them were just standing. If this backlog is addressed, I am sure some of the challenges will be gone. Thank you so much.

11.46
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is mainly on the issue of land grabbing. As you may be aware, this is one of the most precarious circumstances the country is facing at the moment.  We know that land is one of the key factors of production, but the rate at which cases relating to land are emerging is very alarming. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister whether there was a special arrangement in trying to make sure that cases related to land are expeditiously handled. It is because as you may be aware, it started as a case mainly in urbanised areas, but now, it is becoming a countrywide phenomenon. Therefore, I would like to find out from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs whether they have any special arrangement to make sure that cases related to land are expeditiously handled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let me correct the records. Hon. Nambeshe stated that the number of people who have signed the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs report does not constitute the quorum. That is not correct. The total number of the members of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee are 24 people. Quorum is eight, but nine members have signed. Therefore, please, check your record. Each time you would like to bring things that challenge the reputation of the House, cross check before you go on the record. It makes sense.

11.49
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on unfunded priorities in the Judiciary. One of the issues that funds have not been provided for is strengthening the use of alternative dispute resolutions. I really would like to support the committee that Government finds about Shs 6 billion so that the alternative dispute resolution system can be strengthened. We are talking about backlogs of cases that have not been sorted out and so many people are in prison with cases related to land and other disputes. If we could use alternative conflict resolution outside court, we would save ourselves a lot of cost more than this Shs 6 billion. Therefore, I request that Government provides this fund. 

Another one which is also crucial is computerisation and automation of court processes. Mr Speaker, there have always been complaints of case files being misplaced or disappearing. Even when the cases are ruled, it takes so long for people to access the ruling of the court. We think that if the system is computerised and automated, it would be easy for us to manage our cases. 

Actually, the world is going IT and it is only unfortunate that even the Ugandan Police manages files manually. Files always get lost in police and court custody. These are areas Government should consider and support to strengthen the Judiciary so that justice is given to our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.51
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern I would like to raise is about the position of the committee on tribunal awards of the Human Rights Commission. When you look at the Uganda Human Rights Commission, most of the time they have awarded complainants compensations; but to date, this has not been fulfilled. 

It is the observation of the committee that there was a Presidential pledge to offset these awards. This is standing at over Shs 5 billion, according to the report of the committee. Our people down there have suffered in various ways; some were tortured and today over 10 years, have passed to investigate their cases.

However, even after the awards, they have never received any form of compensation. I would like to propose that the ministry of finance reviews this issue so that these people can at least be awarded the compensation, which the commission considered. Thank you very much.

11.52
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me as the Imam on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus and on my own behalf, to wish you - all members of Parliament and all Ugandans a peaceful and fruitful holy month of Ramadan; Isha-Allah. We are beginning tomorrow.

Mr Speaker, having said that, vote 102 - Electoral Commission (e) Relocation of commission headquarters; in the report, it is indicated that we need to raise funds for the relocation of commission headquarters due to the eastern route of the standard gauge railway. I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee; the electoral commission run an advert last year that they wanted to get a fully build house.

Down the road, at the beginning of this year, all applicants submitted were cancelled. We were informed - I would like to be educated that there is some good money which has been allocated squarely for that. This year, they have re-advertised and the process is almost complete. Therefore, if we - because they need a fully built house and they are there. So what would be the purpose of this money when they are relocating to a house which is going to be bought shortly? 

That is the clarification I want to get from the minister; how far is the process? Won’t it be wastage of resources to temporarily - because this means we are going to temporarily rent somewhere and yet the procurement process and everything has been done and the houses which they are going to buy are there?

11.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take on from where the Imam has ended on the issue of relocation of Electoral Commission offices. The reasons being given here are that it will pave way to the Standard Gauge Railway.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, some time, at the beginning of this year, I raised an issue regarding the railway line on the seventh street where some people in Government have decided to allocate to an investor to build a mall. Now you can see where they are taking us. Up to today, Government has not given us a response on who allocated that part of the railway line on Seventh Street in industrial area to build a mall. Now we are being pushed to relocate the Electoral Commission, block money to it until Government explains to us who did that and for what reason.

These are the people who go behind and this money could be for some of them. That is why they gave out the railway in industrial area. Therefore, I will not be party to that allocation of money to shift the Electoral Commission in order to pave way for the Standard Gauge Railway unless that is answered to this House.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of compensation; you know people who lost their property like the Acholi region, Lango region, Teso and West Nile; of course there are those who have won the cases but the money is not provided. Why can’t Government provide even on annual basis a percentage such that each beneficiary gets something out of it? It is something that we need to push for honourable members.

The issue of the backlog of cases is another matter that needs to be addressed. The other day, I raised a case on behalf of the people of Teso, which is as old as I am in this Parliament. It is not coming to an end and it is now 17 years down the road. Attorney-General, you have come in and out of that office; can you see to it that these cases are concluded? Could you provide money to these cases? In most cases, you end up losing cases because your office is not represented so get judgements made against you. Therefore, find money to handle these cases?

On the issue of the Electoral Commission, I would like colleagues here to agree; if the money is not provided for LC I elections - I do not want us to behave like in Venezuela, where they took 18 years for local council elections to be done and we are almost approaching such a scenario. Let us put our feet down that the money must be provided for LC I elections in the next financial year?

Another issue, which the administration of Parliament can take on is, when we were meeting as the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we raised the issue about ministry of lands and prisons moving as it was put to them. However, the Minister of Lands, hon. Betty Amongi, has said they are ready to move out and that they have written to us and we have not replied. Therefore, can the Parliamentary Commission take up this matter because that is the information we got from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.59 
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongola County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Tenth Parliament has delayed to amend the rules of procedure and you recall that during debate in the Ninth Parliament, Members were of the view that all committees of Parliament must be open and free for all members to attend the proceedings of those meetings.

Mr Speaker, it would have been prudent for us to have this as priority so that even the Appointments Committee can be open to all members because somewhere, we have had a lot of reservations on some of the issues there. And because we are not members, we do not have an avenue to express ourselves particularly on the view that even the report of such a committee cannot be debate here. 

Would it be fair therefore that again, we get to 2018 before we can have an amendment of our rules so that all committees of Parliament become open and their reports should be debated here in the interest of Ugandans?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report of the Committee on Rules is on business to follow so it is just waiting for a day for debate.

12.01 
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is on the criminal prosecutions in light of gender-based violence and child related cases. They are reporting a funding gap of Shs 0.820 billion and I thought that this is alarming. They are saying that under criminal prosecutions, 60 per cent of cases are related to gender based violence, which are connected to child abuse and sex offences. If they have a funding gap of that magnitude, our children will never get justice. I pray that we close this gap because it concerns all of us. 

The other time we were in Lira and we were told that there are a lot of cases to do with children not being protected. They have nowhere to put the children when they are arrested and the DPC said that sometimes, they are kept in their offices because they are not supposed to be confined with adults as there are a lot of issues around children.

My other observation is about corruption. This report is a bit silent on corruption in this country and how it is going to be handled, which means that even the ministerial policy statement could have also been silent. We all know how this country is awash with cases of corruption, the most recent being the fake compensation. Where the ministry keeps silent about this, I think this House needs to be told how the ministry intends to address issues of deliberate corruption in this country. I beg to submit.

12.04
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to ask the Attorney-General about these state attorneys who are confusing the public wherever they are. They solicit for bribes and while we are complaining about backlog -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are they allegations that they solicit for bribes?

MS MUTONYI: They are allegations. While we are condemning the Judiciary for backlog, this backlog is also caused by the state attorneys wherever they are because they are the ones holding cases. When you ask the magistrates, they will tell you it is not their fault, it is the state attorneys.

I think the Attorney-General should come in and sensitise his people so that the differences between the magistrates and the state attorneys can be outlined and we know who is who. There are allegations that they ask for bribes and if you do not pay them, your case will not go to court. What is going on? 

I am also wondering who is displacing the Electoral Commission. They say it is the Standard Gauge Railway and we hear rumours that the land is being allocated to a developer. Recently, the Executive Director, KCCA was on radio saying that they are displacing the Electoral Commission to make way for the flyovers –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I happened to participate in the three projects, which are part of the five flagship projects for decongesting Greater Kampala. These are the Standard Gauge Railway, which has got a passenger component, flyovers funded by JICA and the Jinja Express Highway, with a component of the Southern bypass.

The three converge at that very point. There is a very huge interchange at that place and they are taking the entire land at that place. Before I left, we harmonised these three projects and that is why they are mentioned as three projects taking over Electoral Commission.

MS MUTONYI: Mr Speaker, that is my submission. 

12.08
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and welcome back to the House. My contribution is about the criminal justice system in our country. 

Mr Speaker, you are fully aware that criminal proceedings take four forms. First is identification, then investigation, prosecution and finally, adjudication. You are aware that the police is supposed to sanction criminal proceedings but we have a lacuna or a predicament in our country where the same people that are supposed to sanction criminal proceedings are part of the problem.

A case in point was when the IGP was summoned and here you have a DPP telling the country that he has taken over. This is something that permanently dents the image of our country, especially for people that want to seek justice and see it unfolding in such a manner. 

I would interest and encourage the committee to take particular interest in trying to harmonise or dissect the intersection between the people that are supposed to sanction criminal proceedings and the ones that are supposed to execute the criminal justice system of our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have the Attorney-General, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the chairperson and then we will conclude.

12.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the time I entered, and I have to apologise for coming late, we were engaged in a very noble exercise of signing the agreements for the pipeline. All of us were there and I had to rush when I heard that we were on the Floor.

By the time I entered, a Member was raising an issue on whether there are special arrangements to handle land matters. I would like to say, yes. As you may know, the High Court is divided into divisions and there is a land division. What we are trying to do now is to decentralize the High Court as much as possible - resources available - to make sure that in all regions, this compartmentalisation is available. Once we do that and get divisions at every region, and at every region there is a division to handle land matters, we think that will be a right step towards ensuring that land cases are adequately and quickly resolved. 

There was an issue on the computerisation of court records. I would like to inform the House that the process has started and is ongoing. It might take some bit of time but soon court processes will be computerised and the issues raised by the honourable member will be addressed.

Concerning compensation for Uganda Human Rights Commission awards, I would like to assure honourable members that compensations for Uganda Human Rights Commission take priority. Before we consider any court awards, we first deal with Uganda Human Rights Commission awards because we appreciate the importance of redress for those people whose rights have been trampled upon. However, sometimes, as you may know, resources are not adequate to cover all the awards. Otherwise, within the available resources, we give Uganda Human Rights Commission awards priority before we consider other court awards. 

Hon. Rose Mutonyi raised a concern about state attorneys soliciting for bribes and as a result delaying the determination of criminal cases. Well, it is true that in some cases there are those issues of corruption and bribery. However, you are aware as a country we have been grappling with that issue and we encourage everybody - the public and honourable members - that where there is evidence of any judicial officer or state attorney soliciting, receiving or giving a bribe then the relevant organ should be immediately informed and the due process should take place.

Having said that, I must state that over time, issues of that kind of corruption have gradually reduced, although they still exist. We have to work together to ensure that we root out that vice once and for all. It is also true, and I do agree, that when there is solicitation for bribes and a state attorney may not present a file, that would delay –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the matter?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise? 

MR NZOGHU: I rise on point of order. Mr Speaker, you called us here for this sitting and it started at 11.00 a.m. because we are really trying to catch up with time. However, hon. Rukutana is speaking as if he has no energy and Members in the corner are not hearing him well. There is no confidence in the statement he is making; he is just talking casually. 

Mr Speaker, we committed our time and came here today and you are very aware that today we are not even supposed to be sitting but we came because of your directive. Is it in order for hon. Rukutana to give the honourable members no morale in this House and just stay here speaking without emphasis, not giving any meaning to what he is stating before the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as for the energy of the honourable minister, I am not sure about what he was doing last night or this morning. (Laughter) I do not know where he is from. Therefore, I cannot blame him for having no energy at this moment. However, he is trying. Please try harder, honourable minister.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, let me put in some morale. I would like to assure honourable members that the issue of solicitation for bribes by state attorneys is being handled.

12.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you directed us a few minutes ago to go out and reconcile with the chairperson of the committee and the Deputy Attorney-General on whether we provided funds for LC I elections. This is to confirm that we did provide Shs 15,960,151,000, under vote 102. Therefore, we are very confident that the elections will take place sooner than later.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, it is good you gave us a few minutes to go and reconcile. I am happy to report that the reconciliation has taken place. Finally, Ugandans will be able to vote for the LCs I, II and women councils in the next financial year. We would like to thank the Ministry of Finance and the Government for their indulgence. 

On the matter concerning corruption, from the UPDF, when you refer to page 39 of our main report, it is ably covered there; maybe not as prominently, but there is need to train the current staff in the Inspectorate of Government. The corruption trends are now getting out of the ordinary and they have made a case for more funding. 

Thank you, hon. John Byabagambi, for institutional memory about the relocation. I believe Ali Hajji, the Imam, hon. Latif Sebaggala, is now comforted.        

On case backlog, Mr Speaker, permit to say that automation will help a lot. If we provided money for the administration of justice to the Judiciary and the DPP, we would be able to fast-track this. The Judiciary also made an appeal for more judges. This Parliament gives money to the police for investigations, which sometimes are not done properly. We also congest our prisons; the Government of Uganda spends a lot of money feeding the remanded prisoners in Luzira. However, we cannot find money to get judges and state attorneys to prosecute matters. We need to harmonise and see what matters first; is it feeding prisoners in these remand homes and prisons, or should we have judges so that they can dispense off these cases quickly? 

I should report this, honourable Minister of State for Finance, hon. David Bahati, and I want to be on record. This sector administers justice; you cannot boast about good infrastructure development or anything in this country and ignore this sector. The people who move on those roads and transact business or invest in this country need the administration of justice. 

We are Members of Parliament because we were elected. Those who conduct our elections have never had the morale to do so for the last 18 years. Little wonder, several Members here are on the edge; just yesterday, we lost two Members at Court of Appeal. We are leading the officials of the Electoral Commission into temptation every day. When they have to say the Lord’s Prayer, they are very emphatic when it gets to, “Do not lead us into temptation.” 

This Parliament and the Government can provide for the additional Shs 37 billion, which they need to enhance the salary in a phased manner - 50 per cent, 30 per cent and then 20 per cent in three financial years. Mr Speaker, I needed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be on record because we harmonised this situation; we did not want to ambush Government. We met with the Prime Minister and this money can be got. They can even begin with the next financial year. 

Mr Speaker, there is the other procedural thing I had not done. At this point, as I leave the podium and as you are probably directing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come, I beg to lay on the Table minutes of the proceedings of our meetings and a copy of the report. Thank you very much for all the support, honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. There was a pending matter from Kawempe. Can you restate it? 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I talked about the relocation of the headquarters and yet we know that the procurement of new offices for the Electoral Commission is almost complete. Won’t that be a double expense? This is because we shall give them money to relocate yet they are going to get their new home? I want to know whether the money for the relocation of the Electoral Commission is already there and if they cannot wait until they finally settle in their new home, because this process is almost at its final stages. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that was answered. The issue of relocation is there; it is going to be relocated for various reasons. However, he is saying the Electoral Commission is already at the procurement stage for new offices. Is there anything still remaining there? 

MR OKUPA: I think what hon. Latif Sebaggala is talking about is that money was provided for and that is why the procurement took place. If that is the case, what are we again budgeting for in the next financial year? That is the clarification we need to get from them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Of course, the whole thing also takes a process; it is not done in one day.  Therefore, there should be some stopgap action taken within that period. Can somebody deal with this issue, please? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, as much as I would have loved to see the Electoral Commission at their new home, it takes time to construct. The home usually –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us not make this a big issue. Even when you get a building, you still have to configure it to what you need; it is a process. Even if they buy a building today and they want it for their purposes, they have to remodel it to fit their circumstances. So, it is not a one-day thing. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, the specifications in the bid documents were very clear. They need a fully furnished house and it is already there. The bidders have already submitted and so it is just a matter of paying and they relocate. That is the clarification we want from the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because the money is already there and they have done it twice. 

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, I remember something similar to this came up during our committee - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please let us deal with this matter only.

MR KAFUUZI: Yes; that very question arose and the explanation we got was that the Electoral Commission is not merely looking at offices for computer space and so on. They have a lot of equipment such as printers and lots of other machines that require storage and that cannot be housed in one office block; so it is a big thing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now put the question and deal with these matters? 

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I am not convinced with what my colleague is talking about. When bid documents were sent out, what the Electoral Commission wanted was a spacious and complete building, which can house them, with even parking space for over 400 vehicles. Therefore, everything has been set but there is something that they do not want to tell us. Everything is set and the building is already there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the approval of the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for the budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

STATEMENT BY THE PARLIAMENTARY NETWORK OF THE WORLD BANK ON THE WORLD BANK DAY, 30 MAY 2017

12.30
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. This is a statement by the Parliamentary Network of the World Bank to Parliament of Uganda about the World Bank Day, 27 May 2017. 

Let me just give you a brief background about the Parliamentary Network of the World Bank. This network was founded in the year 2000. It is an independent non-governmental organisation that provides a platform for parliamentarians from over 140 countries to advocate for increased accountability and transparency in development cooperation.

The network provides a platform for MPs and civil society to hold to account their own governments, as well as International Financial Institutions (IFIs) for development outcomes. The network reaches over 1,000 parliamentarians in Africa, Asia, Europe and the Americas. It strives to increase transparency and accountability in the development cooperation process by fostering the oversight role of parliaments and civil society, with a specific focus on multilateral aid and a sub-focus on the work and modus operandi of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund, the world’s largest multilateral funders.

Other partners include: the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank, the African Development Bank, Department for International Development of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Finland (2000-2010), the French Agency for International Development, the German Marshall Fund of the United States, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, NATO Parliamentary Assembly and the Association of European Parliamentarians With Africa (AWEPA).

The parliamentary network’s mission is to provide a platform for parliamentarians around the globe to advocate for increased accountability and transparency in international financial institutions and multilateral development financing. 

Today, the purpose of the network is four-fold: 

i) 	To strengthen the understanding of the work of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund among parliamentarians.

ii) 	To provide a channel for parliamentarians to inform the World Bank Group and IMF of legislative priorities on behalf of their constituents.

iii) 	To ensure that the voice of parliamentarians is heard on the subjects in which the World Bank Group and IMF have a key role. 

iv) 	To conduct research and share information among members on topics which are of international concern and interest.

Another of the work focus of the parliamentary network is to bring together parliamentarians, representatives of the private sector as well as donor countries to discuss how to improve the environment for doing business in the developing world and how countries can improve their ranking in international evaluations. 

A Parliamentary Network Chapter brings together a group of parliamentarians that are committed to the network’s mission and principles. Chapters can be national or regional and can help to strengthen the position of parliamentarians among development stakeholders.

Parliamentary network chapters facilitate regular interaction between local parliamentarians and the staff in the World Bank and IMF country offices, including consultations on country assistance strategies, public expenditure reviews, and World Bank policies and individual projects. In developing countries, this level of engagement has proven invaluable in improving country ownership and involvement in the poverty reduction process.

The parliamentary network is governed by a board of directors currently composed of 10 members that are elected for a two-year term. The current board, which was elected this year at the Parliamentary Network’s Global Parliamentary Conference in Washington DC, includes 10 members from Africa, Europe, South America, North America and Asia.

I would like to thank the colleagues that participated and represented this Parliament and these are: hon. Nambeshe, hon. Akol, hon. Mpuuga, hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. They went further to help us, together with the Ministry of Finance officials, to negotiate for the re-instatement of the World Bank funding to Uganda. I think we should congratulate them.

In that conference, our colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was elected as a member of the board. He is one of the 10 members of the board of directors. Therefore, Uganda should be proud of these Members of Parliament. (Applause)

The Ugandan Chapter of the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank was launched in 2006. Past chairpersons include hon. Henry Banyenzaki, hon. Nathan Nabeta and hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. I am currently the sitting chairperson, honourable colleagues. (Applause)

Current membership comprises of 22 members and we encourage more Members to join and to subscribe. A half day workshop to brief Members of Parliament on the activities of the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and a briefing by the World Bank and IMF and other development partners on the roles they play in Uganda is slated for 29th June. The venue will be communicated to you later.

The World Bank Open Day

Honourable members, the World Bank Group, in partnership with the Government of Uganda, are holding an open day, and this is the first of its kind. The event is called, “Partnering for Development”. It will take place on 30 May 2017 at Kololo Independence Grounds, starting at 8.00a.m. and it will go on up to 5.00p.m. The chief guest will be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Mathias Kasaija. Honourable members, you are invited; the cards have already been distributed to your pigeonholes. Please, take time off and join us.

The objectives of this open day are: to enable the public learn more about the benefits and impact of World Bank funded projects; create a platform to interact and obtain direct feedback from the public; share knowledge and information generated by the World Bank Group and the Government of Uganda.

The Parliamentary Network on the World Bank, Uganda Chapter, shall take part in the exhibition and calls upon Members to take off time and join in the opening ceremony and panel discussions. There are about 50 other government agencies that will take part in this event. There will be a panel discussion on the role of parliaments in approving loans, between 9.00a.m. and 11.00a.m. Hon. Mukitale and I, together with the former chairpersons of the network - hon. Ekanya, hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Nandala- Mafabi, who is a board member - will be some of those representing you. It will be broadcast live on TV; please stay tuned. 

The World Bank Group programme in Uganda is guided by a new Country Partnership Agreement, that is, the CPF, which was discussed and supported by the board on 21 April 2016. It is closely aligned to the National Development Plan. In line with the CPF, and responding to Government demand, the bank’s focus is now on agricultural productivity, urban development, social service delivery and economic governance, and fiscal management.

Included in financial year 2017 is the proposed project supporting inter-governmental fiscal transfer system and social development. Financial year 2018, in the first year of IDA 18, it is proposed that there will be support for youth employment, governance and public sector performance, statistical capacity, municipal infrastructure development, and water and sanitation.

The current commitment by the World Bank Group to Uganda is about US$ 2.63 billion in credit and grants, of which US$ 1.8 billion is currently undisbursed as of February 2017. This is where we call on Government to act. We pass loan requests here but you cannot imagine that out of the US$ 2.6 billion, US$ 1.8 billion has not been disbursed. This is where we must hold the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accountable because we continue paying for this loan yet it is not fully utilised.

The main problem here is that Government has not provided counterpart funding. It is good that this is happening during the budget time. We need to push Government to provide for counterpart funding. Otherwise, this money is going to remain redundant, and it covers a number of areas of the project. We have about – I will not be able to read this; I will just lay it on the Table. There is a list of projects here for the last five years and those that are in the pipeline. They are over 30 of them. Members, look at it; when we have a discussion at the workshop, we shall be able to explain it to you. More projects in the various sectors, such as energy, health and education are in the pipeline. 

The country portfolio challenges, however, included delayed parliamentary approval for funding, delays in implementation of approved projects, among others. One outstanding project here is on the refugee host communities, which is still pending approval. This loan is with our Committee on National Economy. This budget is meant to provide for money to the host communities where the refugees are hosted. It is very unfair to see refugees being provided with better facilities than the host communities and yet the host communities cannot access those facilities. 

There is, therefore, an urgent need for us to urge the Committee on National Economy to move fast and we have it approved. They had expected that this loan would be approved before the end of the financial year and since we are still within the financial year, I would like to call upon the Committee on National Economy to moved fast so that we are able to approve this loan so that the host communities in Masindi, West Nile and Lango are able to also benefit from this.

Honourable members can be involved in this work in a number of ways. It is very important for MPs to understand the steps and the processes involved in financing any project. Members of Parliament need to be aware about the process right from the stage of initiating financing. Most times, the Members of Parliament are involved at the approval stage without background information, which has in many cases delayed the approval and disbursement of funds. This is what the network is meant to provide.

They must also participate in the review of country assistance strategy to stay informed of any adjustments. Members also need to be involved in the monitoring and provide oversight roles for active projects to encourage compliance so that we do not go back to the problem we faced with the World Bank withdrawal of funds that stopped the work on the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road and a number of other projects.

Mr Speaker, I would like to call on Members to come and participate in this World Bank open day at Kololo Independence Grounds on Tuesday, 30 May 2017. As stated earlier, invitation cards have been delivered to your pigeonholes. Thank you, colleagues. For God and my country. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, but it clashes with our programme for Tuesday. We have a challenge with time because we will be sitting both in the morning and in afternoon; so I do not know how this will be harmonised.

Honourable members, we still have a challenge on how to handle statements of this nature. That is why the gaps in the rules might have to be supplied soon because this is neither a personal statement nor is it a statement of personal explanation. We are trying to find avenues within the rules to accommodate such a statement.

At the top of the hour - You need to know that today is Friday and the Imam has just alerted me that there are matters that they have to do in relation to the higher powers of human beings. Therefore, for that matter, I am going to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay on the Table some documents that were requested for on Wednesday - the list of the Government negotiating team on the Bujagali power issue and also the agreement, which was requested; I think it should be laid. There is also a short statement that the minister has to make in relation to the negotiation that has been going on in relation to the salary and other issues of the Electoral Commission officers.

12.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, on the issue of the Electoral Commission, it is true we have had meetings with the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda and the Chairperson of the Committee on Parliamentary and Legal Affairs and other stakeholders. 

We agree in principle that the issues in JLOS must be attended to. We are making it a priority to handle them in a comprehensive manner for the financial year 2018/2019. However, there are a few urgent issues that we must attend to and we agreed that we would be working with the Budget Committee to see how much ground we can cover in the circumstances we are in.

THE DEPEUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, chairpersons and members of the Committee on Budget. You now need to work around the clock, use this time and the weekend to try to see that we finish this process so that by next week we are ready to move. I am informed that by Monday there will be no business because the budget committee will be finalising its report. Therefore, this House will be adjourned up to Tuesday and on Tuesday, we need to start in the morning at 10 O’clock.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the chair requested me to lay on the Table a list of the negotiating team for Bujagali Hydropower Limited and the agreement. I would like to lay them on the Table for the record of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that matter and debate was concluded and the law passed. This House is adjourned until Tuesday, 10 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 12.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 May 2017 at 10.00 a.m.) 

