Wednesday, 20 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are welcome. The Order Paper is adjusted to allow hon. Rosemary Seninde to make an announcement and for hon. Kigyagi as well. Otherwise, the rest remain as they are.

2.31
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I beg to introduce to this august House the Forum for African Parliamentarians for Education (FAPED), which was conceived in Dakar, Senegal, in 2000.

The participants to the world forum on education for all committed themselves to mobilise strong national and international political commitment for education. It is in this context that the creation of the Forum of African Parliamentarians for Education (FAPED) was established in view of the critical role that education can play in eradicating poverty and bringing about sustainable development in Africa. 

In the recent FAPED conference held in Dakar on the 5th-6th of May 2009, which I attended and actively participated in, I was elected Vice-Chair of FAPED of the Eastern African region. (Applause) But my election implied that Uganda as a country was elected for this post.

Uganda’s achievements in education that include the passing of the Education Act 2008 were highlighted which also contributed, among other things, to the choice of Uganda taking up this position.

A recommendation was made for Uganda to host the first sub-regional FAPED meeting that will be held in Kampala during the third week of August 2009. It is a great honour for Uganda to host this important conference. A total of 10 countries will be participating and these are: Uganda, which will be the host, Kenya, Djibouti, Seychelles, Ethiopia, Mauritius, Eritrea, Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania.

I will present to this House a tentative programme for the sub-region FAPED conference that will be held in August after further consultation. I am sure the entire House will support this initiative and keep the Uganda flag flying high.

For this matter I humbly beg to lay on the Table the declaration of the second forum of FAPED that was made on the 5th-6th May, and also the objectives that guide the forum. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the declaration of FAPED, that is, the Second Forum of African Parliamentarians for Education. I also beg to lay on the Table a set of objectives which were generated to guide the forum. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Coincidentally, it happens that it is the same committee which you chair that will study those documents and advice the House. (Laughter) 

Hon. Members, I again want to welcome to Parliament His Excellency the Irish Ambassador to Uganda, and also the Commissioners of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. You are most welcome! (Applause)

I will introduce the others as soon as I get their particulars; but you are also welcome.

Hon. Kigyagi is not here, therefore, we will skip his item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.35
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I expected the report to be -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kigyagi, your time came and you were not in. Because of time management, we had to go to another item.

2.36
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I will just be brief because I know we do not have time. 

About three years ago, Parliament of Uganda applied to join Global Water Partnership and on 16 April 2009, the Parliament of Uganda was admitted to the Global Water Partnership and a certificate was issued. It reads: “Global Water Partnership: this is to certify that Parliament of Uganda is a partner to Global Water Partnership.” It is signed by the executive secretary. The documents which Parliament filled to apply for partnership are attached and along with them are the Global Water Partnership policy papers. 

When you become a member of the Global Water Partnership then you also belong to the Regional Water Partnership of Eastern Africa. The principles and values are attached. Automatically we also belong to the country’s water partnership which is housed in the Ministry of Water and Environment and a strategic plan 2009-2013 of the Global Water Partnership is also attached. Because of the constraints of time, I will not elaborate. I know the Ministry of Water and Environment at an appropriate time will come to this Floor because they are the hosts; their affiliated office is hosted in the Nile Basin Offices in Entebbe. 

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to take the chance to lay on the Table these documents including the partnership certificate. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The documents are sent to the appropriate committee dealing with water to study and subsequently brief the Parliament.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.38
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg for your guidance. I realise Members have not yet got the copy of the summary of the report; I wonder whether I should proceed.

THE SPEAKER: The item is, “Presentation of Papers.” We shall subsequently debate this document although it would have been better if the Members had copies. Are the copies available?

MRS SENINDE: I think they were working on them and I expected copies here but -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you Table and then we shall look into that. 

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

The Committee on Social Services has the pleasure and honour to present to Parliament its oversight visit report on the performance of the health sector in selected districts of Uganda, in accordance with Article 90(1) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda.

The report covers the oversight activities that were carried out by the committee in the months of January to April this year, as well as an assessment of the provision of specific health services at the various health units in the selected districts. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I am happy to have read your report but the year you gave there is 2008 and yet this is 2009. Would you like to correct it?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, it is because I am presenting it now –
 
THE SPEAKER: I said I have read it. You say, “This year” but what you actually wrote there is 2008. And I think that this was an oversight.  

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. For that matter, the report takes stock of the achievements in the health sector but most importantly, it indicates areas where improvement is critically necessary. 

The committee appeals to all stakeholders to implement the recommendations. 

I would like to be very brief as I go through this summary. This report covers oversight activities as I have pointed out – 

THE SPEAKER: I am just giving you five minutes.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I will endeavour to use the five minutes effectively. The purpose of this visit, as I pointed out, was to critically see what is actually on the ground in as far as the health sector is concerned. 

We had to visit a number of districts but basing on the time, we carried out visits of 16 districts and these were selected by sampling. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this House that amongst the findings, definitely our interest was to look at the planning and financial management; we had an interest in looking at management of personnel because we know that there are so many problems to do with management of personnel in our health centres. 

We also looked at management of drugs and supplies and medical equipment. We also considered, most importantly, reproductive health. I would like to inform this House that my committee has chosen reproductive health to be our priority and that is why we are putting much emphasis on this.

We also looked at management of infrastructure. We also considered transport and accessibility. 

Finally, we considered monitoring and supervision. Honourable members, you will bear with me because of the fact that I have been given only five minutes. I want to go to the most important part, and that is the policy recommendations. 

Members are of the view that as far as planning and financial management are concerned, we realise that the 1995 Constitution and Local Government Act effectively devolved the responsibility and authority for delivery of health services to the level of the district and other local authorities, such as municipalities. But providing health services is now the sole responsibility of districts since the onset of decentralisation except for hospitals providing referral and medical training that remain the responsibility of the Ministry of Health. For that matter, decentralisation of health services has to be backed by sufficient health sector funding. 

We also feel that we should increase PHC funds to match with the increase in population. These funds have been kept constant for the last 10 years for almost all health facilities and yet the cost of drugs, sundries, wages and general hospital logistics have gone up more than three times over the period.  

Colleagues, I am sorry that my speed could be too much but I would like to – 

THE SPEAKER: You can put a speed governor. (Laughter) 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, when it comes to management of personnel, I would like to inform this House that we put emphasis on this and our policy recommendation is that government formulates a deliberate policy to attract health practitioners to work in rural and hard-to-reach areas. The policy should have approaches to provide additional hardship allowances for medical staff posted in districts. But we want to call upon government to also define what a “hard-to-reach” area is because it is not very clear. 

The government should also expedite the process of recruitment to fill vacant posts in all health facilities in order to improve the medical work ratio.

The government should in addition review the staffing ceiling in order to solve the manpower problem at the health facilities. We found this a very big problem. 

Medical workers heading health centre II to IVs should be trained in human resource management if better service delivery outcomes are to be realised at these levels. We also found this to be a problem.

The Ministry of Health should put in place in-service training programmes to equip all health personnel with basic skills on how to attend to patients with disabilities. In the long run, Ministry of Health should consider incorporating PWD issues in the medical training institutions’ curriculum. 

As far as management of drug supplies and medical equipment are concerned, we are of the view that in order to reduce unnecessary and frequent drug stock outs at the health facilities due to delays in order, processing systems or distribution of drugs, an MIS that supports the needs of National Medical Stores be established. 

The Ministry of Health should also update the essential drugs list in order to ensure availability of all drugs for every diagnosed condition. 

Although the practice of branding all public drugs and other medical supplies has been started, government should expeditiously complete the process. This will go a long way in reducing theft by unscrupulous people in public health facilities. 

Mr Speaker, the recommendations in as far as this is concerned are actually many but I am glad we are going to lay this report on the Table and Members will be able to go through it. For that matter, Members, allow me to move to reproductive health, where we have so much interest.

As far as this is concerned, we are saying that government should clearly earmark a budget to reproductive health and give it the due attention it deserves in order to make big strides towards achieving the Millennium Development Goal No.5 by the year 2015. I will not go into details to tell what we have actually found out in as far as this is concerned. You will find out in the report.

We also want strengthening of sexual and reproductive health services in the local governments with a clear focus on control of STIs, family planning, AMC, supervise deliveries and so on and provision of emergency obstetric care services. We are sure this will ensure that every Ugandan is able to obtain essential reproductive health products and use quality contraceptives whenever he or she needs them.

We also feel that considering the lower uptake of reproductive health services from public health facilities, the government needs to embark on massive sensitisation programmes among the communities to demystify the misconception surrounding utilisation of these reproductive health services like contraceptives. And to also ensure that quality reproductive health commodities are readily available; deliberately target young people and by conducting reproductive health education in schools. 

Let me go to management of infrastructure and utilities. Members, I am sorry, I may not read the details of this but I would like to assure you that the committee has been very serious and has actually come up with good recommendations and when at an opportune time we are given the chance, I believe this august House will definitely discuss this report.

We also came up with policy recommendations as far as transport and accessibility is concerned. In many of the health facilities we visited, we realised that ambulances were grounded and so we have come up with good policy recommendations. And we pray and beg that government and Parliament will adopt these recommendations. 

With monitoring and supervision, we have also come up with recommendations. I have been given only five minutes, colleagues, I beg that we are given the opportunity as a committee to lay the report on the Table. I want to assure colleagues that you are going to have copies of this report and I have no doubt you will like the report. (Laughter and Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and members of the committee. Efforts will be made to ensure that you get your copies of the report so that you study it and during the recess you will be able to tour the hospitals and see what is happening there. Thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 1999 TO 2007

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I remember yesterday the chairperson tabled the report and briefly explained what is in the report. It is now up to you to make your contributions on matters in the report. 

2.50
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for this report. I have one or two things to point out.

First of all, I would like to talk about the committee’s comments on page 7 regarding the conditions of police cells. Recently I visited about two cells in Kampala when one of my workers was detained as a suspect. I found the conditions of these police cells horrible. You find that some of the cells have leaking roofs, and the food served to the suspects, nobody can expect it to be served to human beings. In fact, all that contributes to abuse of human rights. 

When I was in my constituency, I at one time also visited one of the cells of the police. I found that some of the suspects sleep without blankets and as a result these people are exposed to sicknesses like pneumonia. So I urge the government to really attend to the suspects that are arrested as a result of some crimes committed here and there.

I would like to also comment on the issues raised by the committee on page 13 about electoral malpractices in this country. I would like to speak about my own experience in 1996, when I stood as a candidate. I remember very well that we voted without using indelible ink. I won the elections but my results were announced as belonging to my opponent and he came and represented my people in Parliament on my behalf. I complained and even petitioned but I was very surprised that when we went to court, the presiding judge in Gulu court at that time nullified my petition on grounds that I petitioned to a wrong court. (Laughter) 

To me, that is one way of actually denying justice to persons who are aggrieved through electoral processes; and yet the accused had at that time engaged a lawyer who did not have a practicing certificate. Therefore, that case should have been ruled in my favour. So to me that is one way of abusing human rights. I, therefore, appeal to this Parliament to get involved in rectifying the electoral processes through legislation of the right laws so that democracy is guaranteed and persons wishing to contest in such elected positions are protected. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity.

2.54
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much. I would also like to thank the committee for its very good report. The committee observed in their report that issues have been overtaken by events because the consideration of this report is being done a little bit late and yet some of the recommendations could have been of very good use earlier. 

I want to make a few comments on the recommendations by the committee especially regarding the Karamoja sub-region. On page 70, the committee observes that teachers in the rural and hard-to-reach areas are being considered for hardship allowance and they gave the example of primary school teachers in Karamoja. I would like to thank government for this initiative of giving hardship allowance to teachers who are operating in the hard conditions in Karamoja. You will recall that sometime back we used to have what was called, “Karamoja allowance” for people who would offer to serve in that part of the country, which has lagged behind in terms of development. 

However, what I would like to say is that whereas this allowance is motivating to teachers, there have always been delays in its release. As we talk, the last batch of allowances was received in December and it is just Shs 20,500 per teacher per month. It would be very good and motivating if this allowance were given monthly and timely so that it keeps the morale of teachers who are serving in that part of the country up.

On page 75, the committee made a very good recommendation in regard to development in Karamoja. As we have always said, the major problem in Karamoja is lack of water for both agricultural production and animal feeding. I got a little bit worried yesterday while we debated the report of the Budget Committee – I had expected us to come up with a serious recommendation that it is high time we explored the possibility of having irrigation schemes in Karamoja. This part of Uganda has only one million people but it is taking us ages to give the people there sustainable programmes and plans. 

We as leaders from that region would like our people to graduate from relief items; we are tired of seeing people from the Office of the Prime Minister, year in year out, pulling themselves up to take food to Karamoja. It is a little bit of a shame! We should come up with a suitable programme to have irrigation schemes in Karamoja. I am saying this because we cannot keep people permanently – even doctors know that you can only keep a patient on a life support machine for a limited period. We cannot keep people on relief food permanently; that is not sustainable.

I notice that the committee also recommended something on the possibility of government considering the establishment of boarding schools in Karamoja to retain pupils in schools. Karamoja being a region that experiences hard climatic conditions; that would be a welcome idea. Mr Speaker, I think I need your protection – the Leader of Government Business is being diverted; I thought he was listening –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I have been listening. And I would like to inform the House that the idea of boarding schools in Karamoja was accepted long ago. May I also mention that we have started planting food in Karamoja during this season – tractors have been taken to Karamoja. So the issue of a self-sustaining arrangement is being tried. 

I can further report that we already have KIDDP, a programme, which we intend to put in place. So the matters of Karamoja are very dear to me; I have been listening very much.

MRS KAVUMA: I am just wondering how we grant boarding schools to Karamoja or some areas and not others that are in equally difficult positions. I am saying this because we the people from Ssese Islands have been told that it is not possible; it is a government policy that we should have only day schools. So the children in Ssese Islands have to go to school by boat. Actually some days they do not go to schools. So, what benchmark are we using to grant some and leave out others?

MS OKORI-MOE: I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for that response, although I think we still have a lot to do for Karamoja. 

The problem we have in Uganda is that either we are jealous or envious – we cannot even sacrifice and just say that in some financial year we should close our eyes and try to address a problem that concerns just one million Ugandans. Sometimes when we cry to government in regard to issues in Karamoja, we do not do it because we just want to talk; the problems are real. Those of you who have visited that part of the country know what is obtaining on the ground. I would like to say that instead of crying for those who already have, let us join hands and cry for those who do not have, like the people of Karamoja.

Finally, I would like to thank government for pacifying Karamoja by ensuring that people get settled and go back to their original farmlands, which they had abandoned because of insecurity. 

I would like to inform the House that there are many schools that the communities in those settlements have started constructing. I wish government could consider aiding some of them. There are a number of them in Karamoja. Abim, for example, already has 11. My appeal to government is to aid some of these schools to raise the parents’ morale to take more children to school. With those few remarks, I would like to thank you so much.

3.04
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting a report of this nature for the first time. I would like to especially thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for their initiative to highlight, after ten years; the numerous issues that should be put right to enable us enjoy peace in exercising our freedoms.

However, I would like to say that I am going to address the issues in the Uganda Human Rights Commission annual report of 1999, particularly about members of security organs in the UPDF against whom the report recommended that they must desist from arresting and incarcerating people in non-gazetted places.

I would like to inform this august House that I have seen it all. I was a victim and I am glad that there is some improvement because some of the detention centres that I went through, from the grave, because I was put underground, and then in the buses where I was detained for seven hours and finally I was detained in this house - that was in 1987. It was in room 225 on the second floor where I saw it all. If God had not been on my side, I would be seven feet under now. So the response which the UPDF has made is not correct. I want to refer this House to this book and then this letter which has been written, I think, to all Members of Parliament, by Human Rights Watch. It is called Open Secret, which is about illegal detention and torture by the Joint Anti-Terrorism Taskforce in Uganda. If you can allow me, Mr Speaker, to just read part of this letter? 

It is from Human Rights Watch to hon. Angiro Gutmoi Charles, Parliament of Uganda, Parliament Avenue, Kampala, Uganda. It is dated April 8, 2009:
“Dear hon. Gutmoi, please find enclosed a copy of Open Secret, a new Human Rights Watch report documenting the illegal detention and torture of individuals suspected of terrorism and treason by the Joint Anti-Terrorism Taskforce (JATT) in Kampala, based on extensive research over a six months’ period, including interviews with former detainees. 

The report poses that there are serious human rights abuses perpetrated by JATT during the course of its operations. The human rights violations described in this report have periodically been raised with Uganda Government authorities by human rights organisations, the media and Members of Parliament, yet no action has been taken to curtail the abuses or even to investigate, let alone prosecute, those responsible. 

In this report, Human Rights Watch calls on the Uganda Government to end all torture and mistreatment of detainees; to stop arrest and interrogation by security forces without the authority to do so; and to release all detainees from the JATT headquarters in Kololo and close it as a place of detention. 

Any detainees under the custody of JATT for whom there is a legal basis for detention should be transferred immediately to Police custody and charged with legally recognised offences, if appropriate. 

The government should inform the relatives of each detainee of their whereabouts, conditions, and the charges against them. 

Those charged should be tried before courts that meet international fair trial standards. We hope you will give this report and its recommendations your immediate attention.

Sincerely,
Georgette Gagnon, Africa Director.”

Mr Speaker, in this report the UPDF and government say that there are no detention centres but what about this? I wonder if it disappeared yesterday. 

For that matter, I would like to find out the factors which I have realised in my research - why and who is being detained. Those who are being arrested and detained are none other than the opposition because this is a process of changing them to the NRM system. We witnessed how Sam Engola was detained and how that brother of mine, hon. Omara Atubo, was detained and tortured and now he is a member of the NRM. (Laughter) So this is not a very simple matter -(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. colleague for giving way. I want to inform the House that about four or five days ago, some arrests were made in my district in which two Ugandans were arrested. One of those arrested is called Patrick, a reporter with our local Rupiny newspaper. He was arrested under unknown circumstances and to date we have no knowledge of his whereabouts. Those arrests continue in the district of Gulu. So, I believe that these kinds of arrests are actually geared towards scaring away people and scaring away Ugandans and with the intention of detaining them unlawfully. I am glad the Minister of Security is here with us. I pray that he gives us some information as far as these arrests are concerned. Thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, we are heading for the 2011 election but the recommendation of the committee, on page 74, is not very clear. I wish they had continued with their recommendations to say, “The committee observed that the existence of safe houses is unconstitutional and should be abolished” because if they are not abolished, we are just wasting our time. We have talked about this and we know it happens but no action has been taken. 

We want to know from government when they are going to stop these kinds of actions. We have the local Police who should be doing this and the military men who should be doing this during the time of war. But how comes that -(Mr Mbabazi rose_)- let me finish and then give you time. And when you come to the Ministry of Security which is a part of you, I think this is not performing at all. It is not giving us any peace and development. It should be called “ministry of instability and no peace”. 

I do not see the reason for creating this ministry when we have Defence, Internal Affairs and very gallant sons in the UPDF. The suffering we are undergoing is mainly by the ISO, the ESO and these operatives. The purpose for putting all these in place is to cause confusion. Yesterday we witnessed a situation in which military men are involved in child trafficking or persons trafficking and then making it something for other motives. Now, why should we accept this? And now we are here - I am sorry for my colleagues on that side who will talk against this - for that matter they may be warned because in this government, I want to be clear and say that we are still serving under a military government. There is still no democracy in Uganda. I want to be very clear about this. 

If we suggest now that the military men should leave this House, it would not be accepted. It will never be accepted and nobody will listen to us. So that is the recommendation we can see -(Mr Byabagambi rose_)- ok, you can try.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. The honourable member has given two allegations. 

One, that the committee would have recommended abolition of the safe houses. Actually he said these safe houses should be abolished. I would like to know from him whether he knows at least one coordinate of any safe house. We know where the headquarters of JATT in Kololo are and everybody knows this but he stated in plural “safe houses” so I want the honourable member to at least name one location of the safe houses.

Secondly, the honourable member has said we are under the military government and there is no democracy. I am seeing him seated on the other side of the House. May I know how you were elected to come into this House if there is no democracy?

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, for your clarification but I want to inform you that there is no safe house in Uganda because why do you torture people there if they are safe houses? The only safe house here is Luzira and other gazetted provisions in Uganda. 

When I was competing to coming here, my election was supervised by military men. Now if yours was not done that way, I think because you are lucky you are on the other side but for us, it was a terrible thing! We are telling you the truth. People had trust in me and that was not democracy but we defeated the military candidates.

I think the best thing to do is for all the stakeholders to accept that –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. I am just standing on a point of information on the question of safe houses. I have had occasion to address this issue many times in the last 17 years and I have consistently told this House and the country and I said so not long ago, there are no safe houses in Uganda, and to my knowledge, that are used as detention or torture centres. I would like to repeat this that there are no safe houses, to my knowledge, that are used as detention or torture centres by security. 

I am glad that the Human Rights Commission, as is reported on page 74, which my colleague was reading, informed the committee that they have not received any complaint from anyone who has been detained in a safe house since 2006.  The idea of a safe house is an idea in security services the world over. A safe house is a place where, for instance, intelligence services conduct business outside the public domain and I can tell you what they do there because we run agents; the intelligence services run agents not among you because you are not enemies of the state but just the opposition politically. 

We have people that act in a manner that you can characterise as treasonable that is those who have taken up arms against the state and so on. For organisations like that, one of the ways of getting to know what they are planning to do or what they are doing is to infiltrate them. So normally when you are debriefing your agents, you meet them in places where they are safe from the possibility of being seen by those who would then report back and endanger their lives in the places where they have infiltrated. 

So, the concept of a safe house is something that is not Ugandan, not new and that is universal. The point I am making is that there are no safe houses, which are used for purposes of torture or detention. It is the policy of this government, as you all know that any detention centre must be gazetted -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for yielding the Floor. I am seeking clarification on that particular point. You are stating the position of the law that any detention centre must be gazetted. Would you tell this august House whether the detention centre at Kireka RRU headquarters where people are being detained even as we talk now, is gazetted and when it was gazetted? 

Secondly, the detention centre used by Kakooza Mutale along Bombo Road. As we talk now, I challenge you and we can go there. There are detainees there. Just yesterday on this Floor I gave you a list of people who were arrested from Kamuli and detained there. They were rescued the other night by the Police. Is that detention centre gazetted? There is a house here with a high perimeter fence opposite Imperial Royale. We can go there as Parliament; people are detained there. Is it gazetted? There is another detention centre mentioned in the Human Rights Watch report, it is in my constituency here in Kololo, opposite the airfield. Please, is it gazetted? So the clarification I am asking is: are those centres I am talking about safe houses or gazetted detention centres? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am very ready and happy to receive the information from my honourable colleague that he says he has about some detention centres because I would like to know, if they are detention centres, who is detaining who there? He is the MP of Kampala Central and I think most of the areas he mentioned are located where he represents so I am very keen to know who, in your constituency, is doing that because obviously if there are places that are not gazetted as detention centres and yet you say there are people who are there, and this is within your knowledge, I am interested to know: who are these? Who is detaining them, because obviously that would be illegal and I will be very happy to sit with you and get all the details or even visit these places –(Interjection)- well, I gave him the Floor and I am responding to what he said. 

I did not rise until he sat down, so I am simply responding to what my honourable colleague said. The point is that this government as you all know is a government that values human rights; it is a government that fought for the human rights. It is that government that withdrew – well, I did not want to make accusations against my honourable colleagues in this House but I just wanted to remind you that when we took up arms, one of the main reasons why we fought was precisely because there was no rule of law here. There were tremendous and horrendous violations of human rights. This is a matter of public knowledge -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. I can see the minister is addressing this august House with a lot of pride and he is actually very proud that he picked up guns and went to the bush and overthrew a government. Is the minister in order to come and tell us that he picked up a gun, went to the bush and overthrew a government which was against the existing law and was actually treason? Because the government he is serving now I presume is different from the outfit that went to the bush? Those who went to the bush were guerrillas; they were rebels. Now we assume and presume that we have a constitutionally established government for which he should speak. Is he in order to speak as if he is a rebel when he is a minister serving in a constitutionally established government? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thought that he was giving background that brought him to be a member of a constitutional government. (Laughter) And well, there are decisions on how a Constitution is changed by what they call a successful revolution. I think that is the decision of the court. You can establish a constitutional government by successful revolution. The cases are in the High Court. 

But, hon. Members, please bear with me; in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we are honoured with the presence of the British High Commissioner, Mr Martin Shearman and John Hamilton the Second Secretary to the High Commissioner. You are most welcome! (Applause) But please, wind up because it has gone on for hours.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was really concluding by saying that the track record of this government as far as human rights are concerned is very well known, IT is very well documented and there may be –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I do realize that the hon. Minister for Security has very important information to give the House. Probably he does not know that the Member on the Floor is the shadow minister of defence and security? We are keenly listening to him so that we know what is going on and I think the right procedure would have been that the Minister of Security on the government side should allow the shadow minister to make his presentation and then he can come up and make his substantial contribution and reply. But the way he is intervening now is really interrupting the contribution of the shadow minister and some of us have been benefiting a lot from the information he is providing. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, the minister had just stood to give information. He should have sat down and then he gets another opportunity to make his contribution. So wind up your information.

MR MBABAZI: So, in conclusion -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi, making an attempt to wish away the safe houses; the torture chambers in this country that have been reported by an institution of government, the Uganda Human Rights Commission repeatedly for the period 1997 to date. Is he in order to come here and give us misleading information when they as government had an opportunity when the Uganda Human Rights Commission was making this report to make their input and even to prove that the safe houses were not in existence? I know that they interviewed security sources. So, is he in order to come and try to wish away a very important aspect of this report and a very important report made by a government institution? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, I don’t know whether what has happened would prompt a point of order because what is happening is that he is giving him information. Maybe he is disagreeing with what is contained in the report. That cannot prompt a point of order. As I said, hon. Minister, you stood as a Member was contributing to give information and that could not take all that long. But should you want to make a contribution, you will be given an opportunity to do so. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I will make a contribution. I was simply responding to the issue about safe houses and I was saying that even in that report of the committee, it is recorded at page 74 - actually I read it: “The Uganda Human Rights Commission itself reported to the committee that they had not received any complaint.” And I was saying that, to my knowledge, there are no safe houses for the purpose of torture and detention of anybody illegally. That is the fact I was presenting to you. 

MR ANGIRO: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I am disappointed to learn that when I was reading this letter, seemingly the hon. Minister for Security was either asleep or he did not hear it; if he heard it, he did not understand it. And the way forward is now to invite him to my office so that I can take him to all these safe houses we are talking about anytime he feels free. (Applause) 

Finally, I am glad to hear that when you took guns and went to the bush you haven’t come out of the bush and you haven’t handed over to the people of Uganda the democracy they want. Please, endeavour to do so come 2011 so that the bush wars can come to an end. (Applause) 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table this very important document for the attention of hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Minister of Security and also give him a copy, which I have. The document is Human Rights Watch report on Uganda, signed by Georgette Gagnon, Africa Director and the headquarters is at Kololo Hill Drive where I can refer the honourable minister to go and discuss this. Thank you very much.
 
THE SPEAKER: Could you also table the report? 

MR ANGIRO: I am going to do it, Sir. 

3.55
MS CONCY ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for this report. I am very much impressed with the committee’s report especially on page 29, which talks about applying human rights based approaches to development. To my understanding, human rights based approaches focus on the empowerment of the people as a core strategy in ensuring that the system of governance is reformed to respond to issues that affect the lives of people - including poverty. 

This approach also ensures that government is constantly evaluated and made accountable to citizens. In Uganda here, accountability to the citizens is lacking especially on the basis of commitment to national and international legal treaties. A rights based approach will integrate the norms, standards and principles of the international human rights system into the plans, policies and processes of development including anti-poverty policies in the domestic context.  

This empowering dimension of the human rights is a discourse which is very useful in the sustainable poverty-free governance as a basic principle of administration. By this I mean that objectivity is maintained in the implementation of policies relating to fighting poverty so that resource allocation target the areas and people who are suffering from extreme poverty. It should also not be based on any bias or prejudice. 

Such an approach defines human rights goals and objectives specifically for providing timeliness indicators and measurements to monitor progress -(Interruption)

MR PIRO SANTOS: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the hon. Member on the Floor in order to read very long text while pretending to be deliberating on this subject?

THE SPEAKER: Well, is she reading or referring to notes?
 
HON. MEMBERS: Referring -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Referring to notes? No, you are not permitted to read but you can refer to notes. 

MS ACIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. And I would also like to tell the honourable members that I have made an analysis that is why at the beginning I said I am going to base on page 29 of the report. 

So, on realization of specific development projects such as those dealing with food, shelter, drinking water, education and health - Northern Uganda, for instance, where poverty has driven as a policy to render its people dependant on humanitarian aid as a means of control, poverty would have been looked at as a war crime. From livestock, which were forcefully confiscated to the deportation of entire populations and massed into deplorable livelihoods of dependants in the intent was causing total collapse in the economic, cultural and social structures. 

It may be done intentionally to deny us clean water, food, firewood and all those other aspects. It also means children being intentionally denied education in Northern Uganda because of the war. Therefore, they are unable to read and write. So they cannot fully participate in development activities.

Also allow me to comment briefly on page 5, which is saying something about the conduct of the UPDF. I remember last year when I was in my district, Amuru, there was an inter clan land dispute. So the UPDF under the order of the chairman LC III of Pabo sub-county who is also the former chairman of NRM took soldiers with the RDC to a place called Apar. The UPDF were heavily deployed there and started fighting with the local people, shot uncontrollably and the situation was really terrible. And yet I remember that in the past, land disputes used to be handled by the local leaders or clan leaders. So the way the UPDF conduct themselves needs to be investigated. Because I remember those days during Amin’s regime as children we never used to see soldiers moving anyhow in the towns. But if you go to Northern Uganda today, you will find soldiers drinking together with local people and that is a very serious problem.

Let me just wind up, Mr Speaker. Now that IDPs are returning to their homes, some of them cannot settle in their homes because most of the land has been converted into army detachments. So I would like to appeal to government to avail us with a list of army detachments in Northern Uganda. Otherwise, we are not able to know these UPDF, the officials, the commanders; they just go and fence a big chunk of land and detain local people there.

And I would like to conclude by saying that the level of trauma in this country is also very high because of war. You are aware that we have war with in the country here and with the neighbouring countries [HON. MEMBERS: “Where”] in Congo. (Laughter) In the communities, people are traumatised. You find also their leaders are traumatised including the MPs. Even the President who is leading them is traumatised. I think the driver at the wheel of this country has run out of break fluid. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

3.44
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the reports. However, I am disappointed that the first report was made 10 years ago, and yet we are debating it today. I would like to appeal to Parliament that from now on, we should debate reports of Human Rights Commission timely because 10 years is a very long time.

In 1993, an institution was set up and registered in Uganda. It is called African Centre for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture Victims. I have been a board member of this institution since that time. We receive very many cases of people who have been tortured. Most of the cases that go to the Human Rights Commission pass through our hands. We have doctors, they examine and they go to be expert witnesses before courts for Human Rights Commission.

Some of the cases are very alarming! Two years ago, I came across a case in Gulu where a young man was arrested by the army as a rebel suspect. He was kept away for almost one year, tortured, his manhood completely destroyed and one of his hands deformed. When he was released, I talked to him myself -(Interruption)

MR EKEMU: Thank you, hon. Okello-Okello, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am a live example of somebody who went through these torture houses and the safe houses the minister was denying. When hon. Angiro, the shadow minister, was on the Floor and he was laying that letter on the Table, I almost wanted to know if I should lay myself on Table and –(Laughter)- I am also aware that hon. Omara Atubo went through a similar experience! I do not know whether he was going to join me in laying himself on the Table. I went through that kind of torture and I was startled. What hon. Okello is describing is what I went through. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, it was not my intention to raise on a point of information and talk about myself, because some of us believe that sometimes you have to live in the future and not in the past. (Laughter) But for those who may not be aware of what I went through, I was never detained in a safe house. I was detained in Makindye Barracks and I was also detained in Lira Barracks and later for my - by the way, I have been arrested four times in this country: twice during Amin’s time and twice during this government. So I know what you are talking about. But when you see me sitting here and keeping quiet, do not think that I do not know how to shout. I do shout very objectively and intelligently.

I want to assure you that when it comes to issues of human rights, I am the greatest ally of the people of Uganda and that I will always stand very firm and I do know, and I call upon my colleagues from the other side, that when you are talking about the issue of human rights, it is not just the government in power but it is building a firm foundation for all of us. And that is really how we should approach it. I thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the honourable minister for the information. But the minister should know that without knowing the past and the present, you cannot live in the future. (Laughter) You must know where you are coming from.

I was talking about the case of this young man in Gulu. I took the man in my car to this institution. He told me that when he was released, he was instructed not to tell anybody what happened to him, that if he did he would be killed.

I reported this case, it was documented and we now have a branch of this institution in Gulu. The majority of human rights violation in Uganda is in the North, where for the last 23 years the rule of law has been missing. We live in anarchy. I want to give some figures. The cases of human rights violation are going up. I want to give just a few examples. These cases that were reported to this centre in 2005 were 752; in 2006, 1,145 and 2007 there were 1,400. 

So, the violation of human rights in Uganda is a very serious matter and when we are debating it, we should take it seriously. When I saw the hon. Minister for Security joking about this matter - maybe he does not know. Today it is your turn to torture but we do not know tomorrow. That is why we should make sure that this practice is completely eliminated.

Some of these torture victims have been awarded some compensation by Uganda Human Rights Commission and by courts but the government has refused to pay. The government has continued to violate their human rights. The biggest human rights violator in Uganda is this government here. The government should change its mind and have mercy on the people of Uganda - behaving like it is an occupying government and not a national government does not help anybody. 

I can give an example: in 2002, hon. Penytoo and 20 others were arrested in Gulu, tortured in the barracks and one of them was killed within the prison fence. Hon. Okumu and I took government to court and these people were awarded Shs 320 million; to date the government has refused to pay. And this guy is a Member of Parliament not an ordinary Ugandan on the streets. What shall we do if this is the government we have? There is a very serious situation of human rights violation in Uganda and nobody should deny this. It is a fact. 

Who are the people who are violating human rights? Based on the figures of 2008, reported cases indicate that the percentage of human rights violators, are as follows:

•	The police are responsible for 49 percent of torturing Ugandans;
•	The Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU) – 13 percent;
•	UPDF,  nine percent;
•	Local councils, eight percent;
•	LDU, six percent;
•	Prison, three percent; and
•	Others, that is you and I, 13 percent.

We all want to be free and enjoy life but where you have Ugandans who have been tortured and deformed without being taken to any courts of law, it is a serious matter. On top of deforming them, the little compensation that they are awarded is not paid. 

In yesterday’s The New vision, there was a report that Northerners wanted awards by Uganda Human Rights Commission reduced claiming that they are too high. That is not true. The people who are talking are NRM sycophants; two RDCs, who have no mandate to talk on behalf of Northerners. The newspapers really, be kind to us; you cannot quote assistant RDCs and you say “Northerners”. You know that this man has been appointed to represent somebody who is here in Kampala –(Laughter)- so how can you talk for Northerners? That report is absolutely unfounded and to us the awards are too small. They should be higher. Uganda Human Rights Commission has been very lenient with government.

But I do not know what we can do now that government has refused to pay awarded compensation. Is there any way the lawyers in this House can help us? What do we do? I want to know. Thank you.

3.58
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I thank the committee for the report. I also thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the reports so far submitted to Parliament.

I will start with the issue of bridging the gap between the rural schools and urban schools. Whenever PLE, UCE and UACE results are released, there is excellent performance in the country generally but when you take the proportion of the performance of the rural schools vis-à-vis the urban schools, you realise that most of our rural schools perform badly. I want to urge government to make sure that rural schools have the facilities which can make our pupils and students compete fairly. 

I know the Minister of Education has been building seed schools in every sub-county which does not have a secondary school and so far they have constructed over 66 schools. We have over 1,033 sub-counties and over 300 sub-counties do not have secondary schools. I would love that government comes up with a programme of when these sub-counties will be having seed schools because if a programme has been presented to Parliament, everybody would be happy that come year Alfa, a school will be constructed in my sub-county.

I want to thank the Minister of Education because she has actually tried to post teachers in government schools in rural areas. An example is in my constituency, Buvuma College. Last year, the ministry posted seven teachers; they all reported, obtained their appointment letters and as we talk, only two teachers are reporting. The five have already absconded. The reason is lack of teachers housing. Most of these rural schools cannot compete favourably because they cannot retain the teachers without accommodation. 

So I urge the ministry and government to come up with a concrete programme to make sure that rural schools have teachers’ houses, laboratories and libraries to make sure that we compete because as we talk, it is only urban and Kampala - Kampala is not in any region – which are feeding the universities around yet all Ugandans in every corner of the country need to benefit.

The second issue is about civic education. In all the reports, right from 1999 to 2007, the commission has been reporting on lack of civic education in this country. I remember there was a plan to integrate civic education in the primary and secondary syllabi –

THE SPEAKER: But who is supposed to do civic education? Doesn’t the Uganda Human Rights Commission have a role to play?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I think they just reported their findings so that government can take it up; it was intended to let citizens get to know their rights.

THE SPEAKER: I am saying that is part of their duties.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Let me also advise them to do it if that forms part of their duties.

The third issue is about civic education among the electorates. You will agree with me that most of the people we represent do not know the duties of their leaders. That is why a good number of MPs are being harassed by voters whenever no roads are constructed in their areas. The electorates think that is the duty of the MP. 

So I would like to urge Parliament and government at large, to make sure that however small the budget would be, let us allocate some money to enable the Electoral Commission carry out civic education among the electorates. This will go a long way to save government resources in terms of limiting the number of election petitions. You very well know that whenever there is a by-election we spend a lot of money as government, which would have worked on schools, roads and hospitals. Now that we are in the budgeting process, I would like to suggest that Parliament allocates some money to enable the Electoral Commission start sensitising our people rather than waiting for 2011.

I would like to thank government for increasing and building a number of police stations in the country. However, I would like to note that there is still much to be done. As we talk, because of people wanting services to be taken nearer them, every island in my constituency now has a police post. The problem is that many of these police posts do not have detention cells. The wooden detention cells that are available cannot be used to detain suspects over a night. Most of them keep on escaping. This makes many people to think that policemen connive with these suspects, which is not the case. My suggestion is that government should run a programme of renovating and build new police detention cells in established police units.

I would like to wind up with the issue of the National Employment Policy. I would like to urge government to come up with this policy. We have been told that consultations on this policy begun 13 years ago. We have also been told that at one time it was with the Minister of Finance to secure a certificate of financial implications. But as Parliament, as a nation we do not know at what stage this policy is.

My comments on this policy stems from the fact that last year, we had a number (of pleas) made on the Floor of this Parliament regarding the treatment of Ugandan youths who are working in Iran and the whole of Middle East. It was revealed that the agreements were being reviewed everyday. This is because as government, we do not have any employment policy. Ugandans just get employed at their own cost. The rules are almost not there.

We all know that we operate in a free market economy where the forces of demand and supply determine the price. But when it comes to labour, government needs to be strict. Government needs to have a second thought because of the too much exploitation in disguise by people who are claiming to be offering employment opportunities especially the investors. My urge to government is that as you create an enabling environment to attract investors to provide employment opportunities, you must also address the issue of minimum wage to protect our citizens.

With those few remarks, I would like to end by thanking the committee. I thank you.

4.09
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for the good report. However, I would like to point out that it is unfortunate that Parliament has never considered any reports on human rights since 1999. That is not good.

I would like to base myself on the fact that human rights are the basic rights of man and so one should enjoy those rights regardless of anything else –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, the issue of failure to debate these reports for a long time has been coming up, but I do not know what solutions we may have to provide. There have been suggestions that we set up a special committee to only deal with some of these. I am saying this because according to our line up here, it is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to deal with the Uganda Rights Commission, the Judicial Service Commission, the IGG  reports and so forth.

There have been suggestions that maybe we create another committee that will be dealing with these reports. It is hoped that they will be able to deal with them expeditiously than overloaded the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. You may wish to comment on that if you think that can work as a solution.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, everyone is entitled to enjoy human rights as a matter of fact. I am happy to recognise the tremendous achievements of this government, the National Resistance Movement, and their observance of human rights.

It is true, colleagues have been talking about torture and everything but we should know the history of this country. We should not behave as if we are foreigners here. 

To have one say, “I am happy we are progressively getting there”, violating human rights is bad but what we observe about this government is that whoever does something contrary is punished. At least that is an achievement. 

Human right No.1 is the right to life and I am happy to note that the Government of the National Resistance Movement does not directly kill the citizens of this country. What is clear is that we have lost life through other means. For instance, yesterday we were talking about child sacrifice. Much as government has the duty to protect the citizens, when someone is sacrificed somewhere, we may not blame government directly. It is deplorable that this is happening and it is regrettable but I am happy to note that at least the trend is coming to normal. 

On the other hand, it is unfortunate that a colleague talked about one’s turn today and the other person’s turn tomorrow. It is very unfortunate that such words are coming from a Member of Parliament especially since we think we should end the cycle. When you tell us that there is another turn for someone else really, it is unfortunate -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I gave the example here that hon. Penytoo and others were arrested and tortured in the barracks. One of them was shot on the order of the division commander, now Brigadier Otema Awany. Now the honourable member on the Floor is telling us that this government does not kill directly. Apparently, he is admitting that it is killing indirectly. Oloya was shot when the prison commander started telling his men, “There is strength; he cannot run away. Don’t shoot.” He was shot directly. Is he in order to mislead the House by saying that this government does not kill directly but only indirectly? 

Secondly, I made a statement when I said, “You may be torturing somebody now but next time it may be your turn.” That is why we want this thing to stop so that it does not happen again. Is he in order to allege that I am promoting this practice? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he was appealing to us not to wish other people to suffer in future. (Applause) That let us work things out so that we end this.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I think a colleague got me wrong because I think the killing indirectly is that, for instance, if a child dies of measles, government should protect this child but because of our economy being poor, this child can die. Those are the indirect means I talked about. I think the colleague has got me clearly.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Member. The point of order I want to raise is in relation to that statement which the honourable member has persistently made that government does not directly kill. 

The reports we are reviewing here have got information and documented evidence. I will just give one example of the case of Mamenero, which I personally handled before the Human Rights Commission. It is one of the cases captured here. In this case, a judgement was made that Mamenero was killed by CMI at the CMI headquarters, a government institution, by government officials. The award was 30 million but up to now, the relatives - the death portfolio here of the victims who are supposed to be compensated is 1.5 billion -Mamenero is one of those people who were killed by the state and he has not been - so, is the honourable member in order to insist that government does not kill when the report we are reviewing here is very clear that at least Mamenero was killed and an award was made by the Human Rights Commission? 

THE SPEAKER: What should be understood is that the violation of human rights we are talking about is done by agents of government [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] and that is why government is held liable for acts of its agents. I have found many people in the House who do not appreciate what government is and I at one time laboured to explain what government is. What we are talking about is that obviously, these violations must be done by people but because they are being done by agents of government, government is held liable. Otherwise, the government may not do things if it does not have the agents. So it is the agents that cause the government to be liable for their acts.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good you said you took them to court and the compensation was awarded. I think that is a correct trend because the individual was not sent by government. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you have just provided guidance on this matter and information has been provided in the case by hon. Lukwago. There is also information that on 22 November 2007, Saidi Lutaaya was arrested, tortured in Kololo and killed on 23 November 2007. And my honourable colleague says that it is fair and it is good because costs were awarded? We have just heard the number of incidents the Uganda Human Rights Commission has awarded costs and government has not honoured this.

Secondly, if costs are awarded and you get 30 million, the honourable colleague would like us to believe that that sorts out the needs of your family, your clan and your input which you should have made? For instance, if they torture you and kill your manhood, you would also like us to believe that without your manhood you can buy a child at 30 million, which the state awarded you? Is he therefore in order?

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I was waiting for your ruling because it was a point of order.

THE SPEAKER: I think the best we can do is to limit people to five minutes so that other people can make their contributions also.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the other point I have is the issue of employment. It is very unfortunate that our people do not access employment and even those who are employed are not well paid. A colleague talked about the minimum wage. I think it is high time we debated this and gave our people a minimum wage. I know it is very difficult but it can be done because when you go to work places, people are really suffering. Employers give them the money they wish especially in the private sector.

The other issue is about education because article 23(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights says everyone has a right to education and it should be free especially in the elementary stages. It is unfortunate that much as we have UPE and USE, some parents have continuously refused to take their children to school and we are not doing anything as a government. These children must be taken to school. When you go to the villages, you find children of school going age who are not accessing education. I think these issues should be addressed.

We need to improve on the Police force especially by giving them enough money and more serious training. This is because you find that some of these human rights talked about here are abused because the Police do not have the capacity to handle - the prisons officers, some are not well trained and civic education is non existent. I hope that these things will be addressed. 

I conclude by saying that I still stand firm that this government is moving in the right direction and we shall reach there. Thank you.

4.22
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for good work done and for bringing this report for debate. When you read this report, there is no way you can talk about issues of human rights without talking about democracy and the fundamental question we should ask here is, is Uganda a democracy? Yes, it is. As young as we are, at least it is a democracy. Can violation of human rights occur in a democracy? It is possible because under state dynamics, I think we have the best part of the state and the worst part of the state. It is also possible that under a democracy, human rights can be violated especially when government is not very tight on some of its structures.

I want to admit here that I think in Uganda we have committed some acts of violation of human rights. I have a very good example as my colleagues have said. Patrick Mamenero comes from Ndorwa West in one of the parishes I represent here in Parliament. He was picked from Kabale, alive; came to Kampala, was tortured and went back in a box. We shall never forget that incident as it was very terrifying! What is really painful is that the Attorney-General is here; the Shs 30 million compensation after somebody has been killed and government has accepted that they erred - to say that you cannot pay Shs 30 million for over three years is not acceptable! Attorney-General, this is something that we should really work on and get out of the way.

Torture chambers or safe houses have been reported here and I think it is –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we want to assist people to access these awards, when dealing with the budget we should make sure that there is sufficient money on the item for compensation otherwise the excuse they will make is that they have not been provided with funds. So I think it is advisable that when we are dealing with the budget especially that of Ministry of Justice, we make sure that there are provisions for payment of compensation. Otherwise, there are procedures of enforcing awards against a government. It used to be to commit the Secretary of the Treasury to prison but the defence he would make is, “I have not refused but there are no funds” so when you are dealing with these votes, be careful that you scrutinise and see that there are sufficient funds to meet the compensation awards.

MR BAHATI: Thank you for that guidance, Mr Speaker. Have we had torture chambers or safe houses in this country? The Minister of Defence in the report says yes, but we have closed them. Some of them were because of the difficult situation we were going through; terrorism, others were because of errors within the system. I am happy that the Minister of Defence could admit and say that they are closing them and this is something that should be closed.

I just want to make two other points before I sit. One is the rights at work. The report raises issues of social security systems for the informal sector. I think this is an idea that we have debated here several times and we require the Minister of Finance to come here with the necessary reforms to change the social security sector and provide social security for the informal sector in this country.

The committee raises the issue of the need to have a law banning homosexuality. Mr Speaker, I just want to inform you that in your absence we received overwhelming support and I want to thank the House here, myself and a colleague from the great party of the past, the UPC, hon. Benson Obua Ogwal for seeking leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill dealing with homosexuality. This is something that I agree with and we are happy that even in the report the committee has mentioned that homosexuality is not a human right and as a country, we shall never accept it. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR SPEAKER: Hon. Wacha, I thought that you are a member of this committee.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I was going to explain why I was standing up to contribute. (Laughter) Maybe I should do that now. As you might have noticed from the report, I did not sign the report because it was compiled in my absence when I was away with you somewhere -(Laughter)- so I want to contribute a bit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will consider it.

4.29
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for their report. I am particularly concerned with the issues on page 6 of the report, paragraph 5, talking about UPE in convection to children with disabilities. 

It is very true that ten years ago the government did quite a lot of good work. Wheelchairs were provided and Braille papers were given. Honourable members will agree with me that in the 45 districts we had, we had in each one of then a yellow pickup moving round to asses the educational needs of children with disabilities and referring them accordingly. But as I talk now, it has become history. These things are no longer being distributed, disabled children cannot move easily to the UPE schools because wheelchairs are no longer being distributed. 

Mr Speaker, one wheelchair costs Shs 150,000; poor parents cannot afford it at all. In schools where there are blind children, Braille papers are not available; Braille machines are no longer there. Disabled children have become observers in the UPE programmes. 

I am really appealing to government to go back to what they did ten years ago. If government could do this very good work ten years ago, why don’t we continue doing the real good work so that disabled children can learn together with their counterparts? 

You will realize that deaf children, particularly in UPE schools, don’t have sign language interpreters and it is true that ten years ago teachers were trained in Kyambogo but these teachers never went back. They went for greener pastures and they are not going back to do what they were trained for because of poor motivation. I know this government is able to do it and I am appealing to my government to do what they did ten years ago so that disabled children can learn like others. I thank you. 

4.32
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I first of all want to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the job well done, together with the committee. I took time to read the report and I am really glad that the Uganda Human Rights Commission had the courage to highlight the fact that the government is a big time violator of human rights. I am strictly going to dwell on human rights because I have realized that we have a lot of issues. 

First of all, I am going look at the issue of corporal punishment. Maybe I will have to thank the Ministry of Education because it has tried to do something, much as it is not good enough. Under the ministerial circular of 2006 and in the UPE guidelines of 2008, Article 3.4, there is explicit prohibition of corporal punishment. And I realise that the courts of Uganda have done a lot as far as prohibiting corporal punishment is concerned, for instance in the case of Simon Kyamanywa v Uganda. 

However, there is still a lot of abuse especially in schools and even in some universities. I think the House will agree with me that there is still a lot of corporal punishment in schools. A number of schools, for example, Gombe SSS, Kibibi SSS, Nalya SSS; they cane students excessively.

MR SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, are you aware that some parents do not approve of the ban on the caning of children? Actually they think it should continue; they are not happy that it was banned. 

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for you guidance. I, however, believe that disciplining is not strictly in caning. Currently in Uganda there are even universities where they cane, like in the Islamic University of Uganda in Mbale. I believe there are other alternative ways of disciplining other than caning. 

I do not know whether you have addressed your mind to the case of Emmanuel Mpondi where court ruled that it was actually illegal and inconsistent with the Constitution.

If I go to the side of torture, in Uganda there is a lot of torture; we are reading these stories in the newspapers and they have become advertisements on televisions et cetera. If I may read verbatim, page 63 on payment of victims and awards to victims of humans rights by the Attorney-General and if I may read under 4: “According to the tenth annual report to the Uganda human Rights Commission of 2007, the amount awarded so far against the Attorney-General is slightly above Shs 2.1 billion”. We are now bragging that we are compensating these people off the taxpayer’s money but there are other fields where we could put that money, for example, in health. I believe it is better for us to do away with the torture other than simply compensating. Because these people torture people day in day out; they make reports; they make inquiries but they are left to go scot-free; they do not learn anything. When these people are interrogated; people are tortured. I believe they should even put cameras in those interrogation rooms. That is why these people make confessions and they retract them at the same time.

I would also like to address myself to the issues of juvenile justice. I believe we are still doing very badly. I had a chance of visiting Mbale Remand Home and it is like these children are just dumped there. They are left at the mercy of Grade II Magistrates and the probation officers are put in custody, mere hearsay -

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleague for giving me way. For purposes of record, I want to put it right that at the Islamic university of Uganda in Mbale they never cane people, because I am a former student of that university and up to now I am still in touch with people from that university. Even when they are graduating I am there. They have never caned people. Even if you do not put on Hijab, you are not beaten.

MS NAKAWUKI: I believe the honourable member is just wasting my time. What I am talking about is different.

MS OLERU: The honourable member is giving wrong information to the House. I just want to correct the record. They do not beat people in that university.

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker, I am talking as a learned friend, I do not talk unless I have done some research. So, you should come to me, I will give you names of people who have been beaten in that university.

Before she diverted my debate, I was talking about juvenile justice. I think we can use non-custodial sanctions because -(Interjections) 

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this House we have people who have attained degrees from Islamic University. I am a member of the board of that university. I have never heard such information; I have been a parent in Islamic University, I have three children who have graduated from there. At least I would have heard about this. So, we should have the record clear. Is it in order for a Member of this august House to allege that the Islamic University in Uganda canes mature students without any evidence?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nakawuki, you have been challenged that you do not have any information. Do you have the information on which you based your allegations?

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker, I am reliably informed. If the honourable member is on the board, I will get these students because I am a student of the Law Development Centre and I am studying with those students -(Interjections)- if she is interested, because now they are interrupting my debate - I am on something else. If you want information -

THE SPEAKER: No, we want the information.

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: We want the information. Can you substantiate your claim?

MS NAKAWUKI: Mr Speaker, I will lay it on the Table. I have studied with these students at the LDC. I have information from them. That is why I am saying I am reliably informed. So if they want the information, we will bring it. Why are they scared? (Mr Byarugaba rose_) These people are really wasting my time, I seek your protection -(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, with all due respect, is it honestly in order for an hon. Member of Parliament to consistently insist that there is caning in the Islamic university when there are four hon. Members of Parliament who have given evidence to the effect that there is no beating and caning of students in that university? She is consistently insisting that there is caning when she has no empirical evidence. Is she in order? We want the record to be put correct. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: What we wanted her to do is to substantiate. Maybe she may have information which in good faith she believed but we are saying can we get that information?

MS NAKAWUKI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker -(Members rose_)- these people are confusing me. You should give me chance to submit. You will also get your time.

I was talking about juvenile justice. These children are arrested over mere allegations and hearsay and they are kept there and they are forgotten there; the probation officers do not even go ahead to follow them up and they end up missing their education when they are just in custody.

I believe if we also made empowered the local council courts, just in case we get local councils put in place tomorrow, they can help, because some of these people do not even need some of these children taken to the remand homes adding expense on government.

I would also like to talk about the issue of Karamoja. On page 49 the report talks about these people voluntarily returning home, but they are no incentives. These people are not motivated to go back; even those who went back home are dying of hunger. They have nothing to eat and eat just tree leaves. I went there and it was disheartening. I am talking from an informed point of view. A lot needs to be done; this should be addressed with the emergence that it deserves. Thank you.

4.44
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I would like to add to the recommendations of the committee that they would have added that government needs to adopt a human rights approach to governance, that would address issues of democracy, development, provision of water for Karamoja, because water is just a basic human right, whether it is water for production or water for consumption [HON. MEMBERS: “Food”] of course food is a basic human right since 1914, but I am talking about this other new human rights which the government needs to embrace. This would help us to address all these challenges we are facing.

Hon. Omara Atubo said we should live in the future, in regard to these safe houses. My uncle Ogwang Alebe was arrested and detained in numerous safe houses in this country right from soroti. Maybe, the Ministers of Security and Defence will tell us whether they have all been abolished. He was tortured, he still traumatized and he needs to undergo an operation on his backbone. Up to now we are still trying to look for the money. I really think even when we try to live in the future, there are certain coincidences which make you not forget the past. If we all embraced and respected human rights, it would not only be good for us in Opposition, but also you on the other side; because that way, we would develop as a country.

There is the issue of restocking that the committee talked about. Restocking has been going on but it is not very meaningful to some of our people who lost their animals. They bring one calf for four families and yet you lost 100. A case is Mzee Oumo who lost about 3,000 head of cattle and part of them ended in the barracks in Kumi. To date he has not been compensated. So, when they come up with a detailed report of those who have been compensated, there are people who lost their animals, maybe the soldiers needed to have some meat, they ate them up; they should restock them, but they should also bear in the mind the multiplier effect of the animals. That will address the issue of poverty in the Northern region. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.47
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very delighted about the recommendations from the committee and the job well done by the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Right on the Floor of Parliament today, I want a number of people to envisage what is enshrined in Article 20 of the Constitution, which vehemently comes out and highlights the fact that rights are inherent and not granted by the state.

Looking at page 4 and 5 of the report, categorically I have been able to pull out a paragraph where government should bridge the gap between the urban and rural based schools. This should go to the Ministry of Education; it has been highlighted by the hon. William Nsubuga. Whereas I am a Member of Parliament for some area on land, I also do legislate for islands, Kivenyanja, Busi and Zinga where the state of the schools is really appalling. I call upon the Ministry of Education to pull up their socks to enhance our abilities as people from that area.

Furthermore, the right to health at the islands; I call upon the Ministry of Health, we sincerely need more health facilities for Zinga, Kivenyanja and Busi and we sincerely seek the indulgence of the ministry though on a number of times I have written to the Minister of Health and I have got no response.

Lastly, on my way to Parliament today I met a Sudanese national called Haruna Issa. He provided a service for the Ministry of Education to which he was supposed to be paid US $1.3 million but because there is a very unprecedented practice where members of security organs and the UPDF have failed to desist from the practice of just taking on people and putting them in safe houses, Sammy Haruna Issa, although he did offer a service of carrying cargo for the UPDF, he has never been paid. 

They attempted to kill him and he has categorically brought it out, that it is from people, the likes of Mr Talemwa who is known for beating up people in the West. He has imprisoned this gentleman, beaten up the entire family in Entebbe and we pray that this practice should stop. And be it the first family; be it we as Members of Parliament; be it the ministers; be it the security agencies; we should refrain from abuse of law. This practice of torture should stop forthwith. 

Be it a brother to the President; be it that you are a brother to Jovia Saleh, like Taremwa, he should refrain from such practices. He should stop beating up people like we see him all over newspapers. He imprisoned this gentleman because they went into a sour deal and this has been a practice. We call onto all these people to sway away from illegal practice and procedure.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the honourable member but what is happening now is that we are mentioning people who have no access to this Chamber, to this microphone, and we are talking about them and mentioning them by name, we are saying they have committed this or that. Is the honourable member in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think we should always avoid talking about people adversely in our contributions when they cannot come to deny this or the other. It is the best practice to do.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker, but it is reported in the papers and sincerely if it is a requirement that I have to bring it before Parliament, I shall bring it because it is mandatory.

I would like to bring this to the attention of the Attorney-General that a one Vincent Kasozi was imprisoned in 2002 and released in 2006 towards elections. He was released on police bond, yet he had been in Kigo prisons for four years without trial. It is against such background, hon. Attorney-General that we call upon government-

THE SPEAKER: Why didn’t he apply for bail?

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Mr Speaker, he applied for bail as mandated in Article 23 of the Constitution but it was denied until I had to write to the Commissioner of Prisons, Mr Joseph Etima, that is when I first approached the Director of Public Prosecutions, he could not believe it, and he told me that he was going to make a communication –(Interruption)

MR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for giving way. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, but I want to concretise this point. There are very many people who rot especially in community cells kind of prisons; they have no access to any judicial process. 

A case in point is in my constituency Buikwe where a magistrate visits once in a while and even outside the time - say 5.00 p.m. or 6.00 p.m. and his job is to ask for a bribe and if that is denied, they are kept in custody. On flimsy reasons people are kept for over two months in custody and they have no way of getting out.

THE SPEAKER: I thought somebody is remanded with an order that he appears in court on a particular day; isn’t that the procedure?

DR BAYIGGA: The procedure is not even known. It is oblivious in community courts.

THE SPEAKER: No, when somebody is remanded, he is not remanded indefinitely but they say he will be produced in court after one month or two.

DR BAYIGGA: The remand is usually increased bi-monthly but he may come back after two or three months. That is where the trouble is.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you for giving way. Last year my party, the Democratic Party, received a letter from Kigo Prison. I laid it on the Table in this House that letter where prisoners had complained they had been in detention for the last seven years. The Speaker then promised that investigations were going to be done and a report made to the House. To date, since last year, nothing has happened.

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you. It is my humble appeal, hon. Attorney-General –(Member timed out)

4.57
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to this report. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the extensive report they have given on human rights’ abuses over eight years. It has already been mentioned that if possible, this report should come every year so that things are done in time. 

I would like to dwell on two issues only. On page 23, child sacrifice and ritual murders have been mentioned and I do not know whether traditional healers would be responsible for these acts because as far as I know, traditional healers have come forward to assist Police to identify these people who are carrying out these murders and child sacrifice. And I am happy to note that the Minister of Internal Affairs is doing something which may enable us to eliminate these abominable acts.

I am also happy to note that the ministry according to the report has put in place a national task force to find ways and means of stamping out these murders and child sacrifice. 

What I would like to urge members to do is that actually they should differentiate between traditional healers who constitute our national heritage of medicine, and witches, which they term doctors whereas they are not doctors, so that we recognise the service of traditional healers who have been with us since time immemorial. Witches have also been there but these are criminals and if the two are separated, I think we will be in a better position to evaluate the rightful people who are carrying out these child sacrifice and ritual murders.

The other point I would like to consider is on page 33 - the national culture policy. I am also happy that the ministry has come up with a national culture policy although Ugandans are known to put forward very good policies but they are never implemented or if implemented, they are poorly implemented. But I hope that this national culture policy will be properly implemented to curb some of these acts. 

Our culture is also our backbone; a nation without culture is a nation without direction. But I must say that there are negative aspects of culture and these have been mentioned in the report. For example, female genital mutilation is a negative aspect of our culture. Early child marriage is a negative aspect of our culture and of course in the period of HIV/AIDS, widow inheritance is a negative culture. I am happy that if this policy is implemented these negative aspects of our culture will be eliminated. I thank you.

5.03
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I thank you and thank the committee for this report but more so I want to thank the Human Rights Commission for discharging its duty. 

However, what I want to reflect on is that I do not know what was in the plans of this government when it set itself to establish the Human Rights Commission. Probably they thought the Human Rights Commission would be only evaluating a third party and not the Government of Uganda that is headed by NRM.

In 1986, after the NRM assumed power, the authorities that be made a lot of statements. In doing that they set very high standards for themselves especially on issues of governance, human rights and democracy. Past leaders were called all sorts of name. Some were called swine; some were called biological substances, and others were called killers, and probably Anyanyas and “Northerners”. Today we are being reminded occasionally that we should not forget our history. But if the history was characterised with killing and killers, these accusations will still persist. I do not know whether the current leaders will not also be called swine or killers by governments that will come after NRM.

I know and I am happy that NRM is now getting the experience of running a government. These are very good testimonies – one thing and the principle mandate of a government is to protect the lives and property of the citizens under its governance. 

When I heard Members of Parliament on the government side say that this government does not kill directly but that it probably it kills through its agents, I raised a question: which government would kill directly? There is no single government that can do that. Every individual would aspire to come to power to manage the affairs of the state very effectively. It is only the agents of a given Government that cause problems. 

I am happy that you are now part of the situation and admitting that indeed some of the gents are engaged in violation of human rights as documented in both the international and our local Uganda Human Rights Commission reports. When you were warned by hon. Okello-Okello that it might be us this time, but that later on it might be you, you got scared. But these are clear challenges of running state affairs.

I would like to say that if you fail to protect the lives and your citizens die in camps or they loose their lives through rebel activities, such a government will have failed in its principle mandate. 

Secondly, if lives and property of people in half of the country cannot be protected and over 80 percent of their wealth is lost through cattle rustling or ruthless and unconstitutional means, such a government is, in future, held responsible on matters of accountability. I would like to say that the Human Rights Commission has done a good job by submitting the report on its findings. I would like to thank the committee for presenting the summaries of the concerns that government should pay attention to. 

I appeal to government to ensure this kind of persistent reports relating to unlawful arrests, killings and safe houses stops with this report. We should get a much healthier and more promising report from the commission in future. 

I would like to conclude by stating that we should avoid the practice of what we read in Animal Farm. In that book, there is a key person in terms of a pig called Squealer whose work was to keep changing the rules every other day. I see some of these people – hon. Amama Mbabazi just made statements here in passing and walked out. He said that they dashed to the bush because there was gross violation of human rights, which is wrong. What I know is that these people went to the bush in January after elections had been conducted in December of the previous year. How much human rights violations had taken place in a period of just one month when the government was just being constituted? (Laughter) And the first accusation was that the elections had been rigged. But now he is telling us, almost a quarter a century later, while in power, that their going to the bush was based on the issues of human rights violations. I think government should be clear on its own missions and why it should insist on governing this country. I thank you.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the debate in respect to the Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Let me start by saying that the respect, defence and promotion of human rights are the foundations of a happy and stable society. I believe that is why in Article 20 of the Constitution, which is the opening of Chapter IV on the protection and promotion of fundamental, and other human rights and freedoms, these things are clearly stated. Article 20(1) reads as follows: “Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the state.” 

And Article 20(2) reads as follows: “The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.”

Even the opening chapter of the UN Human Rights Declaration of 1948 speaks of the same. The United Nations Charter that established the United Nations also states the very provisions. 

It also adds that the foundation of human happiness and stability is the respect of human rights and freedoms. The causes of World War II which gave birth to the United Nations as well as to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were from the history of what the world had gone through, that is, destructive and gross violations of human rights in states of war and hence those two fundamental documents, the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. And our Constitution derives a lot from those two documents. 

Now, therefore, for us in this House who are charged with the responsibility of representing our people and speaking for them, the struggle for human rights is a continuous process and in this I would like to pose four fundamental questions. For us really to defend, debate and to uphold these fundamental points, I want to pose four questions.

The first one is about the laws in place. What laws do we have in place for the protection, defence and promotion of human rights starting with this Constitution?

Two, what are the institutions in place for the promotion, protection and defence of human rights? 

Three, who have been the main violators of human rights in this country? And finally, what have been the causes of these violations of human rights?

I pose these questions but because of the limited time, I cannot answer all of them. However, let me talk about the institutions in place. I want to particularly commend the Human Rights Commission. 

The Human Rights Commission was created by the people of Uganda. The Odoki Commission went around this country and the Human Rights Commission was very much high up in the minds of the people of Uganda. That is why it came by this Constitution; it was not created by the NRM Government. 

I want all of you to be proud of the Human Rights Commission not as a creation of any particular Government in power but as a creation of the voices of the people of Uganda. And we must support it. 

I am proud for those who have worked for it. I want to commend those who have done work it. I think their reports which I have gone through are in this Parliament. I have basically been a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee and I have seen their reports and I want to commend them.

Before I sit down, let me clarify the statement that I have been a victim of governments in this country. I have been arrested four times, twice under this government and twice under Amin’s Government. I have lived in exile. If there is a person who is serious on the issue of human rights, I am that person. So when I say that I want to leave in the future and not in the past, I want you to understand what I mean. I want those who refer to my arrests and torture, not in a mocking way, not as a way of causing more pain to me and my family - I know what I have gone through and I want you, when you are quoting my case, to refer to it not for purposes of laughing and so forth but for purposes of making me go through -(Applause)

I am a person and I call upon the people of Uganda, please we have lived through terrible days since our independence. Let us learn to have forgiveness. If we do not learn to forgive, then there will be no peace in the North and those who have violated human rights in the North; those wars we have gone through, not necessarily from the NRM Government, we know them, then we shall not be able to forgive one another. 

I think we must go to the root cause of our human rights violations, the causes of war in this country and the violators and not just the government in power.

Also, let us allow this country to heal. If we do not allow ourselves to heal and we keep on pointing at each other, we are not going to heal. (Applause) 

Finally, let us build a firm foundation of human rights, irrespective of our political, religious or tribal beliefs. And let us hold accountable all those who violate human rights. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.18
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report and I want to say that this report is timely especially on our side because we have enough time to examine our actions.

I want to add my voice to the sentiments raised about human rights violations. I will base my debate on two issues, that is, the right to life, education, health and dignity. 

Every time, and often, we read in the reports that women are dying due to insufficient services in the health centres and in the hospitals. Every hour, 6,000 women die. The right to life of those women is violated by Government, and by players who do not ensure that facilities are provided for women to access health care.

There are also silent citizens in this country who we do not know how they live, where they sleep, where they go for education, who treats them and how they produce, that is, the street children.

In the Children’s Act and in the Constitution, children have a right to life, to dignity, to shelter, education and so forth. Everyday, all of us drive by and look at these street children begging on the streets but we do not even mind how many are HIV infected. We do not know how many do not eat. We do not know how many are knocked on the streets. We do not know how many are murdered. Where are the rights of those children?

In this report, 77,000 people died of HIV/AIDS just in 2007. How many lives are those? Do we have value for life? The cases of the children who are burnt in schools are not even well examined. Where are those rights observed?

I want to talk about the issue of budgeting for compensation of victims of torture. I think this will be encouraging, “Torture, kill and compensate.” How many times, and for how long, are we going to kill and torture and compensate people? It is high time we stopped this kind of treatment that we give to our fellow citizens. Everybody has a right to life; everybody has to enjoy this country because we are all citizens and we work for it.

Lastly, I want to talk about the professionalism of security personnel. Two weeks ago we read in the papers about an intruder who was shot on spot. We have been talking about professionalising the army, Police and so forth. Don’t we have professionals who can just arrest somebody who is not armed instead of shooting him on spot? How are we observing the rights of citizens? (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, my colleague for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that in the village where I live that is Kakungulu Akright housing estate, a month ago we had a lot of insecurity. We asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to our rescue. The Police who were on our detach got some people suspected to be waylaying others on the road. They were rolling big stones on the road. Because insecurity had risen, one of those who were rolling the stones was shot and killed as he was running away. The three police officers on duty were all arrested and as I talk, one of them is in Makindye. 

I am wondering about the contradiction of how we apply our law that others can shoot suspects and kill them on spot and they are not arrested while that Policeman is up to now still in Makindye because he did a wrongful professional act. Thank you.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, honourable colleague for the information. Mr Speaker, those are just a few examples we can give but very many are happening out there.

Lastly, I want to appeal to the Parliament that we should speed up legislation of pending Bills that have human rights concerns. These include the FGM Bill, which we tabled here, the Sexual Violence Bill, the Anti- Homosexuality Bill and the HIV/AIDS Control Bill. These Bills are urgently needed in our community and will help us, the Human Rights Commission and other role players in the field to ensure that Human Rights are taken care of. 

I want to appeal to everybody especially the leaders. Let us not sit and laugh about this inhuman treatment. Let us love our country, others and ourselves. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the report for a job well done by the Human Rights Commission and by the committee. I want to start by talking about the rights of children. The report notes that the rights of children are being abused especially by alcoholism. We have a problem in this country. There are companies, I hear mainly owned by foreigners that are packaging alcohol in small sachets, which cost Shs 100. 

On our field trip, my committee found that not only adults but also children have access to this alcohol and it is destroying our country. We have a situation where a child fetches water for a building site, is able to access a little money and goes and buys this alcohol. Can we, as a government, stop this destruction of society? This is because people are going when we are looking and we are talking about –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Lagada for giving me the opportunity to give you information. Mr Speaker, in the district of Dokolo, during the last elections and even currently, tot pack waragi is being distributed generally and in many instances, children and old women are being raped after dancing sprees. So I think this is a matter, which must be taken very urgently because people know how to solicit for votes at the last minute. They take discos to certain areas, collect children and old women and feed them with waragi and this is a serious matter. Thank you.

MS LAGADA: Thank you for the information. This just goes to underlie the serious problem that I see in these tot packs. I want to thank hon. Concy Aciro, MP Amuru where I also happen to have a home and a farm, for raising issues concerning IDPs who have gone home and for saying that the people there are traumatised. It is true; it is not only the UPDF officers that are having conflicts of land in those areas. 

My family owns a lot of land but can you believe that after paying for tractors and opening up a lot of land to plant, some other people came from another sub-county five miles away and planted in our gardens? That is the level of trauma. Now I have the trouble of going to get Police to go and dig up whatever they planted on our farm. So the conflict of land is something serious and I want to appeal to government not to take this matter lightly because people are killing themselves. There is so much trouble and to be sure, even the leaders are as traumatised as the people they lead. We need help and we need it badly.

I want to commend the government. As it comes out in the report, there is increased level of women participation but the report also notes that the Minister of Justice did promise on this floor that they were going to bring the gender related Bills in two weeks and now I think it is over two months ago. Where is the Domestic Violence Bill? Where is the Muslim Personal Administration law? Where is the Family and Divorce Bill? We cannot keep on and on yet you see that there is a lot of domestic violence, people are suffering and we keep on crying for these Bills a hundred times and they are not coming. 

Lastly, the Ministry of Gender has explained that they have given Shs 3 billion to NGOs for orphans and vulnerable children and the committee does note that NGOs are not evenly distributed. It is very true. I represent Oyam, which borders Gulu. Gulu is full of NGOs but Oyam people hardly have any so how will we be able to benefit if government is going to forfeit most of its responsibility to NGOs whose activities are so difficult to monitor? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.30
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the committee for this fat, informative report. I should also thank the Human Rights Commission for giving us this information because I think I am more educated and more informed than before I read this report.

I want to go to education. I want to thank the Ministry of Education and government for giving us UPE and USE.  I think many children have been able to go to school   because of the provision of those two policies. But I want to talk about UPE. I have seen and found children who have attended primary leaving examinations of which some cannot even read. What I have gathered is that some teachers teach children to pass tests and examinations and leave the rest only to drop out of school.  

I want to urge government and the Ministry of Education to reinforce the inspection department so that these people are able to go around the schools to see which teachers are doing an effective job and who are not. Because there is no reason why we should be paying the primary teachers who are not teaching and do not come to schools at all.

MS KAMYA: May I give you information, honourable colleague?

MRS MAGOOLA: Yes, please.

MS KAMYA: I thank you honourable member for the opportunity you have given me to take the Floor. Every year for the last couple of years, government brings to this House a report in which it is reported that about 1 million children between the ages of 5 and 7 register to start their primary education under the UPE programme. 

After seven years, government comes here and tells us that only 450,000 children sat for UPE, which means that 550,000 dropped out. And after four years, we are informed that 160,000 sat for O’ Levels last year, which means that 240,000 dropped out. Of the total sum of 1 million children who started P1, 800,000 did not complete O’ Levels. 

I want to relate this to the President’s speech –(Interjection)– yeah, I want to give her information; this is very important - who said recently that in his home, Mr Kaguta will be the last peasant. He said: “In my family, Mr Kaguta will be the last peasant.” I would like to know whether these 800,000 can also be the last peasants?

THE SPEAKER: Are you seeking clarification or it is information?

MS KAMYA: That is the information I wanted to give to this House. (Laughter)

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you, colleague. Mr Speaker, the committee commented on the gap between rural and urban schools. This is real because we have seen schools which at the end of the year may have just one pupil who has passed PLE in grade I and that means that the biggest number has either gone with grade II but mainly grade III and IV.  

Secondly the gap appears when we are talking about   secondary schools in each sub-county; I have about five sub-counties which do not have secondary schools, which means that the children from those sub-counties have got to walk distances from their sub-counties to go to other sub-counties. Therefore, those children are likely to fall victims of child abuse because as they walk back to their homes at night, that is when they are picked on and are either taken as wives or something else. 

Child abuse is rampant in our own homes; the parents burn their own children; beat their own children severely and sometimes lock them up in cold places because they have stolen Shs 100. I think that that is very bad on the part of the parents. 

But we have those who have been sexually abused; we have seen and heard a two months’ old child being sexually abused. I think that is the worst that we have ever heard. But what I think is that our laws are not to punish such people and deter the wrong doers from abusing our children. 

I would like to ask Parliament that we strengthen our laws and those which have not been enacted, which are on the shelves be passed now so that we can protect our children. And I also want to ask the Human Rights Commission to see to it that they continue getting information where there is abuse of our children. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.37
MS MARGARET NALUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the previous speakers who have thanked the Uganda Human rights Commission and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for such an extensive report on the human rights of the people of this country.  

I want to especially commend the committee for highlighting the issue of domestic violence and gender based violence. All of us know and many civil society organisations have pointed out and have reported cases of women being battered, cases of women being raped, cases of children being defiled by non other that their fathers; cases of children under the torture of house maids; cases of children being burnt by not only step parents but even the biological parents. 

The situation of human rights is really serious especially in this small cell of a family. And I really feel that if government does not really come up to address human rights starting from our families in this country, the multiplier effect on all aspects will be very bad.

I get reports now and from women in my constituency whose matrimonial homes have been sold off by husbands without the knowledge and consent of the wives and the entire family -(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you for giving way. I would like to give you information that about two months ago, we were here, all dressed in white and we were requesting that the Domestic Relations Bill and the family law be brought here.   

The candle is still here; it is still burning. Up to now, we have followed up this problem but nothing has been done. You remember the Executive reassured you that within 45 days, the DRB and the Domestic Violence Bill would be here. So, colleague we do not know when the ministry will bring this Bill. Otherwise, what ever we are talking about rotates around those Bills, which infringe on the rights of women. Thank you.

MS NALUGO: I thank you for that information. I cannot continue mentioning the cases where human rights of women or children especially have been violated but this report has gone ahead to tell us that 120 cases of domestic violence were reported by the media alone, in 2000. Just think of the cases that went unattended to. It further said, according to the Human Rights Watch Report 2000, the percentage was at 41. That is very big and it is intolerable.

This report further observed that domestic violence and gender based violence was largely not tackled through the policies and programmes of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This is a very big challenge.

5.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Firstly, I would like to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the work they do. Additionally I would like to appreciate the Ugandan media for the continued effort they put into highlighting cases of human rights violation in this country.

I would like to take issue with the use of the word “safe houses” and pray that in subsequent reports the word “safe house” should not be used. They should be called “torture houses” because what obtains in them is not safety but torture.

For the record, we had heard that these torture houses exist in Kololo summit view, Kireka head quarters, the CMI headquarters, Kisasi and in some instances even in police stations; for instance, the Nalufenya police station, torture takes place. 

There is a facility that the police do not manage. For the record, while the Minister of Defence said they closed the torture houses, it is also known, we reported in this House on 11 April 2009 that the Mayor of Hoima, Mr Atugonza, had been arrested on 11 April 2009 and kept in the Summit View torture house in Kololo. 

We finally were able to trace him; he was dumped in a police station but he left behind 40 people, men and women whose nails had been removed by pliers.

That is the torture that every one of us should be concerned about because it takes various forms. This aspect of detaining people beyond the 48 mandatory hours is one that is always used to create room for people to be locked away. Members of Parliament are also familiar with the Friday arrests. You are arrested on Friday; there is a very high likelihood you could end up in a torture facility because you cannot be produced in courts of law within the mandatory 48 hours. The question of using ill-trained SPCs, Arrow Boys and whatever to conduct arrests is also one aspect that persuades this aspect of torture.

I say the question of Arrow Boys because there was a report again in the Uganda Human Rights Commission reports where one Pius Ogwang of Soroti District was killed at the orders of the then RDC of Soroti between 2003 and 2004. This RDC is now a minister and a Member of Parliament and up to now the relatives of Ogwang Pius have not been compensated.

What should we like to see? Instead of government coming here and continuing to deny especially the Minister of Security, coming to deny here and saying that these things do not exist when a reputable institution of government and Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, Foundation For Human Rights Initiative, Civil Society Organisation, all of them have come up and said these things are happening.

Instead of denying, the minister and indeed agents of government should look at ways in which these issues are sorted out because torture takes the form of extra judicial killings; it takes the form for interrogations, electric shocks, invisible torture, false confessions, collective punishment – I know of women who have been arrested because their husbands cannot be traced and the report highlights this collective torture. I know of people who have been tortured and dumped in police cells. This Parliament should be calling on government, first of all, to close the torture houses. It is important that our government closes the torture houses. Otherwise, this is a vote of no confidence in the judicial system of this country. Why should we continue appropriating money for professional police, for prisons, when you can on your own sort out any cases of suspicion of crime in your torture houses? Either you close them or you run the torture houses.

I want to call on government to investigate these allegations, in line with the Covenant on Civil Political Rights, which prohibits arbitrary detention. Uganda is also a party to the convention against torture. It is the same government that is the type I am talking about -(Member timed out)

5.48
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will pick it from where I stopped when I had chance to give a point of information. I just want to wrap it with the Attorney-General present that the Judiciary leaves a lot to be desired, particularly in rural constituencies where some of us come from.

I want an investigation into how suspects are held in detention for long and they have no access to judicial services and they continue to rot there without even assistance including food and health care.

This is very important because people can revolt against whoever has arrested them, such people are made to work for long hours and they are paid in terms of food, some of these food rations are not even enough. There cannot be any grave concern to human rights abuse than that as far as these prisons are concerned.

The report talks about 80 percent of the health care in terms of HIV/AIDS care being donor funded. This is a very serious issue particularly when you are talking about care with ARV treatment. It being donor funded would mean that the response to things like credit crunch is met adversely by those who are accessing such treatment. 

Long term treatment and the adherence to this treatment is paramount for if at all somebody does not adhere then death is likely to ensue or the sickness does not become amenable to the treatment available. I think this government should wake up and continuously budget for HIV/AIDS care from our own budget so that the global shocks in the economy do not affect the treatment of people on life long treatment.

Last is the issue of food, which is a basic human right, and I am glad that the Human Rights Commission has picked it up. I had sensitised Members of Parliament about it. When we are talking about food security, we are talking about the starvation of our children at school. Whereas government pushes this responsibility to the parents, we should know that 45 percent of this population is food stressed and, therefore, parents who will not be in position to have their meals at home will find it difficult to push their children to school especially in UPE schools with food as advised by the law of this government. 

The teachers have been saying they are weary of teaching children on empty stomachs. They are teaching on empty stomachs themselves and even the children are studying on empty stomachs. That accounts to the failure rate and dropout rate in this country. 

Food is a basic human right and must be upheld. The 45 percent of this country who are food stressed have the right to be fed by this government and we can pick it up as a political issue if at all there is no response. I can take the information.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. The right to food is a human right and it is not only violated in schools. Sometime back, I received a long letter from a prisoner in Luzira complaining about the food situation. That at about 11 a.m. one is given what is supposed to be beans without anything. And at about 2 O’clock, one is given posho without sauce and they chew like a dog and at 3.00 p.m. you are locked up and you go to bed. 

DR BAYIGGA: Finally is the right for equal pay for equal amount of work. Some of our professionals particularly in the medical profession have been crying foul about the poor payment of the health workers. This explains the exodus of some of these professionals to other greener pastures, therefore, having a secondary effect of denying our population of the right to health care that they need. 

This report needs to give us a wake up call as government to ensure that our health professionals are given the salaries they deserve for the work and the professional input they put so that we can retain them to help our population and to cater for the health care of this country. I thank you.

5.54
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, first, I thank the Human Rights Commission, especially the former commissioners who are the authors of the reports that we are discussing today, for their boldness and for the very serious manner in which they handled their work. I sincerely hope the new commissioners will take note of this seriousness and continue along that line.

Secondly, I want to agree with my old colleague and comrade, hon. Omara Atubo that in handling matters of human rights, we must divorce ourselves from political sides. We Members of Parliament swore to protect and uphold the Constitution. The Constitution that we swore to abhors torture, abhors mistreatment of human beings and does not like – abhors - ill treatment of human beings. And that is the basis of human rights.

I wish I were talking when hon. Amama Mbabazi was still around but I am sure he will be informed. He claims there are no more safe houses for purposes of torture. This is not a new statement from hon. Amama Mbabazi. He is echoing what was stated in 2004 by hon. Mukasa Muluri when he stated in this House that safe houses as safe houses for torture were already closed and what was there were safe houses for purposes of intelligence work. Hon. Amama Mbabazi stated this in 2005 also in this House and also when meeting members of Human Rights Watch.

In a report which was presented to a committee of this House, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which was chaired on that day by hon. Kasamba, the report is dated April 2009, Human Rights Watch still claims and states specifically - and hon. Kasamba is here – that one of those safe houses is close to the top of Kololo Hill, near the Summit View Military area and it comprises of a residential house with a reception room and offices on the top floors. 

And according to former detainees, male detainees were most frequently held in the garage area, notoriously called the go-down, some women were kept on the porch of the house or in the rooms of the house, a water point for detainees exists which is shared and that some of the former detainees were held in the toilet area as well. 

I had hoped that some methods of detention had improved because towards the end of 1986, I personally was held in a toilet area near Christ the King here by utility which was being commanded then by Lt Katsigazi - and you remember in 1986 there was no water in toilets. 

Do these things still exist, sir? Yes, according to a letter dated 14 May 2009 to hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga from Human Rights Watch, 3505th Avenue New York, Human Rights Watch wants to know the whereabouts of four detainees – Hamza Mwebe who, according to Brigadier Mugira, was arrested on 28 February 2008, and Abraham Kijjambu who, according to Brigadier Mugira, was arrested on 12 July 2008. The third person is Ismail Kambale who, according to Mugira, was arrested on 13 July and the fourth one is a one Mugerwa arrested on 25 March 2008.

I agree with hon. Omara Atubo that we should move forward. However, in moving forward we should accept that we have done wrong; we should state that we will not continue doing that wrong in future.

6.00
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Picking up from where hon. Ben Wacha has stopped, I would like to say that I thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for their diligent role in building this nation. We thank you so much for your contributions. I also would like to thank the committee.

On the notion that justice delayed is justice denied, I would like to inform the House that I left Jinja at 1 p.m. I had gone to attend the court hearing of the case of hon. Godi. However, I can report that we waited from 8.30 a.m. up to 1 p.m. – we were told that he could not be produced in court to enable the process of bail go on because there was no transport at Luzira yet we had been told that he had been pulled out of a pick up car that was bringing other inmates to Kirinya Prison in Jinja. So when you talk about human rights in this country – this is an hon. Member of Parliament; he has not yet been proven guilty or acquitted. These are some of the cases that we experience.

Let me now comment on the report. I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 7, which talks about poor conditions of detention in police cells and barracks. I will concentrate on the conditions of the police barracks that we have in this country.

We have children of police officers in police barracks that are growing up in living rooms that used to be toilets in the old days. We have cases of dilapidated buildings that are strictly beyond condemnation, but that are occupied by police officers and their families. Do you expect those officers to give diligent services to this country though they are trying their very best?

Still on police, every police station in this country is supposed to have an Ambulance for rushing victims of accidents, but in the whole of Kampala there are not more than two Ambulances being used by the police. How can we then talk about human rights and saving lives of the people of this country? 

I would like to say that this is far much below of what we expect in this century. Let us save the children that are living and growing up in such police barracks; they are growing up under very hard conditions yet they are the ones we expect to become good leaders of tomorrow. 

I would like to inform you that the situation is very deplorable and in a sorry state. I have seen this especially at Mbale Police Station – it is time someone thought about this situation. 

Let me now comment on the state of the workers in this country. Page 17 talks about social security, but teachers especially those in private schools are working under very hard conditions. They work for eight months without being paid. When their salaries accumulate, proprietors of private schools just lay them off or chase from work. Who is thinking about the plight of such people?

We usually talk about the 1988 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to be domesticated; I would to challenge the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Welfare on what take she has on this. What is the way forward? What plans do you have for such workers? What about those who are loosing their lives because of poor constructions that have seen many buildings collapse with people dying in there? What is being done on this? Are we really interested in domesticating the 1988 Economic, Cultural and Social, Welfare of Ugandans?

Lastly, let me comment on the restocking programme. I am going to base myself on what the committee said that Government should avail, to Parliament, a detailed report on that programme.

I would like to say that it’s unfortunate that we lost our wealth to this government. I am yet to be proven wrong. In the restocking exercise that is going on, you have to first be an NRM supporter before you can be given a cow. And those who get the contracts take very young calves; they buy them at a cost of Shs 800,000 and before they are distributed three quarters will have died. If Government is interested in seeing us regain the wealth we one time had, they should think about this.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end this debate, honestly. I would like to call upon the chairperson to wind up. Otherwise, I thank you very much for the contributions.

6.06
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr Herbert Sabila): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable members for their fertile debate on this report. I also would like to thank them for the complements made.

Many issues have been cleared by the Minister for Security. A lot of them were on the part of the recommendations. I would like to say that all the opinions that have been suggested will be taken care of. Having listened to the debate on the report, I would like to move that this report be adopted by this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we consider – 

6.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. First, I would like to agree with honourable colleagues who have thanked the Uganda Human Rights Commission for producing these annual reports that were referred to the Legal and parliamentary Affairs Committee whose report we have been considering since yesterday.

The commissioners in question are: Mrs Margaret Ssekagya, Chairperson, Mr JM Aliro Omara, commissioner, Mr Karusoke Kaahwa Constantine, commissioner, Mrs Mariam Fauzat Wangandya, Mr Sibbo Audrain, commissioner and Rev. Dr John Mary Waliggo (RIP) and Mrs Veronica Eragu Bichetero, commissioner.

Those are the commissioners who produced the reports, which were considered by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I also would like to thank the committee for reviewing these reports and most ably reporting on them. 

Mr Speaker, credit goes to you for scheduling the consideration of these reports in this very tight schedule. Thank you very much for scheduling the discussion. Allow me to also thank the 26 ho. colleagues who were able to make contributions to this report.

I have only a few concluding remarks to make. I regret that I cannot review every contribution individually. For example, I liked the contribution, which wondered what Government had in mind when they were setting up the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

First of all, I would like to say that the Uganda Human Rights Commission is the programme of the people of Uganda initiated and enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It is true that when this Government came to power in 1986, they established an Ad hoc Commission of Inquiry into the violations of human rights. I can inform the House that I had the occasion to table the report of that commission, which was headed by Justice Odel (RIP). The work of that commission of inquiry was fed into the work of the Uganda Constitutional Review Commission. 

Finally it got into the Constituency Assembly, which made it Chapter IV of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It is on this basis that this is called a programme of the people of Uganda. But it is also a Government programme. That is why we have operationalised it since the enactment of the 1995 Constitution.

There was something about the method of work by the Uganda Human Rights Commission. It was raised here that the government had occasion to see these reports and that is what were we saying? 

I would like to say that the Constitution requires that we respect the independence of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Article 54 of the Constitution tells thus: “Subject to this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall not, in the performance of its duties, be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.” 

On the basis of this Article, we usually leave the commission to conduct its business as it sees fit. I would like to say that it has been my lack to serve as the line minister for the last five years. And I can report that the commission has never showed me their report in draft form. They have never asked me to comment on any of their draft reports at all. On the contrary, I also see it exactly when you see it; when it has been published. I think this is a good thing; I commend it very much.

Furthermore, there was some matter that was brought to the attention of Parliament. The matter is in relation to the Human Rights Watch Report on Uganda Open Secret on Illegal detention and torture by the Joint Ant Terrorism Task Force in Uganda. The report was published this year. But as you were informed, this report was tabled in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. This matter was ably raised by various honourable colleagues like hon. Hon. Angiro Gutumoi, hon. Ben Wacha and many others.

However, I would like to say that my understanding of the government position is that Government will examine this report, ascertain the claims in there and at an appropriate time report to Parliament. That is my understanding. 

The committee itself has made recommendations. Sir, the government will study these recommendations and programme them for implementation. 

I undertake to do a content analysis of today’s Hansard because there have been many contributions from the Floor which are not part of the report. So, I undertake, on behalf of Government, that we will do this analysis and also incorporate the contributions of the honourable members for programming for implementation.

There was a proposal or suggestion on whether the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is overloaded and whether these reports should go to another committee. I would like to salute the committee for a job well done. This was a big job but they have accomplished it and I do not think I should congratulate them by saying, “Let them not do more work.” On the contrary, I support that these reports remain with our Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee because they have shown tat they can ably handle and do a good job. (Applause)

I have two more points. There has been concern in this Parliament on the reconstitution of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. I would like to thank His Excellency, the President, for taking appropriate action. I would like to thank this Parliament and you, Mr Speaker, through the Appointments Committee, for having played your role in vetting the new Uganda Human Rights Commission without hitches, and to say that the current composition of the Uganda Human Rights Commission is as follows:

Hon. Medi Kaggwa, Chairman
Mr Constantine Karusoke, Commissioner
Ms Mariam Wangadya, Commissioner 
Mr Agaba Maguru, Commissioner 
Mr Katebalirwe Amooti Wa Irumba, Commissioner
Mr Joseph Etima, Commissioner

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your indulgence. I would also like to thank my honourable colleagues for listening to me. I support the motion that Parliament adopts the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on these reports. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, thank you very much for your contributions. I thank the committee and I also thank the Attorney-General and all of you for your contributions to the debate. 

The motion is to adopt the report of the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 1999 to 2007. 

(Question put and agreed.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

“Proclamation, by Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution provides that the Speaker may after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultations with His Excellency the President have been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued, now, therefore in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is proclaimed that Parliament stand prorogued with effect from the 21st day of May 2009.

Given under my hand and sealed at Parliament House, Kampala; this 19th day of May 2009.”

This means that the third session is ending tomorrow and we shall be remaining with two sessions. But because there is some pending work in the committees that has not been reported to us, under the powers conferred on the Speaker, this work that is still pending is saved and will continue in the next session.

I wish you a good recess. Thank you very much. So, House is adjourned until a date that you will be notified about.

(House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)


