




Wednesday, 27 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have a few matters to communicate. 

Yesterday, honourable members, we informed you about the death of the legendary footballer, Jimmy Kirunda. On many occasions, I have met retired sportsmen and sportswomen who won medals and made significant contributions to various sports in Uganda. Many of them brought glory and projected a positive image for this country. However, many have reportedly died in conditions of total misery, bitterness and poverty.

Today’s Monitor and New Vision newspapers reported the lack of care and failure to give the late Jimmy Kirunda his entitlements, which had been promised by the President. This is sad. I think there is need for us to be more caring and appreciate those who bring glory to this country. 

Many times, I have complained on the Floor of this House about the stipend to be paid to those who win medals. I think gold medallists, silver medallists and bronze medallists are supposed to get a certain sum but this has not been forthcoming. Many have come here and complained and I have brought the matter to the Floor. I hope that the Government will rise up to its responsibilities and give our sports personalities - both retired and living - a better life. 

I now invite the Committee on Education and Sports to take up this issue. Work with the National Council of Sports and other bodies like the Federation of Uganda Football Associations and come up with appropriate recommendations.

In a related manner, honourable members, this afternoon I received a phone call from one of Uganda’s celebrities, Mr Eddy Kenzo, who is stuck in Cote D’Ivoire, where he had gone to perform. He is really in dire straits now because the lockdown found him out of the country. He has spent whatever he had and is unable to come home because the flights are not available.

Again, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, working through our mission in Abuja, to offer him consular services so that he can be assisted maybe to come nearer to where we have a mission or to be assisted to come home, but also to meet his bills. I will also be informing His Excellency the President about this matter so that he can be assisted. For him, it is even worse because he is in a French-speaking country; so, life is not as easy as it would be if he was in an English-speaking country where you can talk to everybody and get assistance.

Thirdly, honourable members, yesterday something very interesting happened. An item appeared on the Order Paper which I did not remember clearing. Eventually, when I checked with the Clerk, she also did not remember clearing it. That motion is one which I think does not qualify to be discussed here. It is a matter under investigation. I do not know how we can discuss a matter which is under investigation without affecting the investigation. 

Worse still, honourable members, one of those who was claimed to have sponsored the motion said he did not sponsor the motion and he was not a seconder. He said that the signature on the motion was forged. I have a letter here. If Members have reached an extent where they can forge other people’s signatures in order to get a motion on the Floor, it is terrible. 

Therefore, honourable members, I am sending this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. It is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to adopt the President’s directive to CID on Engineer Godfrey Khaukha Werikhe and Engineer John Abouf Turyagyenda at the Rural Electrification Agency. I do not know how Parliament can direct the Director of the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) to complete investigations, as they have asked in this prayer.

That is the motion and I want to send this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that the movers of the motion can explain how they secured a signature of a Member who says he was not part of their arrangement and did not sign the motion. Honourable members, the matter is sent to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

Honourable members, we shall have a few matters of national concern. However, as I indicated yesterday, those matters which are related to COVID-19 will be answered tomorrow by the Prime Minister. So, I will only allow a few of them to qualify. Regarding the floods, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is coming here to give us an update on the floods’ situation in the whole country; so, they will also not qualify for today. 

I will have hon. Kibalya, who will use two minutes. If hon. Mbwatekamwa is here, he can also give information because it is on the same matter.

3.05
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself to a matter of national concern regarding the husbands and wives who were arrested at the time when the President declared curfew.

Madam Speaker, we realise that the spirit in which the President declared a curfew and lockdown was to save lives. However, we are losing more lives and many families are getting destroyed. Most of the husbands and wives who were arrested at night were coming from looking for food or looking for something to feed their families. 

In a situation where people are arrested and there is no mechanism that can be used to find out maybe if this one was doing something dangerous or the other one was not, the law enforcers are instructed to arrest anybody moving at night. Whether they have luggage or not, these people are arrested without knowing where they are from.

Madam Speaker, many children stay at home, waiting for their parents to come back, but they wait in vain. Most of these people who are arrested are taken to unknown places. Many young girls who are helpless have even fallen prey to men who wish to win their hearts using small tokens. Some are even getting married. The time is coming for children to go to school but they will not go because the breadwinners have been arrested.

The situation is –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Kibalya, for giving way. Madam Speaker, allow me to give information to hon. Kibalya on matters related to arrests by police officers, Local Defence Unit (LDU) people and so on.

In my district, they come and arrest you the moment it clocks 5.30 p.m. or 6.30 p.m. They come and arrest you or beat you up in front of your door. Even if you are seated with your children, they beat you up while saying, “Why are you outside? You are supposed to be inside by 6.30 p.m. because by 7.00 p.m., it is already curfew time.”

Secondly, Madam Speaker, last week in Lira-Palwo Subcounty, a young girl of primary 5, who was returning home at around 5.30 p.m. from grinding millet for the family, was beaten up by the LDU and left for dead. Therefore, I would like to agree with hon. Kibalya that this is happening. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, the related matter I would like to raise is what happened yesterday. As we are aware, the President allowed private cars to move with effect from yesterday. Of course, with private cars on the road, we had a lot of traffic jam, considering the poor road network we have due to our poor planning.

Madam Speaker, my biggest concern was that people who were caught up in the traffic jam were being arrested and detained in their cars. I also saw a certain gentleman who had children in the car and the children were not allowed to move out; they stayed there. 

Madam Speaker, I almost faced the same challenge as I drove from here to my place. When I reached Wandegeya, a police officer came and peeped into my car and asked why I did not have a face mask. The question is: If I am alone in my car, what is the rationale of putting on a mask? If I am alone in my bed, do I need to put on a condom? - (Laughter)- Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as we said, the purpose for this was to save lives, but you realise that lives are now at risk. As we said, weak husbands and weak wives, in a situation when they are vulnerable, will be taken by other women and men.

Madam Speaker, we request the good President that we know, especially in a situation where many people have already been pardoned, to come out and pardon these people. They did not commit any crime. They were looking for food for their families. There was no yardstick as to who should be arrested at night – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Member who was on the Floor has said that very many men have taken people’s wives and very many women have taken people’s husbands. Is the honourable member in order, knowing that marriage is a covenant, which is respected not only by God but also by culture, to declare in Parliament that COVID-19 has now legalised men taking over other people’s wives and women taking over other people’s husbands? Are you in order? Do you want to set up husbands against wives and wives against husbands when we are already battling with domestic violence? Are you setting us on a war path? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, can you substantiate, and also wind up please.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my senior colleague, the English I used was simple and clear. I said that in a situation when the respective bread winner is in prison, leaving the partner at home vulnerable, we shall find that some wives are getting married to other men and some husbands are getting married to other women. 

A wife is at home waiting for the husband to come back, but he does not come back because he has been arrested. So, she will have nothing to feed the family on. A husband is waiting for the wife to come back to prepare food for the family, but she has been arrested and she will not come back home. As a result, the husband will look for some other person to help.

We request the President to pardon whoever was arrested for violating the presidential directive on curfew by moving at night. Madam Speaker, we request that the President pardons these people so that we restore hope and happiness in some of these families where children are now hopeless.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, yesterday I watched on TV what happened at various roadblocks on Kiira Road, Wandegeya and Entebbe. There were hundreds of people who had been caught up in the curfew. It is also true that we have traffic jam in this city. Even when I was going home yesterday at 6.00 p.m., there was already a traffic jam. So, I think our police should try to be considerate. 

Ultimately, I think the President may have to adjust and take into account the working hours, unless we are going to stop working at 3.00 p.m. so that people can go home. I think there may be need to discuss that issue. Let me ask members of the task force to discuss it. Soon, children are going to start walking and if they are caught walking home at 7.00 p.m., that will be a problem. It is something that must be discussed. Thank you.

3.14
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the institutions that is bound to suffer because of COVID-19 is the Judiciary. The administration of justice has been, so far, affected by the lockdown for almost three months, yet most of the cases, especially those related to land matters, continue to pile up. 

There is one way of reducing the courts case backlog, and that is by revising the monetary jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts. Our neighbour, Kenya, last revised theirs in 2012 and the Chief Magistrate now has monetary jurisdiction of Kshs 20 million, which is around Ushs 720 million. A grade I magistrate has monetary jurisdiction of Kshs 5 million, which is around Ushs 180 million. However, Ugandan last revised the monetary jurisdiction of magistrates in 2007 with a Magistrate Grade I handling matters of Ushs 20 million and below and a Chief Magistrate handling Shs 50 million and below.

It is my humble appeal, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be directed to come up with a revised monetary jurisdiction to consider the current situation and relieve the High Court, which is handling very many land manners with a few judges. Some of those matters can be ably handled by the magistrates’ courts when jurisdiction, particularly monetary jurisdiction, has been raised. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the request will be transmitted to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, I also hope that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs can pursue it in the Fifth Session so that it can be addressed.

On the issue of floods, bridges and roads, the Minister of Works and Transport is coming tomorrow to speak about what he is going to do about them. I am told the bridges and roads have been damaged because of floods. Those will be handled tomorrow.

3.17
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are aware that the President issued a directive to the Ministry of Water and Environment to evict people or settlements that are within 100 metres of a riverbank, 30 metres of a wetland and 200 metres of a lakeshore.

Madam Speaker, if we are to go by the directive of settlements within 200 metres of lakeshores, over 90 per cent of the islands in Buvuma will not have any inhabitants. This is because many of them are just about 20 acres. So, if they are to measure 200 metres from one side, it will lead them to the middle of that island and if they measure another 200 metres, it will mean that the island cannot be inhabited.

At the same time, all landing sites are within 200 metres of the lake shore; because of the nature of the fishing business, that is where fishing activities should take place. That is where you have the landing site itself, the storage facilities and so on.

Madam Speaker, my request is that the Minister of Water and Environment should come and give some clarification. The National Environment Act, specifically section 53(8)(a), defines a shoreline as follows: “‘lakeshore’ means the land not more than 100 metres adjacent to or bordering a lake.” The directive and letters, which the Minister of Water and Environment sent to the different local governments, indicate that people should be evicted from within 200 metres of lakeshores, yet the National Environment Act about 100 metres of the lakeshores. Therefore, that is the clarity I would like the minister to make.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we have an outbreak of the Nairobi fly that has affected many people in our communities. Some men are now putting on skirts as if they have been circumcised; women who used to be beautiful now having scratches and so on in their – Madam Speaker, the situation is horrible.

When we reported to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - because we thought this was an entomology issue - they said that is a health issue. When we reported to the Ministry of Health, they said the issue is under Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. So, we have failed to get the right office to respond to this – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Migadde, for giving way. What the honourable member is talking about is very serious. Currently, in Amuru District, people have such rashes on their bodies. Some have scratches on their bodies as if they are suffering from scabies. When we raised the matter with the District Medical Officer (DMO), he said that he does not know what exactly is happening. The situation is so alarming. It seems there is something new coming up. Let the Ministry of Health take it seriously.

MR SENYONGA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. One of the serious concerns is that this new policy does not give any opportunity to those people who are being submerged by the waters to relocate to any of the Government areas like forest land. Instead, they are forcing them out of forest land.

Our people in Koome and Buvuma islands live in temporary structures made out of timber. My humble request, as my colleague advocates for help, is that the ministry gets some sense of humaneness by allowing our people to live in those temporary structures.  I thank you.

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, my humble appeal - because the directive is already in place – is that we need this clarification very fast; is it 100 metres or 200 metres? I also request that the line ministry responds to the issue of the Nairobi fly because much as there is COVID-19, people need assistance as Government is still in operation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on the issue of the directive, I notice that there is a tendency for people who live on the mainland to make policies without thinking about people who live on the islands. It is important that the Minister of Water and Environment clarifies on the issue of distance from the shoreline.

The Minister of Health also has to address the issue of the Nairobi fly on Buvuma Island and probably other parts of the country, and give us an update as we open the Fifth Session. Thank you.

3.24
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national concern I would like to address today is about the forthcoming general elections in 2021. 

It has been noted with great concern that the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the road map for the general elections. The election cycle was supposed to conclude between 10 January and 8 February 2021. The current democratic process, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, has suffocated political party mobilisation and mobility of interested persons who want to contest. As I speak, there is no freedom for individuals to move around and participate in the process, yet the Government is quiet.

Secondly, the Electoral Commission was established under Article 60 and mandated under Article 61(1)(a), (b) and (g) to organise, conduct and supervise regular, free and fair elections and referenda in Uganda. Around 25 February 2020, the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, Justice Simon Byabakama, in a statement that he issued, directed that elections for special interest groups would be conducted from the 6th to 10th of April 2020. He further said that nomination of candidates for local government councils would be conducted from the 27th to the 28th of July 2020.

Madam Speaker, the state of the democratic process in Uganda has been diversely affected by COVID-19 and has also infringed on people’s civil and political rights and freedoms. Therefore, we urgently need to get information from the Government on what exactly is taking place because they are quiet and the Electoral Commission is also not guiding the country.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Leader of Government Business harmonises his position on this matter with that of the Electoral Commission and offers a timely and urgent response to the House, providing a comprehensive revised roadmap for the next general electoral elections, 2021. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is required to address that situation and come back and advise the House and the country on the way forward. Thank you. 

3.27
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a matter of national concern regarding the security situation in the Karamoja region and its neighbours, which increasingly deteriorates day after day. 

Last Saturday, on 23 May 2020, a military deployment at Kangole, Ngoleriet Subcounty, was attacked by cattle rustlers, some of whom could have been Turkana. They killed one LDU personnel, took away his gun and drove away 104 cattle. They did this because they had already researched and found out that this deployment had very few soldiers.

A week before that, a medical officer who was working in Moroto and was on his way to his home in Otuke was killed as he travelled on his motor bike. The raiders are said to have come together with Turkanas. These are indicators that if the situation of insecurity in Karamoja is not handled expeditiously, we may not easily control re-armament in the region – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you so much, hon. Sodium, for giving me this opportunity to give you and the House information. 

Madam Speaker, time and again, I have been speaking on this matter before this House - disturbances from Karamoja, especially from the Jie, in districts that border Karamoja. The situation, if not addressed properly, is going to cause a lot of insecurity for neighbouring districts like Agago, Kitgum, Otuke, Amolatar - all districts that border Karamoja are in serious trouble because they lose animals and human beings. In Agago District, for example, we have so far lost six people and some people who were seriously injured are in hospitals nursing wounds from spears by the Karimojong. 

Actually, I have been on the Floor of this Parliament three times begging Government to come up with a permanent solution to this problem. I have begged for an explanation as well as plans to compensate people who have lost their animals but nobody has spoken about it. Therefore, I would like to thank hon. Sodium very much for coming up with this matter. 

I am glad that this matter is coming from Karamoja. I thought it was only the neighbours who were suffering but now the suffering is also within Karamoja. I want to confirm that we see these Karimojong moving freely with guns. This is a confirmation that the disarmament that Government had achieved is almost frustrated, so it has to be reinstated. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Defence is here. I do not know whether there is something you can say about this issue. We want action from the Government.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Sodium for giving way and my sister, hon. Akello, for the information she gave. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only the districts surrounding Karamoja that are affected but even districts within Karamoja like Abim. Abim people are being killed on almost a weekly basis; they are being shot at with bows and arrows. This morning, a person from Alerek Subcounty was shot with a bow and arrow. 

We have told the army to regulate the use of bows and arrows. Every day, people are dying and we are burying. We buried someone on the 13th, another one on the 18th and today, we have been shot at. Where are we heading? Something needs to be done.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, we have been receiving reports of the resurgence of insecurity in Karamoja. The first petition was written by hon. Simon Lokodo, who is here, and he addressed the petition to His Excellency the President. The President, in his wisdom, appointed a committee of Government, which is chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – (Interjections) – Yes, of course, we have to begin by planning from Kampala and then move to Karamoja. 

Our forces are in Karamoja and even this morning, the Prime Minister convened a meeting on Karamoja, which different ministries attended, including the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs which was represented by my minister of state. The Prime Minister will have the opportunity to give a more comprehensive response on this matter because he is handling the matter - (Interjection)- I do not need your help. He is handling the matter personally and he will give a comprehensive statement on this matter. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I was in Karamoja just before the outbreak of COVID-19 together with the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. We met the brigade commander in Kotido. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) is actually trying its best to contain the security situation but the problem is that they cannot move fast in situations where there are no roads. 

People who come from the neighbouring countries of Kenya and South Sudan come with guns and take the cattle of the Karimojong. The Karimojong say that they gave their guns to the Government during the disarmament process, with a promise that Government was going to construct security roads. They say, “Now that the security roads are not there and the UPDF is not able to move, we should re-arm ourselves to defend ourselves against the armed Turkana and Toposa”. 

The gun is coming back as a result of the failure of Government to construct security roads. This issue should not actually be directed to the Minister of Defence - that is why I wanted to help you. It should be directed to the Prime Minister to construct security roads to enable the UPDF work effectively to protect people within and outside Karamoja.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have already told you that the Prime Minister will be coming here - We have had enough time on this issue. Let us go to hon. Oyet, please.

3.36
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of urgent national importance. 

On the 21st of this month, a nasty incident happened in Obira Parish, Got Apwoyo Subcounty in Nwoya District. What I am about to –

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that a matter that has already been raised here?

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, the matter was raised but not with full information of what happened. I was on the ground with the Minister of Internal Affairs on Sunday and I would like to give information regarding the killing. 

On that fateful day, a group of paramilitary forces, headed by one person called Omori, a young brother to the Commander of the Reserve Forces, Gen. Otema, led a group of people in raiding a community living in Obira. They looted all their valuables and after looting, they went further to arrest some people who were then forced to carry the loot, similar to the way the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) used to operate. 

After about two hours, the community mobilised themselves with the intention of going to plead with Gen. Otema or his brother, the Deputy Secretary-General of the National Resistance Movement (NRM), Mr Todwong. He was there on the 10th and declared that some people were squatters on his land. The community wanted to plead with them to first release those people who were abducted in the process of that “kavuyo” and to give them back their valuable items, which had been looted from them. 

Madam Speaker, as they were going to Gen. Otema’s farm – Of course, the paramilitary forces were commanded by the same Omori, who has been doing this since 2010 to date and no arrest has been effected on him. He commanded one soldier called Gad, commonly known as Sankwangye, – I may not be very good at pronouncing his name but that is his name – who told the community to go back or else they risk losing their lives. He then opened fire and shot nine people. Out of the nine people, four died instantly and five were rushed to the hospital. Unfortunately, this afternoon, we lost one of them. 

Madam Speaker, the situation in Obira and Got Apwoyo has been there for many years. In 2017, I raised the same issue here when a one Alex Olama was killed in the presence of his wife and daughter while digging the garden. The investigation was done, a report was given here and I was dragged to court. I do not know, after raising this, where I will be dragged to – maybe to the grave.

The situation we are talking about, Madam Speaker, is now being changed into a tribal war. We have never had any problem between the Jonam and the Acholi; we have lived very peacefully. We are not disputing the boundary between the Acholi and the Jonam. The boundary between the Acholi and the Jonam is – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you are making a case or not because this matter is under item 5 (e). It will be answered here. It is already on the Order Paper. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My humble prayer is that, as we speak now, even after going there with the Minister of Internal Affairs, this same person called Omori is still threatening the lives of the people. I pray that he is put where he belongs in order to give way for the investigation. I will wait for the comments and then maybe you will allow me to respond to the minister’s statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Defence take an interest in the names that have been given, for action, as we wait for the formal answer on this matter? You are supposed to come back on item 5 (e). This is the Obira incident that was raised here already. Thank you. Hon. Ssekikubo, two minutes. 

3.41
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. I rise on a matter concerning the abuse and attack of civil servants and the extent to which Parliament can be involved. 

You are aware that we raised a question about the Lusenke slaughter of the breeding bulls. We waited for hon. Ssempijja to come and appear before this House to answer questions related to the same. All this was before the incursion of the COVID-19 pandemic. Since then, a lot of things have happened. 

However, without going into the legalities, a one Dr Lagu was accused of giving out information to Parliament. He was subsequently arrested and allegedly imprisoned for corruption and misuse of Shs 54 million that bought Chloris gayana grass used in cattle farming – 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that matter is the one for which Mr Lagu has been charged. I do not think we should be discussing it here at this stage. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I will not go into the details and the merits. However, the fact is that we had that matter on the Order Paper and the minister did not rise up to clear the air. He went behind and had this officer charged and without any authority, interdicted a civil servant without going through the procedure, through the permanent secretary or the head of Cabinet. It is really a matter that goes outside the ambit of the legalities. 

This has happened using the cover of COVID-19, and a lot of civil servants are being treated in the same manner. Even in the case of the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), Christine Guwatudde and four other officers were allegedly arrested for the abuse of the COVID-19 funds, yet these funds had not been spent at that point in time. 

Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: My prayer is that Government informs this House why they are victimising the civil servants under the guise of the COVID-19 pandemic. What is happening now? I pray that the Leader of Government Business tomorrow tells us what recourse these civil servants have. 

The civil servants cannot come here on the Floor of Parliament, yet they are bundled up and charged because of the differences they have with the ministers. The ministers themselves are now arrogating powers to interdict civil servants under the COVID-19 threat, which in normal circumstances cannot be allowed under the Public Service Standing Orders? 

Indeed, if there are audit queries, we can always have the special audits carried out but we realise that this is a ploy where one wants to grab – The reason I am perturbed is that this matter is about the animal industry and livestock where most of my people are concerned. Now, with the withdrawal and the putting aside of these officers, there is nobody to guard our livestock in this country. Nobody is going to guard the public ranches in this country. Now, it is a looting spree, like was seen everywhere. 

I think the Leader of Government Business can pertinently inform this House why they are using the COVID-19 threat to quell and suppress the technical persons, the civil servants, who are standing in for public interest and are being victimised under the guise of coronavirus whereas – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable member, you will be allowed to raise the matter when the Prime Minister comes tomorrow. He is going to address us on the COVID-19 situation, so you will be able to raise those issues tomorrow. 

The Minister of Works and Transport will come and respond to the issue of floods. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees will respond to the issue of the disasters throughout the country. The other issues will be handled when the Prime Minister comes to address us on the COVID-19 situation. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you may recall, on 5th of this month, the Minister of Local Government presented a motion for resolution of Parliament to create a new district called Terego. You may also recall that hon. Annet Nyakecho raised an amendment to that motion, where we were requesting for Tororo to also be divided.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that the minister was quick to tell us that 15 days from that day, he would be able to come here with a substantive motion for us to proceed with the creation of the new districts as had been requested. My counting tells me that 15 days have elapsed and we have not seen the minister come here.

The procedural matter I am raising is whether Parliament cannot proceed to move with the creation of those districts as had been requested since the minister is not here and he had said 15 days – one day per year for the case of Tororo.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is the minister or the minister of state here? They are not here. They are directed to come here tomorrow and explain what has happened to the assurance of 15 days that they gave. Thank you.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE REAL ESTATE AGENTS BILL, 2020”

3.46
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, this motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020” is moved under Articles 79 and 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda bestows upon Parliament the mandate of making laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rule l20 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament grant a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE that most real estate agents make money through commission payments made directly to real estate brokers for services rendered in the sale or purchase of a real estate property; 

COGNISANT of the crucial role of real estate agents in connecting buyers and sellers of real estate; 

FURTHER COGNISANT of the inherent risk of an unregulated real estate sector; 

CONCERNED that while Parliament passed the Landlord-Tenant Act in 2019, the operation of real estate agents is outside the purview of that law; 

FURTHER CONCERNED that the absence of a distinct legal regime to govern the operations of real estate agents predisposes unsuspecting sellers and buyers of property to some unscrupulous real estate agents; 

NOTING THAT the regulation of real estate agents will streamline and aid the growth of the real estate sector in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for an Act of Parliament, titled, “The Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded. Give a quick justification. We do not have much time.

(Motion seconded)

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the real estate industry requires an administrative system and rule of the game in terms of regulations for its coordination and control. Unfortunately, the lack of regulation of real estate agents in Uganda has given rise to many problems, including the real estate dealers whom we locally call “brokers” or the “kayungirizi” who have contributed towards the chaos in handling real estate and land matters in the country.

Madam Speaker, these brokers have been the major source of corruption and fraudulent transactions in this sector.

This Bill seeks to end the exploitation of the public by some unscrupulous agents as is currently the case. Cases of multiple sales of the same property to different buyers are very common due to the unregulated industry practices. This Bill will streamline the industry by ensuring that the products are sold by regulated actors and professionals. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill intends to bring professionalism and transparency and to boost public confidence in real estate agencies and bring to an end the days of unscrupulous property agents and land brokers in the country. It is also intended to protect the public from incompetence, recklessness and unscrupulous practices in the sector.

This Bill, if enacted into law, will unlock the industry’s immense potential and attract enormous investments in the real estate business. The investors will be encouraged to put their money in real estate as a business while the consumers will be in position to get the services they deserve and they will not be cheated out of their hard-earned money.

Madam Speaker, a sound regulatory framework for real estate agents will establish entry standards and require –

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the merits now. You are just asking for leave.

MR OTHIENO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. This Bill is long overdue. The real estate industry has grown but still in its infancy due to gaps in regulating the actors, notably, the real estate agents. Yet the Government has been reluctant since 2003 when the country started experiencing turbulence when we had agents like Property Masters coming on the scene.

Madam Speaker, the Government has failed to come up with a legal regime to regulate the activities of real estate agents. Even when the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda funded consultants in 2010 to inform the formulation of an enabling law, still, the Government did not take action.

A number of pressure groups have been formed to push Government to come up with an enabling legal regime to regulate the activities of real estate agents but to no avail. It is against this background that I beg this House to grant me leave to introduce this Bill. The draft Bill is hereby attached to this motion and I am than ready to proceed, once the House grants me leave.

Madam Speaker, this Bill has no direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, it does not offend the Constitution or any other law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is a request from the honourable member. He says there is a vacuum and would like to be given an opportunity to bring a Bill so that we can discuss it on merit and take a position. 

I now put the question that leave be granted to hon. Othieno to present a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE FISH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020.”

3.58
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, for this opportunity, to move this motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2020.” This motion is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and clause 4(b), of Article 94 and rule 120, empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Members’ Bill;

AWARE that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under objective X of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, sets out the State's duty to take all necessary steps to involve people in the formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes, which affect them;

FURTHER AWARE that the current law that regulates the fish sub-sector such as the Fish Act Cap. 197 and the various regulations made thereunder, do not adequately regulate the fish sub-sector and has, due to passage of time, become out-dated due to changes in Government policy, emerging trends, international best practices and changes in the legal environment;

CONCERNED that the inadequacy of the legal regime regulating the fish sub-sector has resulted into continued unrestricted access to Uganda's fish resources by foreigners, the depletion of fisheries resources due to the use of illegal fishing nets, illegal fishing methods, harvesting of immature fish, the manufacture, importation, possession and sale of monofilament nets, the non-existence of enforcement mechanism, unregulated imposition of fees and other charges and the uncoordinated and non-consultative imposition of fish policies such as the ban on fish smoking;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the legal regime does not adequately deal with the new and emerging issues in fisheries resources management such as the recent development of aquaculture practice, which continue to take root in Uganda, without adequate regulation and the export of fish maws, which is currently not regulated;

NOTING that unless the legal regime regulating the fish sub sector is amended to bring the legal regime in line with international best practices, emerging trends, changes in Government policy and legal environment and to curb the illegal fish practices that exist today, the country might not achieve economically and socially, the efficient utilisation of its fish resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members' Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded. You can now speak to your motion.
 
(Motion seconded.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, as it is now, this Bill does not have any financial implications because the proposed inhere only deals with existing structures.

The current Fish Act, Cap. 197 of the Laws of Uganda and the various regulations made thereunder commenced on 1 April 1951 and was last amended in 2003. This being a 69-year old Act means some of its aspects have become obsolete and out-dated. This is so, because over the period, Government had a policy shift in the sector. There has been emerging international best practices and a legal environment that need to be harmonised.

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, is the increasing population that is dependent on the fisheries sector for food, coupled with the increased market demand for fish at national, regional and international levels. 

In its current form, the Fish Act does not adequately regulate the fishing industry in Uganda. It does not adequately prescribe an enforcement mechanism. The framework inadequately deals with harvesting immature fish. It contains no provision of aquaculture practices yet the same has taken route in Uganda today.

The Act does not also adequately give a person the right to claim back his or her property once confiscated by the authorised officers. The Act is silent about granting exclusive rights over a lake or water body in Uganda. It does not adequately promote the collaborative management of lakes and rivers. It does not also prohibit importation, manufacture and use of monofilament nets, among others. 

Madam Speaker, for the reasons above, the fisheries sub-sector has continued to be characterised by weak governance in terms of legal and institutional frameworks, leading to economic loss yet these are instrumental in sustainably leading the sector. There is, therefore, need to amend the law to bring it in line with international best practices, emerging trends, Government policies and changes in the legal environment.

Madam Speaker, once done, the sector is envisaged to once again, significantly contribute to economic growth and development of Uganda hence poverty reduction amongst the population.

Madam Speaker, these issues and gaps in the current legal framework require legislative interventions. The issues and gaps identified fall within the legislative powers of this august House to handle. May it please you, Madam Speaker, that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Fish (Amendment) Bill, 2020. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister, do you have something to say?

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, it is true that the current Bill is inadequate. However, I would like to inform the august House that a lot of consultations have been done and all fishing communities and stakeholders have been consulted. 

The Bill is already in advanced stages – (Interjections) – yes, and it is before Cabinet. We expect this Bill in this House in less than two weeks. 

It is also not true that it has no financial implications because issues of regulation need a lot of money, especially when dealing with lakes that are on the border with neighbouring countries. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that the motion be stayed and I pledge to bring the Bill in 14 days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the fish sector is one, which has been very troublesome. It has been before this House on many occasions and there has been no action from the Government. Certainly, 17 years since the last amendment is a long time. Therefore, I put the question that hon. Okello be given leave to present his Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: If, after the Bill is brought, the Government wants to take it over, they can take it over but let us allow hon. Okello to move his Bill. (Applause)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.09
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” moved under Articles 79 and 94 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that section l0 of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 regulates gifts or benefits in kind to a leader on any public or ceremonial occasion or commission on any transaction to a leader and clearly provides the circumstances and procedures for receiving gifts, benefits in kind, donations or commissions by a leader;

FURTHER AWARE that whereas section l0 (2) and (3) of the Leadership Code Act, 2002 provide for the regulation of personal gifts and donations from a relative or personal friend to a leader, the sections do not regulate situations where a leader may be the one giving out donations to a relative or personal friend, thereby leaving an open avenue for abuse;

NOTING that the Leadership Code Act again prohibits leaders from accepting, directly or indirectly, any property, money or gift, which influences or is likely to influence a leader to do a favour to any person but does not prohibit leaders from giving a person money, goods or other benefits such as a gift or favour;

CONCERNED that the unregulated giving of money or gifts by leaders to citizens and its influence on citizens compromises the quality of leadership and expectations of the public from its leaders;

APPRECIATING the need to strengthen the Leadership Code Act by regulating donations and gifts made by leaders and prohibiting leaders under Part A of the Second Schedule from offering or granting money or gifts to citizens in order to hold leaders objectively accountable to the people;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Act, 2020”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its First Reading.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The justification?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This motion is moved to create a standard in this country concerning the use of money and gifts by leaders to the citizens.

As I was drafting this motion and draft Bill, which is attached, I also noted that there are several gaps in the appointment of the tribunal. I was requested by hon. Abbas Agaba that he has advanced and also agreed that we move together in this motion.

At present, the influence of money and incentives have compromised the quality of leadership in the country –

THE SPEAKER: What were you saying about the tribunal?

DR LYOMOKI: There was a vacuum, which my other colleague is going to explain because he has also done a lot of work. He had requested that we move together because already, there is work being done.

THE SPEAKER: But this is just asking for leave. Do we really need a lot of people to discuss it?

DR LYOMOKI: No. I wanted to –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the justification.

4.14
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I thank my colleague for the initiative. True, we realised that both of us were working on the same idea to have the Leadership Code (Amendment) Act amended again because of a few lacunae. They identified section 10.

There are a number of lacunae in the law, which seem to reflect a difference between the intention of the law, which was intended to clean up our leadership and also the practice. One example that I remember – I have been privileged to sit in the Appointments Committee and recently when we were vetting the members of the Leadership Code Tribunal, sections 19 (a), (b) and onwards provide for the appointment of the Tribunal.

However, you realise that the Judicial Service Commission, that is empowered by the law to select these people and recommend them to the President, this time round only recommended lawyers. The law is silent on the qualification of the other members of the Tribunal but it is clear on two; the chair and deputy. 

I think that lacuna was taken advantage of and all those recommended were lawyers. By law, you cannot reject them, even when they are in one profession but the spirit of the law is to have a balance and a few other lacunae, Madam Speaker, in the law. I think it is just an experience we are getting that we are applying it for the first time. 

It would be fair that when given the opportunity, we look at it and then we can propose amendments to tighten it and make it stronger and able to perform its roles especially as it is done in other countries. I beg to move. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, the code does not provide for a standard against influence peddling created by money and incentives by leaders and prospective leaders during and before office.

Madam Speaker, the overwhelming pecuniary pressure by constituencies and resultant bribery has clouded the role of leaders leading to the demise of transformational leadership in favour of contractual leaders. A standard is, therefore, critical for enforcing values of integrity and proper conduct in pursuit of development, democracy, good governance and promotion of the rule of law. 

It is, therefore, important, Madam Speaker, that we strengthen the code by protecting leaders and prospective leaders from offering or granting corruptible money or benefits to citizens as an inducement or reward and provide for other related matters. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members –

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague, Dr Sam Lyomoki, for coming with this motion. I would like to appreciate that he is forwarding his motion with a concern to amend the Leadership Code Act. 

Madam Speaker, in 2017, in this very House, the Leadership Code Act was amended. This provided for operationalisation of the Leadership Code Tribunal, which has been appointed by His Excellency the President and vetted by Parliament under your Chair.

It is true that after the 2017 amendment of this Act, the members of the Inter-religious Forum again, while scrutinising the amended Act, found a lacuna and we started preparing an amendment to this amended Leadership Code Act. As we talk, this amendment is in Cabinet and at the shortest time, it will be here in Parliament.

Therefore, my prayer is that my colleague and his supporters withdraw this motion and wait for me to come with a Bill on the Floor of Parliament. They may give their input at the committee stage. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I cannot sit on the right of members of Parliament to move their motions. This right is brought under the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. He is just asking for leave to bring a Bill for first reading. In case you are interested as Government, you can either take it over or support his or bring your own Bill. We are, however, not going to wait. We cannot legislate in anticipation.

I put the question that Dr Lyomoki be given leave to produce “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill”. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received the report yesterday and Members said they wanted to sleep over it. Are there any comments on “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2019”? 

4.21
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the committee for the report in respect of this Bill. This Bill has been long overdue. I recall in the Ninth Parliament, we struggled very much to force Government to bring this Bill before the House. 

The Ninth Parliament expired before the Bill was brought but I am very happy that at the end of the day, this Bill has come. It has come at the time when we are facing challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.

This Bill intends to cure very many gaps in the National Payment System. Madam Speaker, I am very impressed with some of the clauses in this Bill in respect to protecting the customers who use the services of the payment systems.

Madam Speaker, one of the points that have been raised is to create an extra account to define the owners of these accounts such that at the end of the day, this money that the mobile service operators are using is money from the customers. Some people are saving on these platforms and the money is being used by these mobile operators at their expense. Some people are placing this money overnight or even lending it to banks. They receive interest on it and the owners of the money are not getting anything at the end of the day.

We are not talking about billions; we are talking of trillions. They receive this money, open personal accounts in the name of the companies in banks, lend the money to banks and earn interest. This Bill, however, intends to cure this and customers will be protected. If an account is to be opened and if this money is lent out, the interest that is earned will be shared between the system operator and the customer. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this Bill is trying to address the gaps, as has been said. When it comes to Committee Stage, we will have a few amendments that will be – (Member timed out.)  - Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will raise the other issues later.  

THE SPEAKER: Is there any other comment? 

4.24
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleague to appreciate the committee for the great work they have done. I agree that this Bill is very important. 

I have some background in telecoms and in Parliament here, I sit on the Committee on Information, Communication Technology. Many times, we have received complaints and petitions from the public especially about mobile money. Whenever we called the Bank of Uganda and UCC, we have had Ping-Pong between them. So, there was no authority in mobile payment system.

Madam Speaker, my only worry is that while this is a good law, it is coming at a time when there is a lot of damage. Many people have lost a lot of money and there is a lot of unknown money sitting on the extra accounts. I worry about what we are going to do as a country to help those who have already lost a lot of money. Many people have died with a lot of money sitting on their mobile money lines but the money cannot be accessed. 

It becomes further complicated because in mobile telecom companies, a SIM card is only active if you use it within 90 days. If you take 90 days without using it, this number is deactivated or given to another person. Therefore, there is a lot of money in suspense and I am wondering how this kind of law will help in such a situation. 

Otherwise I am very interested in this law and I would like thank the chairperson and his committee because I know that they have done a lot of homework and this will be supported by everyone in this House. I thank you.

4.27
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe South County, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to me. I would like to thank the committee for the report that has brought out quite a number of critical issues that have existed in the financial systems payment sector.

Madam Speaker, whereas the Bank of Uganda has been effective in managing, monitoring and regulating the traditional payment systems, the emergence of quite a number of financial technologies globally and even in this country has posed immense challenges to the people of this country.

We are finding quite a number of companies operating payment systems that are not within the responsibility of the Bank of Uganda to follow up. In this process, some of them are acting with impunity, imposing penalties and charges which are not guided by law.

It is, therefore, very important and prudent at this time to come up with this legislation, most importantly to deal with three things:
    1. Defining the new portfolio of payment systems that exist in the country for purposes of clarity and not people falling victim of what they find on the internet or in the hands of unscrupulous people.
    2. To regulate the payment systems providers who are doing it at will at the moment. Companies are imposing different charges at different payment points even when it is the same  company; and
    3. To define the processes of entry and exit into the provision of these services. This law will automatically deal with that and when it is done, it will ensure prudent payment system management in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. We have been waiting very long for this law. In most cases, we have lost our dear ones who have been saving their money through mobile money but when they die - and because you do not have their password and above all, there is no legal procedure to follow and get that money - we have lost a lot of money.

Madam Speaker, in most cases, we have found ourselves even losing balances on our phones. You have about a million shillings and the following day you cannot see any and you start calling here and there and cannot get the right explanation. Therefore, if this law comes into effect, it will help our people; mainly our constituents who are using the e-systems when we pay them or send them some money.

Madam Speaker, I strongly support the committee report and hopefully we shall achieve our objectives. I thank you.

4.32
MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues to thank the committee for coming up with a report on this Bill. This is a Bill that we should have had yesterday. There is a high need to protect the public.

Very many Ugandans are now joining the electronic payment system and this is a public platform where most of them are not suspicious of whatever is going on as far as the payment system is concerned.

Allow me to give an example of mobile money; unfortunately, I don’t have my phone with me. Yesterday, I received some instructions on my phone telling me to acknowledge the withdrawal of Shs 200,000 from my mobile money account. There is a lot of fraud going on in the country. I would like to believe that with this Bill, such problems will be addressed.

To add to what my colleagues have said, when one dies, there is no clear way that one can get the money that was in his or her mobile phone. The only thing that mobile money companies do is to block the account and if the account holder has many lines, he or she will just abandon that phone and at the end, the customer loses.

Madam Speaker, on page 4, the committee made mention of the unfair competition. However, I would like to look at it from this point of view; that during licensing - I would urge that this House find it prudent to protect the local content.

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 has given us a very good lesson that I think we should use this time to address this issue. There are technologies which we normally rely on and they are international and in this particular time, we know that most of these people cannot fly into our country to address the technological problems.

Therefore, as we proceed to make this law, I request that the issue of local content should be handled very carefully to ensure that the local sitting service providers are catered for. For example, if we have any technology or technological development, the local people - (Member timed out.)

4.35
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the House to thank the committee for the report on the National Payment Systems Bill. This Bill comes at the right time - to answer the queries that are in the heads of many Ugandans. 

I remember in 2014 when we went for a retreat; I asked the Minister of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance - then it was the Prime Minister - whether if anything happens as is now and the telecommunication system was locked down, what would happen to all the money in suspense? In the end, I was not answered because they said I did not include my name and I thought that was so rude because that issue was being experienced in the country. We have a lot of transactions going on but which are unregulated, as my colleagues have said. 

We have these mobile money systems already giving loans to people and already, there are complaints that they are deducting more than the amount of money that people have borrowed.

We also have conmen using the same system as well as points of service where one can do online payment for certain services but they continue deducting their money. How do we handle this? I believe this law is going to help to curtail all this. I really thank the committee for bringing the report to cure the mischief we have. Thank you.

4.37
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the principle of this Bill is very good and must be supported. Recently, MTN said they were stuck with over Shs 10 billion on their mobile money system. The question was why they wouldn’t send this money to the Escrow account. 

The answer was they would not because they only provide a platform for subscribers to hold and transact their monies. They are not like commercial banks otherwise they would have transferred the money and because there is no law under which they operate the mobile money service other than the regulations by Bank of Uganda; it would be very hard for them to proceed. For that, I really support this law; it should have been passed yesterday. 

Secondly, in principle, electronic money has become problematic. We have seen, in this Bill, an attempt to mention electronic money issues but my only question - at the right time - would be that we need to actually include, if possible, the money that has been disturbing us in this country. There are people now who, when they are transacting business in China, send that money in form of Bit Coin, which our system has not yet accepted. If we don’t want those currencies, then we should expressly state it here. 

Finally, my only concern is on the object of the Bill at page 2. It says that the object of the Bill is to regulate payment systems. When you go down and read the payment systems – they have been patched – you realize that Bank of Uganda has been using Article 162 to regulate payment systems like the real Time Gross Settlement System, (RTGS), the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) – that actually tells us that in the object of this Bill, the movers should have first provided for among others, the establishment of the payment systems so that we know the legally accepted payment systems.

That is why on page 2, the report of the committee is saying that due to the absence of national payment systems – (Member timed out.) 

4.41
MS AGNES AMEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for presenting the Bill. This Bill is very important – my wish is to request the minister to fast-track it so it can interact with the broader public policy. At the centre of this Bill is Bank of Uganda. The Committee on Statutory and State Enterprises recommended some review and reforms to the operations of Bank of Uganda but these have not yet been done.

The broader issues of the public policy that this Bill would affect are customer protection, which people have already talked about; the mobile money issue – we also have transparency and corruption.

Recently, there was a video clip on TV where local government staff were crying because they did not know how to operationalise the payment system. They feigned ignorance that money was being siphoned out of their accounts.

The other issue that this Bill will help to bring to the table is the conversation on the mobile money transactions and taxes. Mobile money was only trying to bring out the inclusiveness of the financial services to the people in the local communities; that has since been eroded.

The other issue is about interconnectivity within banks. Banks are charging differently - some request for commissions and as a result, there is little use of the visa cards or bank charges and people opt for cash transactions yet bank cards would ably serve in this season of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Lastly, the Bill will bring us at par with our East African neighbours and be of help in the Monetary Union of our economies. I beg to submit.

4.44
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good report presented. I have a small contribution to make. I think when this law comes into effect, it will help in creating some convenience because as it stands now, it is not possible to have transactions from say MTN to Airtel and all the other telecommunication lines. 

There are many people who are inconvenienced. They end up getting all these lines and putting them into different phones so that they have convenience in carrying out their transactions. If we have this law in place and it allows transactions to be taking place across lines; it will create convenience.

Secondly, I think when we have this law in place, it will help in creating awareness because as it is now, there are some people, especially in the local areas, who when they lose their phones, if they have money on their lines, they opt for new lines because they think they cannot get recover the money on the lost lines. I think this law will give a number of people the opportunity to create awareness and those who are losing their money and keeping quiet about it, will get to know they can actually recover it. 

I thank the committee and let us support the Bill to come into law.

4.46
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those happy people today because this Bill has come to the Floor of the House. Hon. Bahati must also be very happy because last year, I gave him a very hard time over this matter. Therefore, I would like to thank him for having accepted, listened and brought this matter. I would also like to thank the committee for this report. 

Madam Speaker, I think this Bill, which will of course become law, will help to harmonise telecom company charges because different telecom companies have been charging differently on withdrawals and transfer of monies. I hope this will be able to address that and solve that problem. 

My concern is, going by the proposal, this law will come in force after six months. I think there is need for us to adjust that. A lot needs to be done on these telecom companies because they were involved in activities that they were not registered for. For example, what is going to happen to money on the accounts of people that have lost their dear ones? 

Two, there has been a lot of fraud and I hope the coming into force of this law will help reduce or eliminate those issues. In case MTN collapsed today, customers would not have any remedy on how to recover their money. I hope this will now help so that it acts in the same way when a bank collapses. We should be able to address these matters. 

There has also been cheating by these telecom companies. We passed a law here about OTT. What we were given and what we passed here is Shs 72,000 per annum. However, if you pay by mobile money, even if you checked it now on your phone, you will end up paying Shs 73,000 annually. There is an additional Shs 1,000 and we do not know who takes that money. If you multiply that by the number of subscribers, you will realise that these telecom companies have been making more than Shs 100 billion in a year. Who takes this money? Hon. Bahati needs to take note of this. Why are they charging Shs 73,000 and not Shs 72,000 – (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we are all operating with the mobile money system. Take an example of a mobile money operator on Dewinton Road or Parliamentary Avenue. When you withdraw Shs 1 million, the charge is Shs 28,500. However, this man/lady operating the mobile money is not even getting Shs 1,000 out of that interest. Who is getting that big interest? 

One time, the President stated that telecom companies are cheating by over Shs 2 trillion every financial year. Nonetheless, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has never elaborated on that. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Of course, it has not only been Ugandans who have been cheated but also the Government. That is why the President came out to address it.

On the issue that hon. Ssewungu is talking about, you find that on MTN, if you are sending anything between Shs 4 million and Shs 7 million, they will charge you Shs 50,000 but if it is on Airtel, it is Shs 12,500. Why is that discrepancy there? That is why I am saying I think this will be able to help us harmonise the charges of these telecom companies. 

We should also not let them go scot free. That is why we need to make a recommendation on the laws we are making – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance on the National Payment Systems Bill, 2019 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2019

Clause 1
MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I request that we stay over clause 1 so that it is determined by clause 74; the transitional provision. Whatever we decide on clause 74 will have an effect on clause 1. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stand over clause 1. 

Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 is interpretation. 

Clause 3 
4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 3 as follows: 
Rename the existing provision as (1) and insert a new sub-clause (2) as follows: 
“(2) This Act shall not apply to securities deposited or held in the Securities Central Depository established under the Securities Central Depository Act and traded at the Uganda Securities Exchange.” 

The justification:
    • The system and settlement of securities is already catered for in the Securities Central Depository Act.
    • These are further regulated under the Capital Markets Authority Act. 

I beg to submit.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6 
4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, there is a small amendment on clause 6 (d). Instead of “any other payment system approved or licensed by the Central Bank under this Act”, we wanted to propose to correct it to say, “any other payment system classified by the Central Bank under this Act” so that the Central Bank has some leeway of monitoring what is happening in the market instead of being limited by only those, which are licensed and approved by the Central Bank. I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale? I have not understood what difference it would make.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, if you say “any other payment approved or classified by the Central Bank under this Act”, it limits the Central Bank to look at only those that are approved or licensed, which is different from “any other payment system classified by the Central Bank under this Act”. The reason is that it gives the Central Bank some leeway to monitor what is happening in the market so that it is not limited to only those that are approved or classified because the system keeps changing all the time in the market.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have, still, not understood. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable minister, if you read the entire Act, this particular clause actually helps the Central Bank. To license a particular payment system or issuer, it must first approve and in the process, it classifies that particular payment system as befitting licensing under this Act. 

I believe that if we leave this clause as it is, it empowers the Central Bank, first of all, to monitor the innovation in technology. A person applies and once the Central Bank is satisfied, it approves and licenses. If you restrict it with the word “classification” only and you leave out “licensing”, it means that particular payment system will not fall under this Act. Therefore, I beg you to leave this particular clause as it is. It helps the Central Bank.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, when the system is not licensed, then, it is not operating. What do you want to cure here? If you are talking about new innovations, they are catered for in the Bill. We have the sandbox section such that if there is a new innovation coming up, it is catered for. Bank of Uganda will be able to regulate and monitor it. If you say “classified” but it is not licensed, how will it operate? I think it will create confusion. I beg that we maintain it as it is so that Bank of Uganda will have better leeway to regulate and manage the system.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 6 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 7(4) by inserting immediately after the word “licence” the words “as may be prescribed”. The justification is that disqualification should not be forever. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  How will it read, finally? Can you read the sentence in full so that we capture it?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, clause 7(4) reads: “A person convicted of an offence under sub-section (3) shall immediately cease to offer payment services and shall be disqualified from acquiring a licence under this Act.” We are proposing to insert immediately after the word “licence” the words “as may be prescribed” – “…shall be disqualified from acquiring a licence as may be prescribed under this Act”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there no penalty section that tells you what to do?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I request the committee chairperson to reconsider his position. When you look at the clause itself, particularly clause 7(1), it is only talking about that particular person who is operating a payment service without a licence. This particular provision – sub-clause (4) – is actually punishing that particular person from ever applying for a licence because he committed an offence by operating a payment system without first obtaining a licence.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am persuaded by hon. Niwagaba and I, therefore, concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 7, agreed to.
Clause 8, agreed to.
Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new sub-clause as follows:


“(a) The Central Bank shall grant the licence within sixty days from the date of the application for the licence.
(b) The Central Bank shall publish in a newspaper of wide circulation in Uganda, a list of all licences under this Act, at least once every year.
(c) Where the Central Bank declines to grant a licence to an applicant, the Central Bank shall, within 30 days, notify the applicant of its decision and specify the reasons for the refusal in writing.”

New sub-clause
Insert a new sub-clause immediately after clause 10 as follows:

“Modification of a licence
    (1) The Central Bank may, upon reasonable ground, modify the conditions of any licence if the Central Bank considers it necessary to achieve the object of this Act, or is in the public interest, taking into account the justified interests of payment service providers, operators and the principles of fair competition and equality of treatment.
    (2) Before modifying any condition under sub-section (1), the Central Bank shall give the payment service provider or operator notice of not less than sixty days, stating the reasons for the intended modifications and giving the payment service provider or operator an opportunity to make any representation.
    (3) The Central Bank shall give a payment service provider or operator reasonable time within which to comply with the modifications of the licence.”

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first deal with clause 10 before we go to the new clause. Honourable chairperson, I see the proposal to insert a new sub-clause as follows: “a”, “b” and “c”. I do not know whether it is under sub-clause (1), sub-clause (2) and sub-clause (3) or sub-clause (6), sub-clause (7) and sub-clause (8). Is it clause 10(1), 10(2) and 10(3) or 10(6), 10(7) and 10(8)?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, these are new introductions, adding to sub-section (5). We can start from sub-section (5). Then sub-section (1) becomes (6), (7) and (8).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the clerk capture that. These are new sub-clauses. There is a new sub-clause (6), (7) and (8). I now put the question that -

MR NIWAGABA: The proposed amendments are okay but I believe there should have been a clause on administrative review of the Central Bank’s decision, especially where the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the Central Bank.

Madam Chairperson, I thought under that very clause, it would have come out well, especially, in view of the amendments. If it is, then we would provide for an administrative review of the decision to the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would that now be sub-clause (9)?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I will agree with what the honourable colleague is saying but I think to limit it to administrative review, would hold the hands of the regulator.

I would think that in principle, if in 30 days, you have been notified of the reason why you are being denied and you feel there is justifiable - or even no response within 30 days - we must provide for a remedy to the applicant. Otherwise, leaving it without remedy will be catastrophic to someone who wants to do business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can you propose what we should put there? “Where the Central Bank declines to grant licence, the applicant may appeal to…” Hon. Niwagaba?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I have been advised that we could – I believe clause 13 will hopefully cover that particular provision.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the vice-chairperson was trying to give me a backup by objecting to the administrative review proposal. We are glad that the honourable colleague has already conceded.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether - clause 13 is about revocation or suspension. It is not about failure to issue. So, we need to provide for a situation where the licence is not granted.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, may I request for time to do the drafting and then I bring it forward?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over that and we now go to the new clause. 

New Clause
MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, on the new clause proposed by the chairperson of the committee, we agree with the proposal but we want to amend the period within which the licence should be granted from 60 to 90 days. The reason for this, is that to allow the bank to operate, it takes time to do due diligence. You need to crosscheck a number of facts about the applicant. Otherwise, from our experience, 60 days is not sufficient to finish this, especially, to obtain information on some of these people who come from out and make a decision whether someone should start a bank in the country. This takes some little time. 

Madam Chairperson, we are not asking for a lot of time but 90 days. That would be enough for us to finish. After all, this is the maximum. When information is available, you can give this applicant the licence in 10 days, one month or two months. Here, we are talking about the maximum - which is 90 days - instead of the 60 days. I beg to propose.


MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First, I would like to respond to the amendment of the minister. We are not licensing a bank. We are licensing payment systems and platforms, which are widely operated. This is not something new. If you say 90 days, it means that in a year, you will be licensing few people yet, this is part of financial inclusion; you are trying to bring more people into the system of financial services. I would, therefore, go with the proposal of the committee of 60 days. I think 60 days is better. I, therefore, suggest that the minister concede – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Hon. Mawanda, you are talking about a system but this system must be tested and you must do due diligence on the applicant. Financial issues especially, operating in an economy like ours, need a lot of due diligence so that when you have a system in place, you know that it is watertight and will not cause problems.

Madam Chairperson, in the past, the current system we are using - you remember when we almost got people prodding our system. When they do this, they do it in millions of monies. I, therefore, think we need time to verify this system and the applicants so that we are sure of what we are doing. 
Hon. Mawanda, I know you are coming with amendments but I want you to support us on this so that the 90 days are granted in order to give us more time to operate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what they are doing is modifying the conditions of a licence. I believe the conditions of licence will be known. Why do you need 90 days to modify a condition?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think you have put it right to the minister. Otherwise, in the East African region, we are almost the last. In Kenya and Tanzania, this is the period. Some even have 30 days. So, we should not be dragging. Madam Chairperson, with your guidance, I think the honourable minister has conceded. Just put the question and we move.

MR MAWANDA: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on sub-section (3). It says, “The Central Bank shall give a payment service provider or operator reasonable time within which to comply with the modifications of the licence.” 

Madam Chairperson, for granting of the licence, we have said, 30 days. When you refuse to give the licence, you are giving him or her 30 days. So, why are you leaving the one on modification open? Why can’t we give it a time frame within which to bring those modifications? I, therefore, suggest 30 days or so. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to generate consensus on a number of things but I would like to agree with hon. Mawanda that for consistency in our previous proposals, we also put a time limit here of 30 days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the 30 days? Is it in sub-clause (3), which says the Central Bank shall give payment service provider or applicant 30 days, within which to comply? (Interjection) Okay. We have now abandoned the 90 days and taken 60 days in sub-clause (3).

MR MAWANDA: Are we on clause 13?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not yet. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
New clause, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 11, agreed to.
Clause 12, agreed to.
Clause 13
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 13 as follows:
    • In sub-clause (1)(a), substitute for “relevant law in force” the words “any provision of this Act or regulations made under this Act.”
The justification, Madam Chairperson, is that the provision extends the application of the law to other laws whose implementation or enforcement lies with other competent authorities and the Central Bank.
    • In sub-clause (1) (h), we propose that we substitute for paragraph (h) the following: “(h) is under liquidation.”
The justification is that under the Insolvency Act, 2011, insolvency proceedings include bankruptcy and arrangement for individuals, receivership and administration in liquidation for corporate entities. For instance, administration being a corporate rescue mechanism means that the company still has a chance to survive the financial challenges and return to trading profitably. On the other hand, liquidation results into the company being dissolved and ceasing to trade.
    • In sub-clause (4), we propose the insertion of the words “or suspension” immediately after the word “revocation.” The justification is that the notice of suspension of a licence should also be published for the information of the public.

    • We propose to insert new sub-clauses as follows and these will be numbered accordingly:


“1. The Central Bank shall give the licensee at least a 30-days’ notice in writing, specifying the reason for the intended revocation of the license.

2. The Central Bank shall, before revoking a licence, consider any representations made in writing by the licensee opposing the revocation.

3. The Central Bank shall revoke the license if, within 30 days after issuing the notice, the operator does not oppose the revocation or the Central Bank is not satisfied with the representations made.”

The justification is that the provision in its current form may not pass the constitutional tenets on the right to a fair hearing.

I beg to submit.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, chairperson of the committee. I have some amendments but I am concerned about your new sub-clause, which says, “The Central Bank shall give the licensee at least 30 days’ notice in writing, specifying the reasons for intended revocation of the licence” and subsequent clauses.

Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with money. The payment system is holding people’s money. You give them notice that within the next 30 days, I will remove my licence; the fellow will withdraw all the money and run away.

I would suggest that we do not give them notice the moment they find that they do not qualify. That is intended to protect customers’ money because this is not their money. Do not give them notice. The moment he does not adhere to the standards, remove the licence. There are other ways and means that can be taken to ensure that the licensee will be catered for. So, I disagree with the chairperson and suggest that we take the position of the mover of the motion.

Madam Chairperson, I also have some amendments in regard to clause 13. The amendment reads as follows: Clause 13 of the Bill is amended as follows:
    a. In sub-section (1), paragraph (c) by substituting for the word “six” with the word “three.”
    b. By inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (h), as follows –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are getting confused. The member is making some fundamental amendments yet we do not have a copy of those amendments. It is true that - he told me that he has given amendments to the chair but clearly as the mover of the Bill, we had already said that unless something is very urgent or something; the member must go to the committee and take these amendments or circulate them so that we know what we are doing. 

The speed at which he is doing the amendments - the amendments are not circulated! We do not know item (b) or clause this or that. He can mess up the Bill, Madam Chairperson. 

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I circulated my amendments two days ago. I gave you a copy; I also gave the Clerk a copy. I had a meeting with the technical team of the committee. I had a meeting with the chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Technical team, not the committee?

MR MAWANDA: No, for the few. Information is dynamic. If an idea comes up – (Interjections) - but I served your office and it has been a practice. Whenever you have an amendment, you serve the committee and then bring your amendments on the Floor. This is not the first time we have done it, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, one of the reasons we insist that if you have amendments, you should send them early enough is to help the committee also look at them. The mover should look at them; the Speaker should look at them. I read mine this morning at 5.00a.m.

You know, you disadvantage the committee. You disadvantage the mover.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, on the amendments by the committee; I believe since the clause talks about revocation or suspension, I would invite the chairman to consider adding the word “suspension” in the proposed amendments, to appear  after the word “revocation” so that the provision is on notice and the like also tally with the suspension.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, can I seek information? Which clause are you referring to? On which sub-clause?

MR NIWAGABA: Your amendments on clause 13 after subclause (5). You were restricting them to revocation and I wanted you to add the word “suspension” so that whatever applies to revocation also applies to suspension to align the entire clause, especially the heading under clause 13.

MR MUSASIZI: That is okay, Madam Chairperson.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think you should make the practice as it is in the House to be really guided and to have a standard submission of amendments. It has been a practice that all amendments have to be looked at in the committee. The committee does not belong to the chairperson only or to the legal team. We never saw those amendments in the committee. We made a report without circulating the amendments. We appended our signatures to the report but it does commit us to an amendment, which we do not understand.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we should move procedurally in accordance with the practice of the House. If amendments are not circulated in the committee, a report cannot be made by the chairperson of the committee or a legal team. It must be a full committee and not an individual or a legal team. This is what happened to hon. Magyezi’s committee report and it brought problems.

If a Member of Parliament, under our rules, is an ex officio member of a committee, he can circulate any amendment –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason we established those rules is not to take anyone by surprise. Now, this amendment – today is 27 May 2020 – I said I read mine this morning at 5.00 a.m. I do not know whether the committee has – No, this is not right. 

You know, when a Bill is published, notice of its hearing is put on the notice board so that everybody is aware of it. If you had interest in this Bill, you should have gone to the committee. I will disallow your amendments. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We go by your ruling but then there was an issue, which the honourable member had brought here about this issue of giving 30 days. What does the chairperson have to say about it? This is about money. He said if you give notice, somebody can easily take off with the money. What do you have to say about that? How is it done in other jurisdictions, before we put the question? Allow us to do some minimal amendments to that. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we can benefit from you as a lawyer and Speaker. Now that on our side, the Attorney-General is not there, we can also benefit from the shadow Attorney-General. If you look at clause 13(h), which is about revocation and suspension of a licence, the original Bill was saying that when somebody enters into insolvency proceedings then we should get out. We should revoke the licence or suspend it because by the time you go into insolvency, it means something had started to go wrong.

The committee is suggesting that we wait until we enter liquidation. Liquidation is almost at the tail end of the insolvency. Therefore, we are proposing that we maintain clause 13 (h) so that we sort of guard those people who are going to be in these systems to be sure that we are very serious. You have to protect your integrity and dealings so that we do not wait until you go into liquidation to revoke the licence. Instead, you guard it even at the time you start proceedings of insolvency. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to remove the words, “has entered insolvency proceeding”? Did you want to amend that? Honourable chairperson, what is your rationale? Let me hear from the chairperson first.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, yesterday I had a meeting with technical people from the Central Bank and also our lawyers. The purpose of the meeting was because I wanted to understand the difference between insolvency and liquidation. I was made to understand that in law, insolvency is that process you go through when you are struggling as a company and liquidation is that point when the company cannot continue to exist anymore and everything has to be brought to an end. 

Madam Chairperson, with this appreciation in mind, it is important that when you start struggling, the regulator gets an opportunity to go in. For this to happen, we have to provide for insolvency. Therefore, I concede to our proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you conceding to? That we retain the original?

MR MUSASIZI: That we retain the original, as provided for in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under insolvency law, if you become insolvent, even your affairs are administered by somebody else. So, the process has started.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I still have another comment to make before I get into other things. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still on 13?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR MUSASIZI: Hon. Okupa asked why we give 30 days’ notice when you are about to revoke a licence. Let me say this; regulation is not the same as policing. Regulations have a number of objectives, among which is to help someone to recover from his struggles. 

I have a feeling that since these companies are not criminals, they are known to us, there is no reason as to why we should not notify them that they are about to get into a ditch and therefore, if they do not change things, something is likely to happen. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is not just about the institution. What about the people who are dealing with it? If they do not know, they are going to continue doing business and committing themselves. Therefore, a notice is important.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the doctrine of notice is important, especially when you look at our constitutional provisions on fair hearing, especially in administrative decisions. Therefore, if you remove the principle of notice in this particular clause, we will be breaching the fundamental provisions of the Constitution. I support the committee’s position and invite members to support it. 

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Chair, I agree with the principle of notice and fair hearing but when you look at clause 13 (d), by the time such a decision is arrived at, the company will have failed to operate for over 30 days, which I think is fair enough. We will agree on the principle of notice but it should not be more than two weeks because failing to operate within this period is proof of incompetence.

I think one month is quite enough for a company that is failing. We may even give it an opportunity to probably find the best way to run away with people’s finances, as has happened with some companies before. 

MR OKUPA: My issue is to the chairperson of the committee. On part 3 where you said the Central Bank shall revoke the licence if, within 30 days after issuing the notice, the operator does not oppose the revocation or the Central Bank is not satisfied by the representations made. You have already stated above that a licence is for at least 30 days. I wish the chairperson of the committee could listen. In part (1) you have given at least 30 days but again on the third part, you are talking of “Can be revoked within 30 days”. I thought it would have been immediately after the 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you on?

MR OKUPA: On clause 13 on his proposals where he is talking of starting a new sub clause as follows - there are proposals by the committee to insert new clauses. When I read (1) and then read (3) - you are saying within 30 days. If the notice is 30 days how can you revoke within that very period of the notice? 

It should be after the 30 days. The way you have put the wording - because in (1) you are saying that you shall give the licensee at least 30 days’ notice in writing specifying the reason for the intended revocation of the license. And in (3), you are saying that the central bank shall revoke the license within 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we remove the word “Within?”

MR OKUPA: It should be immediately after 30 days which you have given and not again within the 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Central Bank shall revoke the license 30 days after issuing the notice. 

MR OKUPA: Yes, 30 days after issuing - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we remove the word “within.”

MR OKUPA: Yes.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, from the whispers around, it looks like the committee had its position and the chairperson is arm-twisting that position. I do not know whether we are proceeding right.

If the chairperson is arm-twisting the position of the committee without him circulating to the committee and to us, I do not know whether we will be proceeding right, Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, for the purpose of the record and the House, according to what the committee chairperson was explaining, insolvency means your liabilities are more than your assets. Therefore, your position of accountability to finance - insolvency of that company shows that you cannot meet your liability. Therefore, that company becomes insolvent.

We start with liquidation and go for receivership - that is the process where Government can intervene. The position he has taken in the committee and why I do not agree with the minister - we looked at all those issues and we decided that we cannot intervene when the Insolvency Act is clear on how we declare books of accounts and they are monitored and seen.

Now, when you take the position of the minister, it changes the committee’s position which we had taken. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is an appropriate time to adjourn. Let us stand over this matter and we come back to it tomorrow with fresh minds.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The National Payment Systems Bill, 2020” and passed clauses 3 up to 12 with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done quite a lot but I don’t want members to be arrested like yesterday. Police are waiting to arrest members who defy the curfew. Therefore, I adjourn the House to 2.00p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 May 2020 at 2.00p.m.)

