Wednesday, 24 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmos Adyebo, in the Chair.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you Mr Chairman. I have an Amendment to Rule 1 of the First Schedule.  For those who may not have their copies, Rule 1 says; ‘No journalist shall disseminate information or allegations affecting the good standing of government and individual or organisation without having thorough investigation of the details of the allegation as the truth.’ My objection to Rule is what the phrase affecting the good standing of the government and individual or organisation. The phrase affecting the good standing of the government or affecting the good standing of any person is the highly subjective phrase and it is subject to many, many interpretations, and journalists more often than not, do contribute or raise objection because of the very issue about the government or about what the government is doing.  If you say that the Journalist should not write anything the good standing of government, and if that government has no good standing, then what are you going to do? What is the meaning of this phrase? 

My interpretation is that the important in Rule 1 is that a Journalist should write after thorough investigations.  He should not lie on rumours or lies, and it is in this respect that I have re-drafted Rule 1 to read, ‘No Journalist shall disseminate information or allegation without establishing its correctness or truth.’  I feel this is sufficient rather than including a highly loaded word affecting the good standing of government or of an individual or organisation.  Yet it is this contentious issue of the good standing of something which the Journalists always attain to write about.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS PAULINO (Dodoth County, Kotido): Mr Chairman, I can see hon. Atubo’s Amendment.  Mr Chairman, my intention is to remove the whole No.1 in the 1st Schedule.

This question of the good standing of the government and individual or organisation - over one of us or every government has a good standing until somebody questions that good standing.  Therefore, to say, the good standing  -(Interruption)- he has only passed the Clause.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, hon. Omara Atubo has not proposed that Rule 1 be deleted as it is being proposed by hon. Marwas.  Hon. Dan Omara Atubo as we can see from his Amendment has not done away with this particular Code. If anything he has been very precise.  He is repeating the same thing, which he has done in detail in very precise manner.  He has not disturbed it. I beg to accept.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the 1st Schedule 1 be amended as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 1 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, there is always a lot of writing about what I would consider not proper especially when it comes to writing information which is not educative to the country’s population.  Therefore, I propose to add some more to the information as given to schedule 1.  Therefore, no.10 should be ‘a Journalist shall endeavour to cross-check information before publishing stories especially those concerning individuals.’

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Wanendeya, this is catered for by the previous Amendment. Mr Omara Atubo summarised it and we passed it.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to submit that a Journalist shall not publish stories which do not contribute to good morals, unity and economic development of the country.’ The point over here is this; I have got a story in connection with Major Onzi, and Major Onzi who is an hon. member of this House did not chose to be lame or to have a deformity which came later on. Therefore, it would be better if our journalists publish stories with due respect to such deformities which may not injure a person’s standing in society.  

I, therefore, would want to tender this as a way of making our journalists to make sure that when they write something, it should be educational and it should contribute to the economic development of our country.  I therefore, beg to submit this. Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: One at a time please.  I now put the question that Schedule 1 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, another one is ‘No journalist shall publish a story that degrades human dignity.’  Therefore, I submit this even to proof that stories like that which try -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Wanendeya, there is no Chairman, on your right.  Address the Chair.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, what I saying is that they may publish a story saying that hon. Wamusi has got one let, when did not.  They would even draw a cartoon to that effect.  Therefore, I am submitting that it should be one of the codes of ethics to say, ‘no journalist shall publish a story that degrades a human dignity.’ I beg to submit.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Schedule 1 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived.)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an Amendment to the 1st Schedule involving Rule 9.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will come to you, Dr Luyombya later. 

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, it would make your work and House easier if you are to call each Rule, and we pass on it.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is what I was trying to do.

Rule 7:

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, my Amendment is really very, very brief.  Rule 7 there is a word where personal opinions are expressed the public shall be made to know in certain terms  I think, Mr Chairman, it is important when you are passing Law what phrases to use and how it can be interpreted.  It does not matter if we just stop at ‘know.’ I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Rule 7 be amended as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 9:

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that Rule 9 be deleted.  I can see that the intention of this Rule is to provide against sectarianism.  There is already a Statute dealing with sectarianism in more detail than this Rule here.  Secondly, this Rule again could be misused if it is left just as it is, and yet one of the objects of this Bill is to have freedom of speech and freedom of the Press.  This could easily be abused if we leave it like that.  I will give you an example. There was this Bika Football.  

There was a time when there was a Debate whether somebody should talk about them or not to talk about them, and some people took courage and talked about them and ever since they were re-introduced there has not been any violence at all and they have just been used to unite the people. But some people earlier on were saying that they could have been used to divide or promote tribalism.  Such a thing government could easily hide behind and arrest or apprehend a journalist. I would like to propose that we delete it and if we want to have freedom of the Press.

CAPT. GASTURA GAD:  Mr Chairman, I can understand the concern of hon. Dr Luyombya.  But if he had an opportunity to refer to the Appendix (b) on the Provisions of International Treaties and Instruments of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  It is given that everyone shall be subject to such Laws as to secure due recognition and respect of the freedoms of others. Specifically some of those limitations of such freedoms are against abuse of amongst others public morality and incitement of hatred along ratio or ethnic lines.  We have seen it abused in different countries not to mention just across in Rwanda, Germany and many other areas.  Here if hon. Luyombya was to demand for the definition of say, tribalism, we would go along.  But to prevent somebody to incite hatred, I think that is not an reasonable in a democratic society, Mr Chairman. I oppose the Motion. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Rule 9 be amended as proposed by hon. Dr Luyombya.

(Question put and negatived.)

First Schedule, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the House to pass the First Schedule accidentally without giving hon. Kazoora chance to propose some very important amendments additional to these Rules.  They were circulated and are here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Omara Atubo, you are actually out of order since hon. Kazoora is here he would have been the one to raise his complaint.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, this is an additional Amendment which I submitted in last week.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kazora, you have been sending many Amendments here and we have been treating them with due attention.  But the last one which you sent I think it was dated 12th May, had been circulated long time ago to the extend that at the time hon. Omara Atubo was raising an Amendment to Schedule 1 and so on, this of yours here is not even confined to specific Rules.  Your were just talking about professional code of ethics in practice and they are many.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, in my Amendment I had suggested Rule 10, but that fortunately has been taken care of by Rule 6 although there is a minor addition I wanted to add in.  It says, ‘no Journalist shall deny any person with legitimate claim a right to reply to the Statement.  Correction and shall be published in a prominent under Appropriate Form without delay and in a way that they will be noticed by those who have received the original information.  

Now, substantially 99 per cent is covered in Rule 6.  But what is omitted is shall.  I would prefer ‘shall’ to remain instead of ‘are to be published’ and add on a ‘prominent and appropriate’ position.  I, therefore, move that that additional amendment that shall is to be and the prominent position should be included. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that -(Interruption)

MR ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, as a chairman of Committee of Discipline, I believe in punctuality.  This Amendment which is being moved and baptised as who, it is actually talking about that which had already done in Rule 6.  If it is the correction of terminology bringing in shall, and all these others, that can be improved on those particular areas but not suggesting that we have a new section.  So, I beg to oppose that one.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule be amended as proposed by hon. John Kazoora.

(Question put and negatived.)

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. to challenge the Rule of the Chair?

THE CHAIRMAN: As far as he raises the point of order to the Chair, according to the Rule, he is perfectly in order.  But he can only be out of order if he is not following the Rules of Procedure.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, the second Amendment I propose is this: ‘the Journalist shall take the necessary steps to correct any false or damaging report he has made on any individual or organisation.’

THE CHAIRMAN:  Point of clarification. Hon. Kazoora, if you were here yesterday I believe this proposed Amendment of yours was taken care of by hon. Wanendeya’s Amendments of yesterday. So, it is a repetition.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw that. No.12 - News Papers and periodicals shall take care not publish inaccurate misleading or distorted material.’ I propose that this should be part of the Rules.

THE CHAIRMAN: But again here the Amendment as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo this afternoon takes care of that.  Okay, proceed with the remaining Amendment.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, No.12 (2), whenever is recognised that, that a significant inaccuracy, misleading statement or distorted report has been published, it shall be correctly, promptly and with due prominence.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think Rule 6 takes care of that.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, No.3, ‘an apology shall be published whenever appropriate.’

THE CHAIRMAN: Mathematically, I would have now concluded that from the assembling of your amendments most of them have been taken care of I think.

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to introduce amendments which have been already taken care of?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is out of order. Hon. Members, hon. Kazoora’s amendments have been taken care of.  I would now ask him to withdraw his amendments.

MR KAZORA: Mr Chairman, not all of them are care of.  For example No.16. (Interruption)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, hon. Butagira rose on a point of order and your wise ruling - the hon. Member was ruled out of order, and is it right then now that, is it in order that he should continue boring the House with this?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the point is this.  I have consistently advised hon. John Kazoora that these amendments have been taken care of and he is actually repeating them here, and an hon. Member raised a point of order in a rule that hon. John Kazoora was out of order.  So, I am saying these Amendments are actually out of order and should therefore not waste our time.  So, we proceed?

First Schedule, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the First Schedule as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Second Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Third Schedule:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Third Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Fourth Schedule:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, in the Fourth Schedule, Rule 1, subsection (1), there is a word that we revised, ‘The Council shall meet for the discharge of its duties at least once every three months, not every two months.’ We found that this gives time for the Committee of the Council which should always report to the main Council also to meet in between.  So if their meeting takes place quarterly then this is going to be okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Rule 1 of Schedule Four be amended as proposed by the chairman of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 4:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, if this is going to be a big Council, Select Committee Members find it necessary that the quorum of five be raised to seven.  That even members shall form a quorum at a Meeting of a Council, instead of five.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Rule 4 of Schedule Four be amended as proposed by the chairman of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 6:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Fourth Schedule as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Title of the Bill remains the same.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has carefully considered the Bill entitled ‘The Mass Media Bill, 1995,’ and passed it with several Amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to more that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESS AND MASS MEDIA BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Samson Kisekka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Press and Mass Media Bill’ be read the Third Time and do pass.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Bill entitled ‘The Press and Mass Media Bill’ be read the Third Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the Minister for Internal Affairs to move that the Press Bill be read the Third Time?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister is a Cabinet Minister and he is representing his Colleague.  So, he is perfectly in order.


‘THE PRESS AND JOURNALIST BILL, 1995’

(Bill passed.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much hon. Members for doing a very good job.  I now adjourn the Council until we meet again.

(The Council rose at 3.55 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

