Friday, 20 May 2005

(The Parliament met at 10.29 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued.)

10.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for making me the first person to contribute today. I support the report of the Committee and the Bill. Actually, I am pleased that this Bill has addressed a historical fact that Kibaale District belongs to Bunyoro and our people are happy.  It took us some time for Kibale to make this decision, but we have now made the decision and we are sure of what we are doing.  

Madam Speaker, I support the regional governments.  I have been listening to the various reasons being given here and I would like to associate with them, especially for harmony, peace, addressing historical wrongs and so forth.  I do associate with all those sentiments. But I particularly support this bill because the regional governments are furtherance of the decentralization system of governance; that is how I see it. The regional governments are contributing to the decentralisation process.  

We have been practicing decentralization in this country for more than ten years and it has proved effective and our people love it. We are happy that the NRM Government came up with this system because it has improved service delivery.  

We start with decentralizing to districts and as you are aware, honourable members, we did not decentralize every activity. Actually we only decentralized the primary activities such as schools, primary healthy care, feeder roads to the district governments. But these are the very basic social services, which we have actually during the last ten years or so and we are still continuing to do very well. 

At this juncture, the opportunity has come which was initiated by the regions that had had kingdoms before, namely, Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga and others, and it has given us an opportunity to continue the decentralization. But this time we are saying that we are going to decentralize at a regional level, which is a higher level, but is breaching the gap between the centre and the districts. 

Now we have created a regional government, and I support it because now we have ensured that the services which are being done by the districts will remain and this gives the district the opportunity to perfect that art of giving the basic services and will even do it better as they continue.  

We are now decentralising the secondary services to a regional government, which I think is very much in order so that we create another level of services. The regional governments, which are going to take care of the secondary services, like secondary education, referral hospitals, regional roads. I think it is a perfect arrangement and that is why I am supporting it.  So we should actually look at it not so much on strengthening the former kingdoms, but also as a level, which is going to cater for the secondary services, which were not decentralized initially. 

I think the regional governments are going to be a centre of activity like the districts have proved. By having so many centres of activity at this point in time in our country, when we are talking of the transformation of our societies, I think this is going to accelerate the rate at which we are going to transform the society and I would like to appeal to colleagues to support this arrangement which Government has proposed. 

I would like the other regions to think about it outside the kingdoms, but as a service delivery system which is decentralizing secondary services to the regional tier, and I am happy that –(Interruptions)- This is actually my conviction apart from being a person from the Kingdom of Bunyoro. It is going to threaten my kingdom, fine, but for me when I am sensitising my people, I will emphasize that this regional government is going to take care of other services which were not decentralized so that we can accelerate the transformation of society by having more players in the field.  

So after analysing this regional government, I could not hesitate but grasp this opportunity for Bunyoro Kingdom to participate immediately without delay. That is why I have been advocating that we in Bunyoro Kingdom be deemed immediately without delay because we need this service now; it would have been yesterday, but we need it now so that we can accelerate the transformation of our people in the kingdom. I would like to invite other regions to come on board. This is a very excellent arrangement; do not miss out. With that comment, Madam Speaker, I support the motion and the regional governments strongly. (Applause)

10.38
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support the motion –(Applause)- and also to thank the committee for a very good job done.

Madam Speaker, I am one of the Members of Parliament who was sent here to crusade for federalism. The definition of federalism according to my constituents was in the perspective that federalism is a mechanism of conflict resolution, that federalism is a power sharing arrangement between the centre and the local units. My people wanted federalism because they want to check on tyranny.  All of us know the history of this country from 1962 up to about 1996 when the current regime took charge. Regime after regime the people of Uganda have suffered untold suffering, marginalisation and most times sectarianism.  

Madam Speaker, my people want federalism because they need to attend to local issues quickly. It is true, Madam Speaker, that the arrangement we have got today is not federalism but it is better than nothing. For 27 years, my people were clamouring for a system that had been taken away by a regime, and in 1992 the kingship and the kingdom was restored. After the 1995 Constitution, a charter was introduced and now we are debating a regional government, a regional tier. I believe that we are now on the right path.  We will go with the arrangement that we have and perhaps in future we will get the actual federalism that the people are really clamouring for.  

Madam Speaker, I was happy with the report of the committee, in fact I was very happy when I read that some Members of Parliament from Acholi and Busoga regions are pushing that those regions also be deemed. Madam Speaker, I want to used this opportunity to beseech Government to deem all the areas, which actually want to be deemed. We would not like a situation where this arrangement is only seen as favouritism to Buganda, we would not like a situation where the Baganda only appear privileged.  I believe that this arrangement should come across the board and that all those areas, which want to be deemed should be deemed.

Madam Speaker, I want to wind up on the issue of Kampala. I believe that this Parliament will have to revisit the proposal in this Bill on the following grounds: We are all aware that initially Kampala was a city of seven hills, today we are told that Kampala has got more than seven hills.  We are also aware that Kampala today has got five divisions, and we must be projecting into the future. We are aware that Kampala has got a growing population, we are also aware that Kampala cannot be confined –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, wind up please.

MR MABIKKE: I am winding up in very few minutes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not in minutes, just wind up now.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, if you take Kampala out of Buganda as the case appears to be in this Bill, we are in future going to have problems because Kampala has got to expand; Kampala has got to grow; the infrastructure of Kampala must grow, the population is growing. If you say Kampala is not in Buganda, I think in future we are going to have a problem in the expansion programme of Kampala. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I beg to support the Bill.

10.44
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to support the Bill, and my reasons are three. First, I would like to refer to the Constitution, which states, under Article 178(3) that “The district of Buganda as specified in the First Schedule of the Constitution shall be deemed to have agreed to operate on the coming into force of this Constitution.”  Madam Speaker, what the Bill provides is more information on how this cooperation should have taken place and I believe that with this Bill Buganda will be in a position to put into operation the cooperation that will have been undertaken under the regional government.  

I would also like to support this particular Bill on the basis of the fact that for us who studied in Buganda, and in particular Gayaza High School, we do appreciate that Buganda for time immemorial has hosted a number of us and has been gracious to most of us who live here. Therefore giving Buganda a regional government will enable Buganda as a region to develop more, and also will enable us who live in this region to enjoy the benefits of this development.

Madam Speaker, I would like to speak on account of Mwenge County South, and yesterday I would like to say that we did meet as Members of Parliament from this particular district of Kyenjojo and we were sharing what we had found when we discussed the White Paper with our people.  

Madam Speaker, the people of Mwenge South at first thought that this regional tier or federo as it was known then was for Buganda. But I did go to great lengths to explain to them that this would be also available to them that this would also be available to them if they were agreeable to cooperating.  I am glad that this Bill explains and puts in place a mechanism for our people to enter into such cooperation.  

Madam Speaker, of course, some people also misunderstood this particular arrangement to mean that they would go back to their earlier arrangement of Kabarole as a district. Kyenjojo is a new district like Kamwenge and Kabarole is on their own; this meant that it brought fresh memories of being part of a large block and therefore, being marginalized. 

But after explaining some people understood and others were very hesitant and, therefore, the provision for further consultation with our people and obtaining of resolutions is in order. By so doing we will have brought all people in this particular region on board to appreciate and understand that the regional tier will not take them back to the old arrangement and the district remain autonomous. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by urging all members of Parliament to support this particular Bill. I would also like to state the fact that Buganda and other regions which are ready to be deemed will go ahead and form the regional government is good for us who may not be readily able to do it in that we shall be watching carefully and studying and analysing the benefits.  These are the very benefits that we shall use to convince our people about the advantages of forming a regional tier. Madam Speaker, these are my reasons for supporting this particular Bill and I thank you.

10.50
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, madam Speaker. I am a great supporter of the federal system of governance. Busoga was at its best when it had semi-federal status. That time they did a lot of things including providing education to children from poor homes like me. I cannot imagine that I would have been able to achieve what I have achieved and even be in this House if Busoga government had not paid for my education and took me to some of the most prestigious educational institutions. Therefore, I support the federal system of governance. (Applause) 

The federal system of governance removes concentration of power and resources from the centre and actually makes people more innovative and resourceful. I can see that if we go the way we are now discussing, I am very excited about the development of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, in fact, I want to appreciate the leadership of Buganda for having persisted and insisted on getting federal, and for whatever eventually has been achieved. (Applause) I therefore, support the creating of regional government. When we come to Committee Stage we shall have to look at some of the proposals that are being made. I looked at the functions to be performed by regional governments. If we do not do anything to that particular clause it may mean that these are the only functions and maybe functions that will be voluntarily surrendered to the regional tier by districts. 

I can imagine that not many districts will be interested in surrendering any of their functions. So, I think at the end of those functions we should provide that Parliament shall enact a law to provide for creation of other functions to be performed by these regional governments so that in future should we find it necessary to pass to the regional governments some of the functions now being performed by the Central Government, we can decide as Parliament to do so. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of financing regional governments, this to me is very, very, important.  I understand that the people in Mengo shy away from charging taxes, and that is why I think this compromise under clause 11 was reached at whereby Government work out a formula for granting unconditional grant. To me this is not good enough. 

If you look at the functions being allocated to regional governments, it is important that we must have a sure financing of regional governments to enable them perform those functions. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I will also make some proposals when we come to Committee Stage to provide for a much more sure financing of these regional governments including a system of taxation. 

Madam Speaker, allow me finally to talk about deeming. I think deeming is something I support and I am surprised that the Minister did not come up with a proposal in the law to create - If the Minister can listen to me.  I would have expected the Minister to come up with a provision in this law to propose the kind of regions that could be created so that people can actually discuss this and even try to lobby the various districts so that we can create these regions. 

I was so excited when hon. Kagonyera, yesterday said that the former Kigezi and Ankole are going to create one region. I think this is going to be very good because you have a strong regional government that is able to effectively negotiate with the Central Government to make sure that a number of facilities are provided. 

For Busoga, Madam Speaker, I think we should be deemed in the same way as Buganda because we already have a Charter, which brought together all the districts and there in no need for us now to go and consult again. With regard to other regions, I think it will be very important that other districts seriously consider the deeming element so that we can create strong and viable regional governments as opposed to these small districts, which are not even able to survive on their own and even maintain road equipment so that they can do work in their districts. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the motion.

10.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I also wish to thank the honourable members of Parliament for doing justice to this very historical motion. 

Madam Speaker, when we vote positively on this Bill, Uganda will never be the same again. This is a move in the right direction. As we listen to the debate, it is clear that for our country to have stability and harmony, it is necessary that views and wants of others have got to be accommodated in one way or another.

According to the paper I read recently, the most important function of the regional tier is to capture or reflect the identities and interest of local communities at regional level, prioritise, customize and adopt the type or style of systems or services to meet the needs of local communities in a particular region in a most cost effective manner. Madam Speaker here we are talking about efficient management with qualitative economies of scale. 

Madam Speaker, the set up of a regional government or regional tier is just a continuation of the process of decentralization by the Movement Government. We all have to appreciate that while there are functions which are being handled at the district through decentralization, there are also those functions which were left at the centre. 

Let us be honest. Some of these functions may prove a bit heavy for the centre to handle effectively and efficiently. It is these functions that we are talking of moving to the regional government which would result into efficiency, which result into equitable distribution of resources and people being able to get benefits in a more direct way than when you have them at the centre where it takes time for the people of the whole region to know what is happening. 

It will enhance supervision, Madam Speaker. Unlike in 1962, the proposed regional structure offers the whole country, or districts that so desire, an opportunity to come together as regions and in a manner guarantees to enhance equitable sharing of the national cake and political stability, Madam Speaker. We are talking about management. 

Madam Speaker, I want to pause here and emphasise that this is not a Buganda thing. Yes, Buganda may have spearheaded it because of persistence and because of history, but this is not a Buganda thing. We are talking about the future of our country. In this country everybody will in one way or another be affected by the decision that we make on this motion. 

The advantages and disadvantages have been discussed and I believe Madam Speaker that when we come to the Committee Stage, there will be amendments as the Minister did put forward to try and accommodate the few areas, which were mentioned in the letter that has been referred to of the Katikiro. I must stress as Chairman of Buganda Caucus that there was nothing new in that letter. 

Madam Speaker, I support this motion and I urge the honourable members when it comes to voting to vote positively, support the motion for success, future stability of our country and harmony. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Okumu Ringa): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak on this very important matter. I rise to support the Bill and the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitutional (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005. I rise on behalf of the great people of Pader County whom I have the honour and pleasure to represent in this august House. 

Nebbi District espouses the aspirations and most importantly the heritage of traditional leadership. We have Rwot Jalusiga who will be crowned very soon after losing Rwot ObimO Jobi II. This Bill is very important because the institution of traditional leaders has been enshrined and has been part of the governance of this country. More so when you look at the Bill, it is bringing in regional tier. If you look at all the concepts and processes of devolution of power, devolution of power is a long process. 

You recall the Magna Carta of the 1215 of the British Government; up today they are still devolving powers. When you look at the case of the British, the Home Rule Bill of 1886, the Home Bill of 1893, the Home Bill of 1912, all talked about the devolution of powers to the various territories in Northern Island. 

In our case, our history is very good. Devolution of power in terms of creation of districts - in 1959 we had only 16 districts. In 1962 when we had independence, we had 17 districts but that time power was devolved at kingdom level. Buganda had the greatest power; other kingdoms had powers, the districts had powers but governed directly. In 1968, the number of districts rose to 18, in 1971 we had 19 districts, in 1972, the number rose to 37. That is when Nebbi was created as a district. In January 1979 the number of districts rose to 40 and after the fall of Amin, the number of districts was reduced to 22 and again, in August 1979, the number of districts rose to 33.

Madam Speaker, I am bringing this because this is part of devolution of power. But the NRM in its wisdom, when it took over state power, a Commission of Inquiry which was set up by the Minister of Local Government, Edward Kakonge, appointed a Commission under Prof. Mamdani and in this House, we have the Rt hon. Prime Minister Prof. Nsibambi Apolo who sat on that Commission. Hon. Mukama served as Secretary, though for one month, but it is the Mamdani Report in the Local Government, which has given rise and strength to the kind of Local Government and the regional tier we are now discussing. 

What are the advantages of regional tiers? There are many advantages.  Right now, we have districts; the regional tier will bring the districts and act as a supervisory mechanism to the district. In my view, when you look at it critically, the regional tier will work towards rationalising and reducing costs because there are certain functions, which can be rationalised from the districts. For example, if we talk of the Land Board, the District Service Commission and you bring it to the Regional Service Commission, you are reducing on costs. If you look at other areas, costs will be reduced.  So, the issue of costs should not be an impediment.  After all, when the concept – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister, try to wind up.

MR OKUMU RINGA: My two last points Madam Speaker, society is not an abstract thing; society is made of individuals and individuals have preferences.   The sum total of the preferences is what makes society and in my view, the general quest now is that the majority of the people want regional tier.  In the case of us in West Nile, we have five districts and these districts have had a history of cooperation. Very soon these districts will come up with the necessary instruments so that we have a regional tier called the Great West Nile. 

My last point, Madam Speaker, - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is time.

11.10
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for deeming me.  I also wish to support the Bill and thank the chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. On behalf of Kigezi region, I also want to support all the previous speakers who have expressed the wish of regional tier.

Madam Speaker, yesterday Prof. Mondo Kagonyera made a statement how the Kigezi region has been planning to have a regional integration of Ntungamo, Kabale, Rukungiri, Kisoro, Kanungu. As we talk now, Madam Speaker, the Kigezi region put up a Kabale University that was supported by the four districts of Kigezi region. Kigezi region has already put up a bank known as National Bank of Commerce which was formerly Kigezi Bank of Commerce, but we called it National Bank of Commerce in order to attract other bankers from other areas, but this was also supported by the initiative of the Kigezi region.

Madam Speaker, the justification for regional governance is indeed the need for having neighbouring districts with a common vision to come together and pool resources by building blocks of cooperation so that they can be able to benefit in cultural and social areas.

Madam Speaker, I think these regional governments will create backward and forward linkages between the Central Government and the districts that are being decentralized. As most of you know, the decentralisation policy in Uganda has been declared a success and we have been sending out experts to go and preach in other areas outside. 

I agree with the Member who talked about the concerted effort of the people. Regional integration should be people-driven and the government should only come in as speed governors so that the whole process is owned by the people. 

Madam Speaker, Africa has been crying about our backwardness and marginalisation because of the former colonial masters. But now that these colonial masters are long gone; now that the founding fathers of independent Uganda are long gone, why can’t we the leaders of today bring together our people for the sake of unity and development? What should prevent us from building more bonds of unity? Why shouldn’t my brothers from Teso come along with other people in the region in order to benefit from economies of scale arising from a large population and a large market? The whole world over, regional integration is sweeping the entire market place. 

With globalisation tightening on most economies in the world, no single state can survive in isolation. That is why in East Africa we are trying to form the East African Community. That is why ECOWAS they are forming their own regional configuration; that is why SADC is forming its own regional configuration, because we cannot compete in a market place with the developed world unless we negotiate as a block. 

MR ODONGO OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and seek your guidance. If we are just to consider time and yet we are making a Constitution, we are not doing this country a service. I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Otto, you have already made your contribution, allow other people to speak.  Proceed.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The reason why Africa is lagging behind is indeed, lack of political and economical integration. Much as we are a bigger continent and we are still referred to as a “dark continent” in terms of resources endowment, we are highly rated but our contribution has since dropped from 10 percent in the early 1960s to 2 percent today on the world market contribution. 

So, as a country we need to position ourselves in order to compete within Africa region before we begin accessing the markets in the AGOA and European Union. How can you look towards AGOA and European Union before you can look at your neighbour in the region and yet, our ways of life, our cultures, the Bakiga, the Bahororo, the Banyarwanda, have similar cultures, they eat the same food? So, we can be able to interact together and live together.

For those who are thinking that Buganda has been given a special status, I do not agree with that.  Buganda is being treated like that because of the unity that they have had for a long time since independence, even during the colonial days. So, we should be able to emulate the Buganda case, and be accommodative and be able to bring about everybody so that we can bring our country as one Uganda.  But until we graduate from being a Mukiga to being a Ugandan and to being an East African, we cannot definitely go and have a postgraduate of being an African without developing at the grassroots level.  

Madam Speaker finally, I appeal to some of my friends in this House. Yesterday somebody stood up in this House and said that they do not agree as a region on the regional integration or regional governance. Definitely, regional governance is in anyway general salvation for you to come out of that abject poverty. 

There is a saying in Rukiga that “ageteyine nigo gathihupa”. That concerted effort is the only way you can break a contentious born and if you want to harvest one season, you plant a seed like a bean, you want to harvest for decades, you plant seedlings like coffee and if you want to harvest forever, you must invest in your people. So, we must invest in the people of Uganda for better generations to come. I thank you.

MR SIMON PETER WANANZOFU (Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report they have presented to this House. Madam Speaker, today is another day in the history of this country that we are handling a very important issue of this kind.  History has always revealed that Buganda has been at the forefront in the political organization of this country. Today again Buganda is ahead, they have negotiated for the regional tier that other people are trying to emulate. 

Honourable members, let us learn from the past. During the 1960s when Buganda demanded for a higher status, the then President of Uganda, Milton Obote gave Buganda a special status to the extent that he went ahead and created other kings that were not there; like the king of Kigezi, Rutakirwa. When Buganda realized things were not working out properly, His Excellency by then decided to abolish the kingdoms, even those ones that did not exist by then.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, let me hope history will not repeat itself. Those who want the regional tier, let us give them, I have no objection to that, but let us learn from the past that history does not repeat itself. 

Today we are here discussing the regional tier; very many regions have demanded for the regional tiers while others have decided not to opt for it. Those who want the regional tier, let us be honest and give them what they want. It would be unfortunate to give people who do not want to have what they do not want. Let us make a constitution that everyone will feel proud of; let us make a constitution that will stand the test of time. 

My people of Bunkhoko North County, have not opted for the regional tier. But since there is still Committee Stage, maybe when we sit down and they opt for it, I will move an amendment here to bring a regional tier for our area. Now that we are here today, time has come for us to decide on the fate of this country.  

Among the functions of a regional tier, I find the cultural issues. I think it is very important that we recognize a regional tier to the extent that some cultural matters will be handled at the region if other regions accept the regional tiers. For example, the Domestic Relations Bill (DRB) being a cultural issue, I think it will be handled best at the regional tier. If all members accepted that, I think that is the best area where certain issues will be handled and I pray that we pass this regional tier and maybe the first issue that the regional tier will handle will be the DRB. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, today we are here discussing and we are about to pass the regional tier that the district will ratify. My worry is, if the districts do not rectify this, then it means that will be the end of the whole issue. I call upon those who want the regional tier to go ahead and convince the districts that we get the two thirds. Otherwise we would have done nothing for this country and we would have wasted most of the time doing nothing if the districts do not ratify the regional tier. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. For God and my country.

11.22
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Bill before us is a bill about public administration and public administration is about the authoritative allocation of national resources in an effective and efficient manner. As we try to change the form of government operating, it is important that this House does not lose sight of what is commonly known as the mischief rule.

MR KAKOOZA: Point of information. Can I give you information?

MR WANDERA: I am just building a premise for my point; I will take the information later.  Madam Speaker, this House should ask itself, what evil are we trying to cure in terms of delivery of services to our people? I know there have been challenges with the decentralisation system. It has been stated that there is lack of capacity at the district and many other problems. How does the creation of regional governments address those problems? I have been listening attentively and this far Madam Speaker, no one has answered this question.

On the contrary, I am worried that the creation of regional governments is going to create unnecessary decision making structures, yet we know that in modern public administration, first, decision making is important but what we are doing through this is to create another level of decision making. If the government wishes to devolve powers closer to the people, I have no problem and I would propose that let the government devolve the powers that it wishes to devolve to the districts and the districts devolve some powers to the sub-counties because the argument has always been that we should take services closer to the people. 

Madam Speaker, creation of regional governments is not going to create any new resources, it will not add any resources to the Treasury of Uganda.  The regional referral hospital in Jinja will not get more medicine, the same budget that it has had is the same budget it will have but what is going to happen is that there will be additional costs for managing the same resources and I do not think that is efficient management. 

Madam Speaker, I have listened to proposals that the region of Busoga be deemed, I want very honourably and humbly and gracefully to disagree with that position and I will be very precise by giving two authorities. The first one is a statement by the hon. Member for Bukooli County South, hon. Patrick Peter Ochieng, Member for Bukooli County South. On the 3rd of February, while debating the White Paper, he had this to say. 

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of regional government and the situation which appeared a little bit very complicated to my constituents but they said this is all they want, they have seen. They have moved for a long period of time since 1997 in the decentralisation system of Government and they do not want much interference into that. They prefer decentralisation and they do not want either federal government or a regional tier that the government was trying to introduce. Hon. Peter Patrick Ocheng also happens to be my Member of Parliament, and he effectively represented the views of the people in that area. 

The other thing Madam Speaker is that Article 1 of our Constitution says that people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how we shall be governed. For days we were educated on this principle, when some of us proposed that the issue of changing political system should be determined at the district, our good brothers and sisters said, “Power belongs to the people, they have to determine how they should be governed and they carried the day”. 

Now, wouldn’t it be a serious contradiction if the same people came to this House and said that we should decide on behalf of the people of Bugiri, for example where I come from, on how they should be governed? I think what the Bill has proposed is that, let resolutions of sub-counties and districts be obtained and if the people of Bugiri so wish, they can join the regional government. So I would not like this House to shift from that position. I would like to inform the House that I have been in constant consultation with my LC V chairman and he shares the same position.

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I was really very reluctant to rise up on a point of order on my colleague hon. Martin Wandera who is a good debater in this House I presume. But the point of order I am raising is, the LCV Chairman, is not in this House and he cannot ably pronounce himself on the Floor of this Parliament, but I have also been in contact with the LC V Chairman and I am sure that the LC V, while in Naminage, signed for the Charter. Is the Member representing Workers, hon. Martin Wandera, therefore in order to to lie to this august House that the Chairman, LC V Bugiri, Al hajji Siragi Lyavala is not for the regional tier and therefore the Charter and Busoga regional tier?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is within my knowledge that the Chairman of Bugiri is a signatory to the Busoga Charter; I witnessed him append his signature. He even came to the gardens of Parliament to handle over the document to the Speaker of Parliament. I have not yet heard his withdrawal. In the circumstances, I think you leave that matter alone.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a firm believer in our Rules and I will therefore not get into the realm of your ruling. Fortunately, Madam Speaker, your ruling has been on whether the chairman signed the Charter, and I agree with you. But the point that my brother, hon. Mulengani, did not understand is that the procedure that should be followed to form a regional government, because the regional government that we are talking about now is different from the Charter under Article 178. I would expect any member like hon. Mulengani to be able to differentiate some of these simple things. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to say that I am also not in support for traditional leaders to be involved in politics and my decision draws heavily from our history that my brother, hon. Mukula has effectively talked about. Madam Speaker, this is what the Odoki report recommended after serious consultation that traditional leaders should not play any role in politics and governance of both the central and local governments. Then the functions of traditional leaders should be restricted to purely cultural and developmental roles. 

Article 246 of our current Constitution also stops traditional leaders from exercising any legislative and administrative powers. Now what this bill is doing by making the traditional leaders titular heads is to make them exercise certain administrative powers because ceremonial powers fall within the realm of administrative powers.  

Now I do not know whether this Parliament is going to proceed to breach the Constitution. The issue of cultural leaders is also heavily contested in certain areas. So, I request that to avoid confusion let us not involve traditional leaders in governance.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

11.35
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the committee for the work well done.  

For a long time my people in Wakiso District have agitated for Federo. But I would like to thank the President on their behalf for having made it possible to have the negotiations that have resulted into the regional tier arrangement that my people strongly support and I strongly support. 

I also believe in accordance to the observations of the committee that the bill intends to move towards facilitating harmony and mutual co-existence and also to give all Ugandans sense of belonging and ownership.  

When I focus on the history of this country, I would like to refer to the colonial times where regional administrators had administrative independence to put up roads, hospitals and the like that led to the development of their regions and the development of the entire country.  This governance structure was so successful that by independence Uganda had one of the best Africa’s infrastructures. That is why I believe regional governance will also be very beneficial to our country as a whole.

I would also like to focus on the importance or the merits of regional governance that we are all going to achieve. I would like to say that regional governance would promote certain levels of cultural – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order. 

MS SENINDE: Will promote culture cohesiveness which are often more important for stability and economic development. It will also impact on Ugandans in that it will empower the people of Uganda in various regions of this country to mobilize their human and natural resources – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please.

MS SENINDE: for development without unduly depending on the distant Central Government. This will also defuse the competition of the limited Central Government positions and re-channel some of it into building vibrant regional centres that create opportunities for the region’s inhabitants and the nation as a whole.

I also believe that unlike our neighbours, Kenya and Tanzania, Uganda’s regions are endowed with a lot of agricultural potential and natural resources. I believe many of these regions are going to benefit from the natural resources we have and from agriculture.  When I take an example of the Kigezi Region, which could capitalize on its attractions like Lake Bunyoni and Bwindi. I want to try to be brief.

I also want to focus on the employment opportunity that our people are going to have. When I take an example of many of our children who have completed university without employment, and some of our girls have been victims of sexual abuse just because they are looking for jobs, regional governance is going to help us in providing employment for our people. For instance, accountants and lawyers will be needed to ensure smooth running of the regional financial and judicial system.

I am finally convinced that when all Ugandans whether in Karamoja, in Kigezi or in Buganda get empowered to shape their destinies within the context of Uganda, pride in Uganda as an entity will increase along with increased regional self confidence.  

In conclusion, allow me to ask the honourable Minister just a few questions in good faith. The first question is, I would like to ask him has the regional tier arrangement been budgeted for in the financial year ending June 2006?  In my understanding we are supposed to have regional tier elections before June 2006. So, I would like him to give clarification whether this is budgeted for.

The second question is, how are the boundaries of Kampala and other districts going to be demarcated with especially neighbouring districts like Wakiso and Mukono bearing in mind the long-term plan of Kampala as a Capital City?  

Finally, what will be compensated for Kampala City?  So, I wish the honourable Minister at an appropriate time will give answers to those clarifications.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.40
MR NATHAN NANDALA (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is common knowledge that any bill which comes to Parliament must come with financial implications. This bill here, I do not know if the Minister has presented the financial implications.

Having said that, today I have seen in the Sunrise newspaper, it reported that Ministry of Finance can now slash the cost of public administration. The Ministry of Finance is going to slash public administration at the same time they are creating more layers of public administration. Now which public administration is going to be funded and which one is not going to be funded?  

To go through what is going to happen in the regional tier, we have the composition of the regional tier, we have members elected, we have women, we have youth, we have disabilities, we have culture interests, we have district chairpersons, we have ministers six per region and all these are going to be on public funds. Now where are we going to get this?  Is it just to make the regional tier for the sake of it, or we are going to fund it?

You said that power belongs to the people; we need to ask people about the regional tier – (Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to inform hon. Nandala that he complains of the resources to fund this regional tier. The philosophy says if you continue building the property in your mind, you will remain poor. Uganda is rich intellectually, in the human development and even the resources. It is only developing the human capital so that the human capital will develop these natural resources and we get the resources for this country to develop these regional tiers.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much for your information.  I think you are practicing some little economics. But I will tell you as a graduate of economics, what happens with capital. There must be capital formation.  What capital have we formed here?   

My friend, Loote, was trying to practice his English and economics is not my problem.  But I want to put a question- (Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I feel a little bit uncomfortable with hon. Nandala who is confusing the House.  Regional tiers are expected to bring about economies of scale. This is why all the member states of this world have grouped up under the United Nations to bring about economies of scale. So, is he in order to confuse this House that the regional tier is not bringing about economies of scale. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think our economies perceive matters from different directions. Proceed.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker- (Interjection)- no, I will forgive her. We are talking of public expenditure. The donors are saying they are not giving us money because our tax collection is increasing. I do not understand what they mean by tax increase: When the exchange rate increases, the tax collection will increase definitely because we depend on 75 per cent imports.  But what is the real value? 

 In 1987 we used to collect Ugshs 47 billion, which is about $800 million, by then the exchange rate was Ugshs 60 per dollar. Now we are collecting Ugshs 1.8 billion, the exchange is 1800. That is again one billion plus. What increment is that?  

In real terms, we should be realistic to one another. If Baganda want federo, we should give Baganda federo; if Basoga want federo, let us give it; if Banyoro want it, let us give it. But we should not bring the law to confuse the public. We have formed units, now you are making more districts. What is the purpose of creating more districts if you are bringing regional tiers? What is the purpose? Why do you bring- (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way. I am surprised that hon. Nandala is up to now wondering whether the tier has a background. The regional tier is well “backgrounded”. It is part of the inquiries of professor Sempebwa and Odoki Commission.  As Members of Parliament we can decide to give sanctity to the tier. What he is talking about?

MR NANDALA: I know Baganda have always killed fellow Baganda. Binaisa, who is a Muganda, caused the 1966 crisis. Right now we have Members of Parliament here who are going to bring problems again for Baganda. It is wrong for you, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, when you want federo to talk about regional tier. We do not need regional tiers for federo; you must get your federo in full.  Federo means you have power to collect taxes; you administer your units, but not regional tier. This is what they call Byoya byanswa.     

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Vice President.

11.45
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (Busiro County North Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I want to stand here to support the regional tier.  I want to support the regional tier not merely for service delivery. Regional tier will bring a larger group of people together, and if they are well mobilized they can produce massively and become self-reliant economically.  

I will give you an example. In Italy there is a CMI autonomous region called South Tile, and if you go to Bozano that is the capital, you find extensive growth of apples. They just specialize in growing apples and they supply 30 per cent of all apples eaten in the European Union. The same way here, if Karamoja becomes a regional tier and it specializes in mining gold as a unit, they will make more money than they are making in the special small districts.  

Therefore, for me, Madam Speaker, the economies of scale are far more important than service delivery. Because at the moment I think there is only one district where- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a point of order on His Excellency, the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya.  The bill is very clear on the functions which are being delegated to regional governments. It does not include exploitation of minerals. 

So is the Vice President in order to misconstrue and pre-suppose that other functions which are not outlined in the bill would be given to those regional governments thus misleading the trend of the debate in this House.  Is he in order not to be abreast with relevant provisions of the bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Vice President is obviously familiar with the provisions of the bill, but he is describing what will be done within that unit because there will be activities; there will be people; there will be schools and there will be economics. That is what he is talking about. He is in order.  Your Excellency.

PROF. BUKENYA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Hon. Odonga Otto needs more experience; you know he is still young.  However, although I mentioned mines, I can also mention agriculture because now this country is being zoned up, and zoning makes one area more productive if it concentrates on one crop.  I think the regional tier will produce more production and therefore, funds or money secured will be more.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to stand and support fully the regional tier as a means of development. I would urge hon. Odonga Otto also to support and vote for it.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

11.50
MR SAMMY LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the bill and also to support this regional tier.  The people of Karamoja have been looking for an opportunity- in fact they were trying to mobilize themselves to come up with the charter so that they cooperate and bring their resources together and develop as a unit.

One of the reasons why I am supporting the bill is to address the historical mistake which was made by the colonialists. This mistake has been dividing Uganda in different cultural values. So, if this honourable House passes this bill, I think our brothers from Central Region, especially the Baganda and our brothers from Busoga and other parts of Uganda can actually be brought together on board. So that we move as a country, working together, harmonizing our differences and build our national unity, accepting the areas that we need to develop together; and also taking the views of the minority.  So that is why the people of Karamoja support this bill.

Secondly, the bill attempts to accommodate the interest of the minority and the need -(Interruption)- I have a little time to take. So, the bill takes the interest of those who feel they have been suppressed for long. So that is why those people of Buganda have been advocating for a federo for many years. That you all know very well, in this august House. This is the area where now we come together to understand ourselves and give them the chance to develop.  

In fact I was talking to some of them. They were analysing why they want to take this opportunity to go for the regional tier. I think let us go together with them and Karamoja benefits from this regional tier.

Thirdly, there is also regional planning. Regions of a particular country try to put regional planning together to regionalize, to address also the historical problems or mistakes and economic imbalances.  So, I believe the people of Karamoja also will benefit from this regional tier. Karamoja is rich not only in the human resource, which is supposed to be developed and I do believe the regional tier will develop this human resource.

Karamoja is a granary of this country. Maybe through this regional tier and given the mandate by the central government, I think the regional tier will go a long way, mobilize resources and attract resources for the development of these marginalized areas.

Thirdly, I do believe the regional tier also will preserve, protect and identify the good cultural values. In our country, we have lost our cultural values; we have now gone to the West. I think the regional tier, also if provided, we will even get elders who can redirect and redress these issues of cultural values. 

So the people of Karamoja and the people of my constituency are supporting regional tier.  Let us go regional so that we may mobilize our resources both externally, internally and throughout so that we build our country together.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.55
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the committee for this report and I also thank the Government for trying to sort out the problem, which has lingered on for a long time.  

As you are aware, Madam Speaker, this question of federalism has stayed and every Government that comes in tries to do its luck and given what I can see, what has been presented to this Parliament, I will not be shocked if even the next Government tries to handle this same issue nearly the same way we are handling it, and as other governments handled this matter.

The problem has been federo. This has been the main issue.  Some parts of Uganda are demanding federo. But this concoction of coming up with a certain arrangement, which may appear good for the country, in my opinion, may not necessarily work.  

A federal system of government is designed to accommodate diversity. It is designed to make sure a nation moves ahead together. But my fear is with the way- when I read this bill, I can just see problems tomorrow.  I would have expected another arrangement fully negotiated by the people of Buganda and all districts and a consensus arrived at before this bill comes to this Parliament.  I have a few –(Interruptions)

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, hon. Jack Sabiiti, for accepting this point of clarification, which I wish to seek from you. Following the debate yesterday and this morning, I am inclined to think that this is a very contentious issue on which we need the input and the decisions of many people in the districts.  

I would like you kindly to clarify as to whether it is not one of the issues, which should be actually considered for a referendum so that everybody in this country can make an input.  Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I have said, before we came up with this bill, there should have been thorough consultations. Districts should have given their input and a consensus that will mould Uganda into one nation would have been arrived at, and therefore, your idea is not far-fetched.  

Therefore, I would have expected that this tier we are talking about should have looked at a number of issues. One, does this tier guarantee the security and defence of our country?  Does this tier in future, or will this type of arrangement not result into unnecessary conflicts tomorrow?  That is the first question I wanted to ask.

Two, I would have expected an input on the side of commerce, the regulation of commerce by the central government.  I do not see anything in that area.  

Three, I would have expected details on taxation. How equitably are our resources going to be distributed in these regions particularly the centre and the regions?

Fourthly, not much has been said about the legal status of these regions and the centre. Nothing has been talked about how our foreign relations are going to be handled.

The devolution of powers, as far as I am concerned, we are leaving it as if you are still in the decentralization system. We have not talked about how far powers can be devolved. For example, take funds under the decentralization system, 37 per cent goes to the districts.  Now if we have regions, are we going to continue with this type of arrangement?  

In our Constitution when we were in Constituent Assembly we came up with a formula. I would have expected a formula, how the resources of this country are going to be distributed to the regions.  There are many other areas, which I think have not been touched on, particularly the relationship between region to region and region to the centre.  

Lastly, I would like the Government to take note of this, that the state of Uganda must be indestructible, and that the national government must enjoy supreme power over the region. If this component is not clearly identified in this law, I can see chaos for tomorrow.  Therefore, with these words, Madam Speaker, short of all these that I have enumerated, I do not at all support this regional tier.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you may have noted, maybe you are very far, that virtually on every row a minimum of five people are busy reading newspapers.  Is it in order for my honourable colleagues to go contrary to established procedure of this House that nobody should read any other literature –(Interjections)- I can confirm it if you are to order the Sergeant-At-Arms to check. On every row there is a newspaper being read.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are familiar with our rules. You are not supposed to bring newspapers here; you are not supposed to bring radios; you are not supposed to bring telephones; anything that will distract you from what is going on in the House. So, please put away your newspapers and we proceed with the work.

12.00
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to this debate of national importance.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, when it comes to this motion I can assure you that I consulted my constituency very widely. The message is, please honourable members, with all humility we appeal to you –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to debate on this topic when he is a member of the committee that presented the report?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is a member, but he also has a special constituency.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for a very wise ruling.  It is true I am a member of the committee, but I also have a constituency. I was trying to put forward the message from my constituents. The message is that my people strongly support the motion and the regional tier, and strongly appeal to this august House to support this motion.

It is important to note that this federo issue, Buganda issue or Mengo issue has been a contentious national issue for more than 30 years. Many politicians and leaders who came here before us attempted to solve it, but were unsuccessful.  Therefore, it is important for us to know that we hold a very unique position in the political history of this country, and we must take this matter very seriously.  

It is important to avail myself this opportunity to thank the Government for having engaged in complex negotiations, in complex debates, painstaking negotiations that have resulted in the resolution of this matter.  

A few months ago this issue was considered to be a complex matter, an issue that cannot be handled.  But as I speak today, you can see we have many friends who are aboard this motion.  

I have two comments: One relates to the status of women and marginalized groups in the regional tier system. What we have is a concept of representation in the regional assembly.  Representation alone does not mean impact, therefore, Madam Speaker, we are appealing to whoever goes to this regional tier or whoever is in charge of the regional government to ensure that the concerns of women, people with disabilities and other marginalized groups are taken into account.  

Lastly, federo is not a new thing here. One time the Kingdom of Buganda had a federal system of governance, but it was abolished using illegal means.  The Constitution of Uganda was forcibly abolished.  Now that we are trying to correct mistakes of the past, we must ask ourselves who in the first place caused mistakes, where are these people who abolished the federal system in Buganda, can we demand an apology from them?  

I have heard political groups that were part of abolishing this system we are talking about here saying that they support it, but up to today they have never apologized.  I hope, Madam Speaker, that this generation should learn from the past so that we do not repeat the mistakes of the past.  With these few remarks, I support the motion.

12.10
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make my contribution on this amendment of the Constitution.  As a Ugandan, I am happy to do so because I have consulted the people of Bugabula South as well on many issues, including federo. 

This entire precinct of Parliament is full of our history.  Starting from the gate of Parliament, you will find the tribal emblems welcoming all of us to Parliament. If members have not seen the gate through which you came, through the Independence Arch, you should look again because every tribal emblem adorns the gate of Parliament. I think it should be part of the orientation of every new Parliament to understand who we are.  

As a member of the Parliamentary Commission, in the Sixth Parliament, we did have a problem when the Madi emblem was missing and we had quickly to reconstruct that emblem to fit within its place. So if members have not paid attention to who we are and how we came about, I would like to take a walk to the gate of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, when the issue of federo, as the people of Buganda baptized, it was being debated and being requested in the Ssempebwa Commission, it did cause a lot of questioning and the airwaves carried sentiments that Buganda wanted to be special.  So, it took us a lot of time to run round the country to tell people that if a tribe for any reason wants to be what it is and what it wants to aspire to be what it is, it was okay.  

So, during that time, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I made a personal pledge to the Kabaka of Buganda and the people of Buganda that I would support federo and I do still support federo, because for me it is a cultural and intrinsic value that the Baganda hold.  

So, I took my time, went down to Busoga and made the people of Bugabula South begin to like federo as according to me; as I interpreted it.  So, I find it difficult now having promised federo to return regional government. I promised federo, now I am taking back regional government.  

So, I would like to be allowed some time, if this House would allow for me to consult again –(Interjections)- my consultation will be short, Madam Speaker, because I only intend to consult the Kabaka of Buganda whether this is okay with him. I am not sure about the subjects. I would like to hear it from him because I promised it to him -(Interruption)

MS BALEMEZI: I am seeking clarification from my sister, Salaamu, and I would like to thank her for giving way.  As she has been telling us that she informed and tried to convince the people of Bugabula on the federo, which she learnt from the people of Buganda. I just want to seek clarification from her because when the people of Bugabula voted her in, she came in on individual merit. I am wondering whether she first consulted the people of Bugabula South to turn into FDC. That is the clarification I would like to have. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification form hon. Salaamu Musumba. We have had speakers after speaker from the Busoga region and most of the speakers from the Busoga region have demonstrated that it is the aspiration of the people of Busoga to be constituted into a regional government.  

I know honourable Salaamu Musumba is one of the Members of Parliament from that sub-region.  As she wishes to consult the Kabaka of Buganda to find out his opinion, in her own opinion about the representation of the people of Busoga, does she feel the regional tier is good for the people of Uganda as a whole including Busoga region?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from Buganda.

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member Salaam Musumba has told this House that she has got to consult the Kabaka of Buganda.  I will not ask as who, but I would like to inform her that the Kabaka was duly consulted and that he had people from Mengo who were fully involved in the negotiations. The people of Buganda accepted the position that we are discussing here. I am talking as the Chairman of the Buganda caucus.  Thank you. 

MRS MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have been asked as who -(Interjection)- yes, as who?

MR MBALIBULHA:  Thank you very much, hon. Salaamu, for giving me this opportunity to inform the House.  When the federo demand started, members of Parliament who had interest in it, we formed a caucus. Hon. Lukyamuzi was our Chairperson. I was in charge of the western region to consult our people on how we can help the Baganda to champion this for the whole country.  Hon. Otto was in charge of the north –(Laughter)- yes, this is a very serious information. Some of us who were trained to stand for the cause and even die for the cause, we find it so hard, very difficult- when I was in the lobby up there, I heard hon. Lukyamuzi, my Chairperson, supporting the regional tier which is not a federo which is a decentralization at the regional level.  

For me to be asked right now to stand up and support a regional tier whereby my honourable Lukyamuzi, the Chairperson of the federo caucus had not even told me that he has made a U-turn, I find it so hard.  

More to that, some of us who cannot go to any region anyway, because we know the problems of regional governments, we had supported honourable Lukyamuzi because of the –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Is honourable member in order to give information, which is misleading this House? Is he in order as a human being –(Laughter)- to say that when you see you are falling in a pit you should just continue falling in it and not to correct your steps?  Is he in order really to condemn hon. Lukyamuzi when hon. Lukyamuzi has seen the light and he has seen that the correct way is this? Is he in order to condemn us Members of Parliament to behave as though we are not human who actually change when there is need to change? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think since this debate started, we have been talking about compromise, accommodation, changing positions, convincing others.  So, I think you are not right to castigate hon. Lukyamuzi- (Interruption) 

MR MBALIBULHA: But you have changed –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, that is your small caucus; you should have called one another.  Hon. Salaamu, please, conclude.

MRS MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, as we wait for the numbers to increase, just allow me some space to make my point–(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, leave honourable Salaamu.

MRS MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have been asked, “As who?” That question that caused the fear in the population is exactly being asked of me now. My colleague should have known that I am the Member of Parliament for Bugabula County South in Kamuli District. He should also have known that I am the Vice Chairperson of Forum for Democratic Change –(Laughter)- and if I cannot ask, who will ask? Who will consult the Kabaka of Buganda if Salaamu cannot –(Laughter)- and so I would like you, my colleagues, to be very careful, these are the exact insinuations that have made the whole of Uganda very agitated. 

I will let go for today. But, please, take note that if we are going to communicate as Ugandans, let us be mindful and sensitive. I wish well for Buganda; I do –(Applause)- and I have not been bought to support Buganda. I just wish well for Buganda like I wish well for Busoga. 

Hon. Dombo asked what about the Basoga? Of course, I do support the Basoga and so do I support the Banyoro and everybody in this Uganda for his or her cultural identity- (Applause) The information I was given as to when I turned to become a Forum for Democratic Change does not arise today. I will sufficiently answer it another day. 

The regional tier needs some more consideration. I find difficulty because I want to help Government to solve a problem. I want to help Government to solve a problem for all Ugandans. I am not encouraging Government to recondition a problem because that is what it is doing. If we are looking for cultural identity, this is not path the to cultural identity and to all the things you say are meant to be in this law. You have a different mindset altogether; this cannot cure the demand for self-actualisation for a tribe. 

So, I would like us to separate- and I am so surprised that nobody ever, not the Parliamentary Commission, not the Government, none of you has shown us how you plan to do this and we have to do it on the Floor which is not right. 

I am hoping that the chief negotiator has not concluded his negotiations; maybe he will find time between the Second and Third Reading to help us understand what Government wants to do with reconfiguring governance in this country.

Madam Speaker, if it is not too much to ask, I would like to ask that at some point we get out of this Plenary and we are told how Government plans to do this because it has not told us and I do not know what to tell the people. There are so many voices coming up across the Floor, for anybody listening they would think this is a Kiganda thing. Yes. For anybody listening they would imagine that this is a Kiganda thing and it is not. 

So, my plea really is for us to be helped to understand because as a representative of Najjanankumbi, we also believe that we should help to reconfigure this Government or the governance of this country in a manner that can achieve not only the cultural aspirations but also achieve efficiency and effectiveness. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I know that many people want to contribute to this debate, but we have had five days of it and this is only phase one. I would like to give you an opportunity to go back and consult for about one month so that we come back for phase two of this same bill. It is not ending today. 

So, I would like if you do not mind to ask the chairperson to wrap up and the Minister so that we give you time. You can go and consult the Kabaka -(Laughter)- you can go and consult King Oyo; you can go anywhere for one month before we come back. 

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I understand you are about to close this debate–(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have closed it; yes.

MR ALINTUMA: But, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask you to pass a message that I have told this august House that the members of Bukoto East support the regional tier. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of what? I do not understand that.

MR AWORI: Guidance, Madam Speaker. Thank you. I am seeking your guidance on the procedure of the House. You made a statement - I do not know whether it was a ruling or a piece of advice to the august House. Does it mean that today there shall be no voting; that we are not going to make any decision today? You are advising the House go home, consult, come back and then we resolve on the matter. I am seeking your guidance.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us move step by step. Let us hear the wrap up. We are coming to all those.

12.29
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I thank you for the debate and I thank you for appreciating the work that has been done by the committee. I take this opportunity to thank members of the committee for the diligence they have shown in the conduct of this work.

Let me start this way. I will start by laying on the Table a petition from Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom presented to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, but no comment was made to it in the report arising from some one or two difficulties that we faced tracing some of these documents. 

We received the petition from Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom signed by the three Chairpersons of the districts of Masindi, Kibaale and Hoima districts in the presence of Owekitibwa Elisa Kagoro Byenkya, Katikkiro of Bunyoro-Kitara. The sole request that they made in this memoranda or petition to the committee, Madam Speaker, was that the districts of Bunyoro be deemed to have agreed to cooperate –(Applause)- I wish to lay this on the Table.  

Secondly, I want to recognise the presence in the gallery of one old man Mzee Senyonga Nantamegwa from Natete. This old man walked to the committee; he is seated right there- (Applause)- He appeared before the committee, he spoke in Luganda and his submissions were translated.  

The old man showed us photographs of two of his colleagues and himself who upon the loss of power of the Kabaka decided to grow their beards until the Kabaka came back.  They showed us the pictures.  I pay tribute to such people, because of the sentimental value they attach to some of these institutions.  

Mzee Nantemegwa is one of the people we must bear in mind that some of these things mean a lot to them. (Applause) It is the only way they realized themselves; it is the only way they find that what they really aspire for are catered for. I salute Mzee Senyonga for this.  

The honourable members in the debate have come with tiers, but the bill I am talking about talks about regional governments.  A regional government has been presented as a partial solution in my opinion.  Does it solve all the problems, does it answer all the questions, and does it satisfy the aspirations of all Ugandans?  I think the answer is no.  But I am glad to say that it is a step in the right direction. (Applause) It does not answer all the questions, but it is a big step in the right direction.  

People have shown their aspirations; people have placed their demands persistently. It reminds me of the Biblical story of the old woman who kept going to a very bad judge and everyday she was saying, “I want justice,” the judge would ignore. She comes the next day, “I want justice,” the third day, a week and then finally the bad judge says, “Though I fear no man or anybody, let me listen to this woman because she is really wearing me down”.  

I am glad in this case it is not because the Government has been worn out of the demands arising from sections and our community, but because of realization and commitment to truly recognising the aspiration of the people of Uganda and building on that for national unity. (Applause)

Several issues have been raised.  The first issue raised strongly in the committee is the question of deeming.  Districts want to be deemed; some districts do not want to be deemed.  
The hon. Moses Kizige put a strong case for Busoga to be deemed. When we pass this bill, this House will go back to the district councils for approval and ratification. If those district councils have not agreed to the deeming, the bill will suffer a problem.  That is why in the opinion of the committee it was necessary to bring all this proof to the committee so that they do not let down the bill when it goes to the district councils.  

Supposing the districts, which have been deemed, refuse to ratify the bill, what will happen to the bill?  That is why we said in the committee that it is necessary that we get sufficient proof on which to take the decision to send this bill back to the districts for ratification. We do not want to take the risk.  

It may sound obvious like the case of the Banyaruguru in the bill that will come later.  It was obvious that they are a community in Uganda, but when the petition was brought to the committee, we took the necessary steps, and forwarded the matter to the Minister of Internal Affairs for verification. Because the verification came, the committee is in a better position to adopt the proposal.  That is all that we wanted.  We are not putting roadblocks to deeming of any district of this country.

Madam Speaker, points have been raised which should be noted. The point raised by the hon. Amajo and several other members on what will happen to those who have already presented charters to districts which cooperated, are they also going to be subject to elections in regional governance?  I think this is a valid point.  

I remember when Busoga appeared before the committee, they put the case against the amendment of Article 246 and the upholding of the Charter of cooperation in Busoga, but they objected to elections to the assembly. They said the Charter clearly provides methods for the formation of this assembly.  So, even then, there are still qualifications that need to be harmonized.  What happens to the charter arrangement where it is already operational, they have an assembly and yet in the law it suggests that we carry out elections.  But these are the things that need to be harmonized and that is why I say that the issues that have been raised are valid and should be taken as serious concerns by the people as we finalise this debate.

I do not want to go through all the issues that were raised because a lot of them are mainly appreciations on what should be done.  But I want to conclude with the issue raised by the hon. Ekanya on the committee report that the schedule should be separated and that these matters cannot be handled together.  I ask the honourable member to read the report again and he will find that the committee report says exactly the opposite of what he says.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to take any more time, except to end with the last comment which hon. Jack Sabiiti raised on the legal status of a regional government.  If you look at Clause 4, which is the proposed Article 178(6), you find that the legal status of these regional governments is clearly provided for. 

I would like to thank the honourable members for the contributions they have made and to ask the House to support this bill the way the committee has recommended. (Applause)

12.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to preface my response by answering the preliminary questions which were raised by members. 

One of the questions, which I consider preliminary, is the issue that was raised by hon. Nandala Mafabi in effect questioning the status of this bill before this House. Hon. Mafabi wondered whether in presenting the bill, the Minister had obtained a certificate of financial implications. 

I beg to state that this bill was presented on 8 April 2005 for the First Reading and the Minister of Justice accordingly presented a certificate of financial implications to this bill. I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the certificate of financial implications for the record of this House. 

Another issue was raised on the commencement date of the regional tier arrangement. My answer is that Government proposes that regional tier arrangement, if adopted by this House, commence at the beginning of the financial year 2006-2007.  

Hon. Martin Wandera raised what in my view is one of the most fundamental issues surrounding this bill. Hon. Wandera asked, “What is the mischief that this bill and the regional tier arrangement seeks to cure?” The answer is in the report of the committee which I gladly applaud.  

I would like to state that I agree with the recommendations of the committee 100 percent. On page 5 of the committee’s report, the committee observed and I beg to quote for purposes of refreshing our memory. “That while our focus must remain forward, our decisions and actions must have the effect of collecting historical difficulties and avoiding them for the future”.  This in the opinion of the committee would give Ugandans a sense of belonging and a sense of ownership. We think our common humanity is more important and if we live up to its potential, Uganda would be a better place where tolerance and mutual respect is the order of the day. 

The committee went further to say that the bill has come in good time.  I would like to applaud the committee for those very wise observations. 

Hon. Kawanga also did answer the question of the mischief because hon. Kawanga did submit that the purpose of this arrangement is to ensure that as Ugandans we learn to accommodate each other. I liked Kawanga’s submission on this matter.  

Hon. Badda from Ssesse Islands did make a very instructive comment when he said this bill addresses the long-term concerns of the people of Buganda and the people of Uganda. I was intrigued by hon. Loote’s comment that in his view, this bill seeks to correct the historical mistakes which were left by the colonial order.  

I am glad that this bill has generated consensus. Out of the 84 members of Parliament who contributed, only five expressed a dissenting opinion and a record of over 99 percent support the bill. I am sure that that record will be maintained both in the committee stage, the motion on the second reading on which we are about to pronounce ourselves and the third reading. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to make clarifications which I consider fundamental.  Hon. Alonga from West Nile was genuinely concerned about the grouping of districts in the first schedule. To be specific, he said that the grouping of these districts is a prelude to deeming them.  

I would like to clarify that the districts, which have been grouped in the first schedule are purely for purposes of identification.  So the grouping in the first schedule has nothing to do with the deeming of districts. I thought I should clarify that.  

Hon. Muranga made very useful comments when he compared the scenario we are in today with the scenario those members were in during the Constituent Assembly and I quote him, “While the Constituent Assembly was not flexible, on the question of deeming, the bill we are discussing today presents a flexible mode of deeming districts because it is optional”.  

I liked that comment and I think that is the spirit the bill was drafted in because the bill does not seek to conscript any person who does not want regional tier arrangement.  That is why, Madam Speaker, Government has advised that those districts who seek to be deemed like Buganda, should seek the support of resolutions from their district council, supported by two thirds so that at the committee stage, Government can move amendments to deem those districts.  

 I am happy to report that my office has received two resolutions from Masindi and Kibaale. As soon as the third resolution comes from Hoima, certainly, Bunyoro will be deemed as Buganda is.

In my view, the case of Busoga presents a very interesting scenario in that Busoga has a Charter. I would like to undertake that sooner at the next session of Cabinet, I will be moving Cabinet to review the case of Busoga. 

On the question raised by members, I must say that members made comments, which in my view enrich the bill.  Questions of qualifications of Chairpersons of regional tier, I think that was an omission in the bill, which should be corrected. 

Issues of sanctions, which were raised by hon. Besisira and hon. Muruli Mukasa in part, those are issues, which we should take up at the committee stage. 

An issue of having an administrator for the regional tier constitutionalised is a very important issue that we should consider.  

The questions of powers of districts vis-a- vis the powers of the region are issues worth considering. The idea of Mengo Municipality being created by Constitution is a matter, which the committee has already commented on.

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, I want to know whether the matter of contention in Busoga Charter is a Bugiri affair.  The Attorney General talking before us today is saying he is going to put the case of Busoga to Cabinet.  We do not have a representative from Bugiri in Cabinet, how are our issues going to be understood? Can I know because we have a number of problems?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, I have no other forum to initiate policies and decisions other than Cabinet and Cabinet is a meeting of the Government of Uganda. It is a cabinet of the people of Uganda and its decision on this matter will not be final. It will have to come to the Floor of this House for ratification. So I would like to allay the fears of my colleague that as soon as Cabinet takes a position on this matter it will be brought back to this House for its decision.

I would like to summarize by assuring members that the issues they raised such as the election of women representatives to the regional council, the questions of boundaries of regional governments, the question of names of regional governments and its roles, the proposals of Members of Parliament being represented in the regional assembly, all those will be discussed by Cabinet and brought back to this House for further debate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend this Bill to this House for its approval by supporting the motion for the second reading. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable Members, this Bill requires a roll call vote so each member must be individually accounted for. Therefore, I suspend proceedings for five minutes. The sergeant is going to ring the bell so that any member who is still in the corridors should come back here before we take the vote.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.49 p.m.)

(On resumption at 1.00 p.m._)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, the House is in session.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I put the question that the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill of 2005 be read for the second time. We shall proceed with the voting in alphabetical order. I hope everybody is now here. 

MR KUTESA: What happens if a name is called and someone is not present but turns up before the end of the voting? I want some guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I think sufficient notice was given that we will take the vote today. The reason I asked the sergeant to ring the bell is to make sure that everybody comes back into the Chamber. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I did not get you clearly. Does it mean if somebody comes in before we reach hon. Zziwa and the name had just been passed, he cannot identify himself and vote?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He will have to wait until the end. If you are in the Chamber and I see you, you will vote, but you will have to wait until the end.  

MR OTTO ODONGA: Madam Speaker, I want clarification on the specific answers you expect from members because I might give a speech for an answer.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, there are only three ways of answering to the vote. The clerk will call out, “hon. Odonga Otto” and ask, “how do you vote?”  If you say “aye”, it means you are for the second reading; if you say “no”, it means no; and if you abstain it means you are hanging around.

(Question put.) 

AYES:
1. AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS REX
2. ABURA PIRIR SAMUEL
3. AEL ARK LODOU
4. AGARD DIDI
5. AHABWE GODFREY PEREZA
6. AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO
7. AKECH OKULLO BETTY
8. AKELLO DINAH GRACE
9. AKWERO ODWONG JANE
10. ALASO ASIANUT ALICE
11. ALI MOSES
12. ALINTUMA NSAMBU JOHN
13. ALISEMERA BABIIHA JANE
14. ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA
15. AMAJO MARY MAGDALENE
16. AMAMA MBABAZI
17. ANGIRO GUTUMOI CHARLES
18. ANYOLO SAMUEL
19. APUUN PATRICK
20. ARONDA NYAKIRIMA
21. ASUPASA ISIKO MPONGO
22. ATENG OTIM MARGARET
23. AWONGO AHMED
24. AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY  
25. BABA DIRI MARGARET
26. BABU EDWARD FRANCIS
27. BADDA FRED
28. BAGALANA TOM SAMSON
29. BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA
30. BAKALUBA MUKASA PETER
31. BAKKABULINDI CHARLES
32. BAKOKO BAKORU ZOE
33. BALEMEZI NALUBEGA LYDIA
34. BAMWANGA STEVEN
35. BANYENZAKI HENRY
36. BASAJJABALABA NASSAR
37. BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY
38. BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN
39. BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILIP
40. BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS
41. BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE
42. BESISIRA IGNATIUS
43. BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE
44. BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT
45. BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA
46. BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE
47. BITANGARO SAMUEL
48. BOGERE FRED
49. BUKENYA GILBERT BALIBASEKA
50. BULAMU JOHN RICHARD
51. BUTIME RWAKAIKARA TOM
52. BWERERE KASOLE EDWARD
53. BYABAGAMBI JOHN
54. BYAMUKAMA DORA
55. BYAMUKAMA NULU
56. BYANYIMA NATHAN
57. CHEBROT  CHEMOIKO STEVEN
58. CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE
59. D’UJANGA GIW SIMON
60. DOMBO EMMANUEL LUMALA
61. EKANYA GEOFREY
62. EPETAIT FRANCIS
63. ERESU ELYANU JOHN
64. ERIYO JESSICA
65. ESELE JOHN PETER
66. ETONU BENEDICT
67. GABOI KIBALE WAMBI DAVID
68. GOLE NICHOLAS DAVIS
69. HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY
70. IMUMET ISAIAH
71. ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA
72. KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO
73. KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES
74. KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM
75. KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
76. KAGABA HARRIET
77. KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
78. KAGONYERA MONDO
79. KAJEKE WILFRED
80. KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY
81. KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA
82. KAKOOZA JAMES
83. KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL
84. KAMANDA BATARINGAYA COS
85. KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU
86. KARORO OKURUT MARY
87. KASAMBA MATHIAS
88. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR
89. KASULE  LUMUMBA JUSTINE
90. KATIRIMA	PHINEHAS
91. KATONGOLE BADRU
92. KATUNTU ABDU
93. KATURAMU HOOD KIRIBEDDA
94. KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST
95. KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA
96. KAYANJA ELLY
97. KAYIZZI ASANASIO
98. KAYONGO TOM
99. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE
100. KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL
101. KIDEGA DANIEL FRED
102. KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN
103. KIKUNGWE ISSA
104. KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM
105. KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE
106. KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS
107. KITYO HENRY MUTEBI
108. KIWAGAMA WILLIAM 
109. KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL
110. KIWANDA GODFREY
111. KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER
112. KIZIGE MOSES
113. KOLUO CHARLES PETER
114. KUBEKETERYA JAMES
115. KULE MURANGA JOSEPH
116. KUTESA SAM
117. KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON
118. KYATUHEIRE  JACQUELINE
119. LOKERIS APARITE PAUL
120. LOKERIS PETER AIMAT
121. LOLEM MICAH
122. LUBOWA MOSES PAUL
123. LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
124. LULE MAWIYA UMAR
125. LWANGA HERBERT WILSON
126. LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY
127. LYOMOKI SAM
128. MABIKKE MICHAEL
129. MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN
130. MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE BEATRICE
131. MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD
132. MALINGA JOHNSON
133. MALLINGA STEPHEN OSCAR
134. MAO NORBERT
135. MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED
136. MATOVU BYATIKE
137. MATOVU DAVID
138. MATTE ROGERS
139. MAYENDE SIMON
140. MAYOMBO NOBLE
141. MEHANGYE IDAH
142. MIGEREKO DAUDI
143. MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA
144. MUGAMBE KIF’OMUSANA JOSEPH
145. MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
146. MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM
147. MUJUZI PIUS
148. MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH
149. MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS
150. MUKASA MURULI WILSON
151. MUKIIBI BENIGNA
152. MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL
153. MUKULA RICHARD
154. MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT
155. MULENGANI BERNARD
156. MUNTUYERA NUWAGABA HERBERT 
157. MUNYIRA WABWIRE OMUSOLO ROSE
158. MUSUMBA ISAAC ISANGA
159. MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI
160. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA
161. MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
162. MWESIGE ADOLF
163. MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE
164. MWONDHA PATRICK JOHN
165. NABETA NASANI
166. NACHA LORIKA ROSE
167. NAMAYANJA ROSE
168. NAMUSOKE KIYINGI KYAMA SARAH
169. NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER
170. NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH
171.NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI
172. NANTUME ERON JANET
173. NASASIRA JOHN
174. NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA
175. NDAWULA ALI SEKYANZI
176. NDAWULA KAWEESI EDWARD
177. NDEEZI ALEX
178. NDUHUURA RICHARD
179. NSABA BUTURO JAMES
180. NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE
181. NSUBUGA NSAMBU YUSUF
182. NSUBUGA WILLIAM
183. NVUMETTA LUTAYA KAVUMA RUTH
184. NYANZI VINCENT
185. NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN
186. OBBO HENRY JOSEPH
187. OCHIENG PETER PATRICK
188. ODIT JOHN
189. ODONGA OTTO JR SAMUEL
190. ODONGO JEJE
191. OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL
192. OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY
193. OJOK B’LEO
194. OKOT OGONG FELIX
195. OKOT SANTA
196. OKUMU RINGA PATRICK ALOYSIUS
197. OLUM ZACHARY
198. OMACH MANDIR JACHAN FRED
199. OMWONY OJWOK
200. ONEK OBALOKER HILARY
201. OPANGE LOUIS
202. ORECH DAVID MARTIN
203. ORYEM HENRY OKELLO
204. OULANYAH JACOB
205. PAJOBO BRUNO
206. PATAKI AMASI
207. RUHINDI FRED
208. RUKUNDO SERAPIO
209. RUKUTANA MWESIGWA
210. RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY
211. RWAKIMARI BEATRICE
212. RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT
213. SAIDI OKUTI NASUR
214. SALAAMU MUSUMBA PROSCOVIA
215. SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY
216. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD
217. SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA
218. SENINDE NANSUBUGA ROSEMARY
219. SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA
220. SSEKIKUBO THEODORE
221. SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK
222. SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA
223. THEMBO NYOMBI GEORGE WILLIAM
224. TIBARIMBASA AVITUS
225. TIPERU NUSURA
226. TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE
227. TUBWITA GRACE BAGAYA
228. TUMA RUTH
229. TUMWESIGYE ELIODA
230. TUMWINE ELLY
231. TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO
232. UDONGO PACUTO BETTY
233. WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE
234. WACHA BEN
235. WADRI KASSIANO EZATI
236. WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON
237. WAKIKONA WANDENDEYA DAVID
238. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON
239. WONEKA OLIVER
240. WANJUSI WASIEBA SYLVESTER
241. WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM
242. YERI OFWONO APOLLO
243. YIGA ANTHONY
244. ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO	

NOES:
1. BASHAIJA KAZOORA JOHN
2. BYARUHANGA CHARLES
3. MATEMBE MIRIA
4. MBALIBULHA TABAN CHRISTOPHER
5. NANDALA MAFABI NATHAN
6. OKUPA ELIJAH
7. SABIITI JACK
8. WANDERA MARTIN

ABSTENTIONS:
1. ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are the results of the voting. There are 301 voting members of this House, so two-thirds of that will be 201 members.  

We have 244 members who voted “Aye”; 8 members voted “No”; and 1 member abstained. So, the motion is carried.

(Question agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank you very much for the tremendous work you have done today, the whole week actually but as I said, the second and third reading of this Bill must be separated by at least 14 sitting days. So you are now free to go and continue with your consultations and you will be notified when – no, no, we are not going for recess. In between your other work you are to continue with the consultations. So, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p. m.

(The House rose at 2.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)



