

Wednesday, 24 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1. Mr Moses Muwanika Walyomu

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Walyomu, on behalf of Parliament, I welcome you back from the “forced” leave. We are happy to see you; you are among friends. You will continue to serve on the committees where you were located in the first session until it is concluded.

However, since you are a new Member, I then would like to give you a copy of the Uganda Constitution to guide you and the Rules of Procedure, which you should study again. Otherwise, we welcome you back and we are happy to see you. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back for the sitting today. There are just two issues I would like to communicate. The first one is that Africa has now a new opportunity in the World Health Organisation because an African, Dr Tedros Adhanom of Ethiopia, was yesterday elected as the next Director General of the WHO.

This is an achievement for Ethiopia but also for Africa. He joins the likes of Kofi Annan who was Secretary General of the UN and Mr Jaques Diouf, the former Director General of the Food and Agriculture Organisation. You can just count the number of Africans who have served at a high level. We, therefore, congratulate him and wish him well.

On behalf of Parliament, we would like to offer our congratulations and to thank the African Union - of course our President was part of that decision and the other African leaders - for supporting Dr Tedros.

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday, there was an allegation raised here yesterday that someone who had come to visit Parliament was arrested within the precincts of Parliament. However, I have evidence from our CCTV camera that the subject entered Parliament from the North Wing gate at 9.26 a.m., at 9.27 a.m., he went through the scanners. At 9.30 a.m., he was walking out of the scanners and at 9.31 a.m., he was heading to the lift. 

At 9.32 a.m., he entered the lift and went to the canteen. He was later seen in the company of hon. Luttamaguzi and other members. He went to the canteen and had tea there but later addressed a press conference in the precincts of this Parliament. 

He spent most of the morning here and exited – I think the press conference was at about 12.53 p.m. Thereafter, he exited Parliament at 14.00 hrs. I have pictures of him on the bridge walking freely; I have pictures of him getting out of the lift of Parliament and pictures of him on the steps of the northern wing of Parliament, walking freely out of the House. I have pictures of him at 14.03 turning on the other side of the road and at 14.04, he had passed our check point. It is, therefore, not true that anyone was arrested in the precincts of this Parliament.

Secondly, honourable members, not anyone can come here and address a press conference. This is not Nakivubo. It is only Members or people allowed by the Speaker. Please do not abuse your being in this House; do not abuse the privileges of Parliament and do not do it again. Otherwise, whoever does it again will be disciplined for breaching the Rules of Procedure.

Otherwise, honourable Members, I would like you to know that nothing happened. He came and spent almost four hours and left. If something happened, it happened elsewhere and not in this Parliament. Thank you very much.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (General Duties) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dr Tedros is the first African to hold the position of Director General of World Health Organisation. Of course as Africa, we are proud that we voted as a bloc and we were supported by the other countries. 

Dr Tedros is commended worldwide for establishing the Community Health Extension Workers, from which Uganda is building. We, therefore, have high hopes in him and he is highly respected. This is why we were able to garner votes beyond Africa. He got 133 votes while his competitor who was from the UK got 50 votes. I just wanted to congratulate him.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that you guide me and maybe the country at large. You have talked about the UPDF gentleman who was here. The fact that that soldier was able to reach Parliament and even address a press conference in the precincts of Parliament; wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister or somebody from the Government makes a statement about the fate of that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told you that he was not supposed to address a press conference here. It is against the Rules of Procedure – please sit down. He was here without my knowledge or authority.

3.10
MR ONESMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a matter of national importance regarding the ethnic tensions in the Bunyoro sub-region, as reported in today’s New Vision. 

There is an organisation called BUKITAREPA - Bunyoro Kitara Reparation Agency. This is an agency that was begun by some Banyoro with a good intention of seeking reparations from the British Government, for the atrocities committed during the colonial rule. Later on, the agency took a different direction that was totally sectarian, agitating for the eviction of all non Banyoro in the entire sub-region.
 
The members of BUKITAREPA are always on radio stations threatening all the non Banyoro to pack their belongings and leave Bunyoro to Banyoro willingly or else they stage a bloody war. They have been collecting money from the locals with promises of awarding them properties and lands of all non Banyoro, after being chased out of Bunyoro.

Despite the fact that BUKITAREPA is trying to do hard work to involve more Banyoro, not all are involved in this. Of recent, the latest audio-recording being reported about in today’s New Vision, was of a forged voice of a Mukiga with a clear Runyoro accent, reported to be in a meeting with some Banyankole and planning how to ask all the Bakiga women to lure the Banyoro men and exterminate them by poisoning. I have that audio recording here with me. If allowed, I can lay it here on the Table. 

The audio was aimed at seeking solidarity and togetherness of the indigenous and incite them against the non Banyoro. As we speak, in my constituency, some families where there are inter-marriages are breaking due to the ill-propaganda being spread by this BUKITAREPA organisation on radios. There are some areas where the Banyoro can no longer drink from bars owned by non Banyoro and vice versa. Therefore, the ethnic tension is real and is doing a lot of harm in the entire sub-region. 

Madam Speaker, I have written to various authorities informing them of the devilish and malicious talk that has been going on various radio stations, provoking, inciting, recruiting and equipping the indigenous community with ill and concocted propaganda, aimed at causing bloody wars in the sub-region. I have not received any response.

I have written letters, attaching various audio recordings to the Uganda Communications Commission for quick help but I have not received any feedback as of now. I have written to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but have received no response.

I have circulated all those copies to the Office of the President, to the Prime Minister and to the Minister of Information and ICT, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to the IGP, to the Director General of ISO, the Minister of Bunyoro Affairs but I have not received any response.

As we talk, this BUKITAREPA got an interim order, stopping all land transactions in the seven districts of Bunyoro sub region, since there was no single response submitted to court by the Attorney-General. In June this year, they are likely to get a temporary injunction, stopping all the seven district land boards and their agents from transacting any land related matter not until the main application is disposed of, which can even take 20 years. That means 20 years without any land transactions since the Attorney-General is still quiet on the matter.

Madam Speaker, BUKITAREPA is now in court asking to remove all non Banyoro MPs representing Bunyoro from this Parliament. Next month, court will sit over this matter and the Attorney-General has not responded to this up to now. They are asking court to allow them take over all leadership positions right from LC 1 up to parliamentary level. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that this august House looks into all these matters to stop the brewing bloody wars, which may end in genocide. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you sure the Attorney-General was served? What is the case number? 

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I can submit all this. I can lay them on the Table with the copies of the cases and the audio recordings.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it would be quicker for you to go to the Attorney-General and handover those things to him.

3.16
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for what he has submitted. In normal procedure, when a Member of Parliament writes any communication even if it is a call to the minister, the best form of conduct is meeting that person and you discuss the matter.

Now here we are, with the honourable member; we know what is in Bunyoro. By the way, I am one of the best examples because my tribe is not well defined. I am neither a Muganda nor a Munyarwanda but just in between but in Buganda. (Laughter)

When a Member of Parliament raises matters, which are even historical in Uganda, the Attorney-General is named but no government agency is caring, I think there is something wrong.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, I asked the Member whether the Attorney-General has been served. Does he actually know about this case so that we know how to move?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, that is what I am emphasising. For him, as a Member of Parliament, according to what I have heard, he has written his concerns officially to the minister; he has not served him because he has not gone to court. However, he is saying that none of them is coming to his rescue. 

Madam Speaker, we have a big number of ministers here and they are many to ease work. I would like to be on record that I am very disappointed with the Attorney-General. We have heard many issues where the Attorney-General is supposed to come in but nothing is happening until we send for him.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, bring those documents. I would like to know what he is bringing here.

3.17
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I think that Office of the Attorney-General should get serious. I am a living example, Madam Speaker. I have been in court for 17 years with Government since October 2001. Every time we appear in court, the Attorney-Generals’ Office is not represented.

They moved us from Kampala to Mbale and now to Soroti. We were there last week but they were not present. Now this time because the resident judge has said he has closed the case and that on 11 July he is going to make a ruling, then tomorrow they will jump in that they are appealing.

I think the Office of the Attorney-General should really get serious. There is no way people can appear in courts of law and the Attorney General is not represented. This Parliament is also an example of the same; you know what happened. 

THE SPEAKER: Lay what you have.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I lay on Table an audio recording of BUKITAREPA, calling upon Bakiga women to lure Banyoro men and exterminate them by poisoning.

I lay on Table the four audio CD recordings of some of the BUKITAREPA programmes on radio, threatening non-Banyoro to leave Bunyoro to Banyoro and attacking Government for ferrying non-Banyoro to Bunyoro Kitara sub region.

Madam Speaker, I also lay on Table a letter I wrote to UCC appealing a for a ban of BUKITARAPA from airwaves in Uganda for promoting sectarianism, war and recruiting and equipping the indigenous communities with ill propaganda to stage war against non-Banyoro. I wrote it on 10 May 2017 and it was received by UCC and copied to the President’s Office, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister for ICT and the Office of the Prime Minister also received copies.

Madam Speaker, I lay on Table a letter I wrote to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on 10th May and received by the Office of the Prime Minister and the President’s Office.

I also lay on Table another letter that I wrote to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; I was submitting additional information - the last audio that was aired urging Bakiga women to lure Banyoro men and poison them.

Madam Speaker, I lay on Table a copy of the New Vision reporting about all this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Twinamasiko, you talked about a pending hearing. I would be happy if you gave us the case number so that we can instruct the Attorney-General to respond very quickly.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I can rush to my office and pick that copy of the case that is in Masindi High Court. This copy of the New Vision is for 24 May 2017 and the headline is; “Ethnic tension hits Bunyoro, police on alert.” I beg to lay.

3.22
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the honourable member has submitted is true. The BUKITAREPA group is a sectarian group in Bunyoro sub region and it is a very big problem. It is a well-known group with some big people in Government supporting it.  

These people have vowed that non-Banyoro should not get any job in Government. Madam Speaker, I concur with what hon. Twinamasiko has presented. It is true and we acknowledge the evidence and we can provide more. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to think of how we are going to handle this matter. Let those documents be there as I think of how we are going to handle. This is a new situation and I do not know whether to send it to the committee, to the ministry, or to the President. Give me time to think.

3.24
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of urgent national importance and it pertains to pensioners, especially the former workers of the Uganda Police Force.

I have a number of them in my district who have worked with the Uganda Police Force and have retired honourably but have taken years without receiving their pension. Efforts have been taken to follow up this matter and the latest information I have is what I got from the director of human resource of the Uganda Police Force. He told me that they have the money to pay these pensioners but the Ministry of Public Service has failed to clear those people such that payment can be effected. 

As I speak, we are coming to the end of the financial year. He actually told me that they are stuck with the money and will have to send it back to the Consolidated Fund. These are people who have served this nation in a dignified manner and have retired honourably but payment of their pension and gratuity is not forthcoming. They are living very miserable lives. 

Madam Speaker, in fact I was considering loading these people on a truck and delivering them to the Ministry of Public Service such that they can feed them. This is a time of famine in the villages. They have no income and thought they could be sustained by their pension, but the money is not coming.

Madam Speaker, we need an explanation from the Ministry of Public Service and the police to know exactly why these elderly people are not being paid yet the money is available. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have seen the Minister of Public Service. Maybe he will say something. Let us have hon. Olanya and hon. Kaberuka.

3.26
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the security situation in northern Uganda, specifically Gulu and Amuru districts. We have iron bar hit men who are continuously hitting and killing our people. 

on 23 May 2017 at 2 a.m., the Assistant Town Clerk of Gulu, John Oola, was hit at his gate and he died instantly. It is not only Oola; we have a one Jacob Olwoc who works with Gulu FM. He was also hit. There is also Sam Okaka who works with Rupiny FM as well as Emma Okano who works with the Northern Uganda Media Association. Nine others were hit last week.

Madam Speaker, we have raised this matter continuously and the minister promised that they would take maximum care of our people. However, these iron bar hit men are continuously hitting and killing people.

Madam Speaker, we pray that Government beefs up security, mostly in all the urban centres. It seems the security is no longer tight especially at night, yet we have very many security personnel. We have the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) as well as police personnel. Therefore, Government should beef up the security. 

Secondly, Government should explain why this situation is still persistent up to now. The other year it was in Kitgum. It went to Lira and is now in Gulu and Amuru districts. Finally, Madam Speaker, Government should investigate and bring those culprits to book. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise –

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry. I forgot to announce that the people who are in the Gallery are from Kagoma. They came to witness the swearing in of hon. Walyomu. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the matter of public importance I am raising is about the Government and private schools increasing school fees mid-year. All of a sudden, you hear they have increased. 

The Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) has already issued a circular increasing registration fees for the candidates. All this is happening amidst the challenge of hunger and the people of Uganda are all stricken by hunger. My concern does not only affect my constituency but the whole country. 

The circular issued by UNEB is gives 30th May as the deadline and all the head teachers have translated this money into the package of the money the students should pay at the term opening on Monday, 29 May 2017. 

Based on this, Madam Speaker, I pray that the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, investigates the implication of this considering the hunger issue in Uganda. In addition, they need to compel UNEB to revoke this circular because it is increasing registration fees from Shs 15,000 to Shs 20,000. The schools are also increasing fees from between Shs 50,000 to Shs 100,000. Where will the families which have nothing to eat and have been eating ants get this money?

Madam Speaker, I seek that Government intervenes and revokes this money that has been put mid-term because the parents have to plan accordingly.

3.31
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a matter of national importance regarding the management of public finance in the Uganda AIDS Commission. We are coming to the close of the budget process and for sure, we have allocated some funds to the Commission, which to us is very important.

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I am aware – and believe that the various ministries that supervise this commission are also aware – that the term of service of the board of the Uganda AIDS Commission has expired and the board is no longer functional. We are also aware that the term of service of the accounting officer, who is also the chief executive of the Uganda AIDS Commission, has also expired. 

In the absence of the board and the head of the institution properly appointed by the Head of State as per Section 4(a) and (b) of the Uganda AIDS Commission Act – that can manage the finances that we are going to put to that sector – I am wondering what this Parliament can do with regard to the funding of the Uganda AIDS Commission. 

I would like this House to ask the Prime Minister and the Office of the President to tell us who has so far been managing the finances of the Uganda AIDS Commission. What we know is that according to practice, which is also by law, every accounting officer must have an instrument of appointment. 

The head of the Uganda AIDS Commission, who was dully appointed by the Head of State, was also appointed as the accounting officer for Vote 107 and that appointment was supposed to stretch up to 30 June 2017. Since that accounting officer stopped operations in February, who at the moment is managing the affairs of finance of Uganda AIDS Commission.

My concern is that we should ensure that whatever money we put in any institution is managed in accordance with the law. However, as of now, the Uganda AIDS Commission does not have a Board, a chief executive and an accounting officer as appointed by the law to manage vote 107. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Public Service to say something? 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Mr Kasirivu Atwooki): The Uganda AIDS Commission falls under the Office of the President and I am taking charge of the Office of the Presidency as of now.

It is true that the time of the Board expired but we are in the process of reconstituting the Board. For the Chief Executive, in the absence of the Board, the minister takes charge. (Interjections) Meanwhile, for the accounting officer, we have an acting person that we have put in place as the process of getting a substantive Chief Executive Officer is underway. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you can complete the process before the end of the financial year so that we know who is accounting there. Minister of Public Service -

3.36
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, we all know, a pension accruing to a retired civil servant is not negotiable; it is a right.

Recently, the Ministry of Public Service carried out a country wide pension roll revalidation exercise. I would like to beg hon. Lubogo to provide the ministry with the particulars regarding these senior citizens who have not been paid but are sure that their pension money is there and it is only a question of remitting it on their accounts. 

Let me have the details and then this matter will be looked into and settled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Some time back, we received a petition from citizens about the high fees in the schools. We sent a copy to the Committee on Education and Sports and the Ministry of Education and Sports. Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, people are worried about next week.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is true is that Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) has revised the examination fees. A circular was sent out to the schools last term and it was very clear how much each candidate will pay. 

As for the increase of school fees other than the UNEB fees, it is very clear that before school fees structures are adjusted, management committees or boards of governors of schools are expected to have sat and sought permission from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports. As we talk now, the Ministry of Education and Sports has not authorised any single school to revise fees structure -(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, Uganda has the Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008. I took time to go through this Act and I made research because I wanted to compare with what is happening in other countries.

Along the way, I found that there is no provision in the Education Act of Uganda that states that a public primary or secondary or private school should seek permission from the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Education and Sports when they wish to increase school fees. I made the comparison with the Education Act of Ghana and it is very clear. They have a ceiling where by public primary, secondary and private schools have to put school fees. However, Uganda has nothing in the law.

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the minister to deceive this august House and say that they are supposed to seek the advice of the Permanent Secretary? In essence, every time they are passing the results of primary and secondary schools, they talk about no increase of school fees and yet, it is not embedded in our law. I think this is not procedurally right. I need your guidance on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the population wants a solution and that is what we are trying to look for. That is why they raised the outcry about high school fees. Please, honourable minister, come and finish your submission. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The law gives the powers to regulate what goes on in the schools to the Minister of Education and Sports. It is spelt out in the Education Act of 2008. We have got the powers to regulate whatever takes place in all the schools that are registered under the Ministry of Education and Sports –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that this is a House of Representatives. This is what is happening in our constituencies.

I would also like to inform the minister that the circular has just reached in some schools. That is why they are calling meetings to increase it and put in the fees package of next term. I do not know whether the schools call you first and constitute a committee to increase fees. Therefore, what is the Ministry of Education and Sports doing about this? Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for allowing me seek for a clarification. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. In this committee, UNEB’s budgetary allocation was cut. We are witnessing this scenario taking place even before the passing of the budget because of the timely period for UNEB.

Madam Speaker, the minister needs to clarify on the statistics of those students who will not sit exams because of failure to pay examination fees –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is your proposal?

MR SSEWUNGU: What does the minister lose by telling us that this is happening as a result of the budget cut in the Ministry of Education and Sports other than beating about the bush?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not a result of budget cut. UNEB came up with a budget, which the Ministry of Education and Sports studied and approved. This required more money than what UNEB could raise. Therefore, the ministry allowed UNEB to raise the examination fees by a very small amount, which was communicated to the schools last term in a circular.

Madam Speaker, if there are any schools that have raised schools fees other than what was communicated in the circular, I will be investigating that and I will get back to you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I requested hon. Twinamasiko, to lay on the Table, a document concerning the case.  It is an old case but I think they are several applications. Let him lay it on the Table and we hand it over to the Attorney-General. Then, the Minister of Internal Affairs, respond to the iron bars in Gulu.  

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Miscellaneous Application Number 732 of 2006 that is in court about throwing out non-Banyoro MPs representing Bunyoro constituencies from Parliament. I lay it on Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall hand it over to the Attorney General. It seems it is an old case and they keep bringing applications. Please, look at it and see how you can assist. In the meantime, I will direct the Minister for Security together with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister for Bunyoro Affairs to examine the complaint brought by hon. Twinamasiko and see how we can move on it. It is a bit sensitive and urgent; I would appreciate if they handled it quickly and gave us the report in a fortnight.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Col Okello Engola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We got that report of the hitmen, especially, this one of last night. We have asked the police to handle the investigations. (Expunged) Therefore, we have sent police to investigate further and then, we shall come back with our report. (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. So far, last week alone, nine people were hit and two people died. I am dismayed to hear the minister making claims against John Oola, the Assistant Town Clerk, who was hit. This is a very terrible allegation against a dead person while the family is in sorrow. 

Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to make such allegations against a man who was killed and who cannot now defend himself?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the complaint was about the series of iron hit men and they said the latest victim was the Assistant Town Clerk. It is about all of them, not just the Assistant Town Clerk.  Therefore, honourable minister, you are out of order.

COL ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I was talking about the Assistant Town Clerk who was killed yesterday, not all victims and we have handed the case to the police to investigate. That is the information we got. 

3.48
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From wherever the Deputy Clerk was coming, when he got killed, the Ministry of Local Government is very sad that he could lose his life to hit men. I would like to express our grief. Today, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has travelled to Gulu so that he assesses the situation. Investigations, of course, will follow but my ministry is extremely sad that this kind of event has taken place. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Defence, in his submission, appeared very inhuman by making false allegations about a dead person. It would be unfair for the minister’s statement not to be withdrawn. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister, in the interest of the dead to rest in eternal peace and also for the justice of the people who have lost their dear ones, to withdraw his statement with an apology and commit himself to never do this again? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct that that part of his statement be expunged from the record of this House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW €37.1 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT AND €35 MILLION FROM KFW BANK, THE GERMAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE MBARARA-MASAKA TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to make his motion first? He hasn’t said anything yet.

MR BAHATI: - to authorise to borrow €37.1 million from the French Agency for Development and €35 million from KFW, the German Development to finance the Mbarara-Masaka Transmission Line project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded?  (Members rose_)- It has been seconded by the Minister of Energy, Minister of Local Government, Minister for Public Service and also several back benchers. Honourable members, that request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO JAPANESE YEN 5.706 BILLION ($ 49.19 MILLION) FROM JAPAN INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION AGENCY (JICA) FOR THE COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION WORK OF THE NEW BRIGDE ACROSS RIVER NILE JINJA PROJECT

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $49.19 million from Japan International Corporation Agency for the completion of the construction works of the new bridge across River Nile at Jinja Project. I beg to move. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. (Mr Nzoghu rose_)- What is the problem, hon. Nzoghu? 


Honourable members, you will be able to speak about that when the report comes. Now, we are sending it to the committee and they can tell us whether we should borrow or not. You cannot speak about it now. It is sent to the Committee of National Economy for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCREASE THE SHARE CAPITAL OF HOUSING FINANCE BANK BY UGANDA SHILLINGS THIRTY BILLION (SHS 30 BILLION)

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for Parliament to authorise the increase of the share capital of Housing Finance Bank by Shs 30 billion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Honourable members sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had partially considered this Bill, I now put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

MR PETER OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The last time this particular part of the Bill was stood over, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was asked to come and brief the House on the figures, which would make the House take a decision that waiving tax on Bujagali would be beneficial to the country. Yesterday, I asked the minister how much Bujagali was paying in taxes and he told us that Bujagali was paying Shs 80 billion annually.

Madam Chairperson, making a rough calculation, for 15 years, which is being proposed that taxes be waived on Bujagali, that would mean we are foregoing Shs 1.2 trillion. I again asked by waiving Shs 1.2 trillion, how much are we going to save in terms of reduction in power charges per unit. The minister told us that there will be a reduction from 13 cents to eight. That is the reduction of five cents.

I sampled around asking Members of Parliament what is their consumption per month. It went to a range of between thirty and fifty units of electricity.  (Interjections) This was an average from where I sampled. I am not saying that is actual but what I sampled.

Madam Chairperson, I googled and found that 20 per cent of the Ugandan population are connected to the national grid. Taking a simple calculation, that would give us about 6.8 million Ugandans connected to the national grid. Going by 50 units per month on average and taking the reduction of five cents per unit, that would mean we are foregoing Shs 1.2 trillion for 15 years against if we get a deduction of five cents and taking the 50 units, we would be only benefitting an amount of Shs 1.1 trillion which is less.

If we had allowed the fare to be as it is now and we remain taxing Bujagali, it means Government will be losing Shs 100 billion. Is that a good deal for the country? I am sure and I brought this so that the minister can provide us figures that by foregoing Shs 1.2 trillion, we are not losing as a country in terms of our reduction of charges to the citizens of this country.

Unless we are provided with that, Madam Chairperson, it will be very difficult for thisHhouse to take a decision on deals that we clearly see that the country will not benefit from.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The bottom-line of this matter of Bujagali is how to get the high sky rocketing electricity tariffs to affordable rates by the wanaichi of Uganda. I am opposed to the duration of 15 years tax waiver. My proposal is to have a renewable duration of time to test the waters because the challenges that we grapple with now of very high tariffs, which we used to think was $11 cents, is not. It is $13.5 and above cents; that is too high.

These challenges are because we have tasted the bitter fruits of a bad agreement. The moment we enter another with such a long duration of time of tax exemption of 15 years, we shall live to regret the more. It would be better and I hold a view that we accord him a waiver of at least five years renewable or bound to being reviewed. That is my proposal. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Honourable minister, the honourable colleague has endeavoured to make his simple calculation. If you followed his argument, you may find that he might be right. We need the opinion of Government to those calculations. Whereas he is talking from the point of view of household consumers, Government might be focusing on industrialists. 

If the minister does not come here with information on the opportunity cost of what we are gaining or losing, honestly, we will be in this ping-pong and we will end up not taking the right decision. Honourable minister, kindly inform us about what the opportunity cost of foregoing taxes is. And kindly clarify to this House - in his State of the Nation Address the President was talking about 11 cents. Now, we are in the negotiation period and we are hearing 13.38 cents for Bujagali.

Madam Speaker, what price are we talking about; we have been hearing a different price; on coming to review, another price has come up. Kindly be honest to us and tell us so that we take the right decision. Thank you, very much.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to give some statistics from the background to the budget for the Financial Year 2013/2014. (Interjections) I felt I should give this information to Members before we make this decision so that the ministers of Energy and Finance should be able to explain to Ugandans and to this House.

Presentation on electricity pricing in Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority 2017; Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, the general tariffs for electricity plants in Uganda of which we have over ten stands as follows; Eskom Uganda Limited that is Kira, Nalubaale 1.06 cents it is the cheapest; Tibet Hima Mining Company, $2.60 cents; as of the generation tariffs for quarter four for the year 2016.

Kasese Cobalt Company Limited 5.63, Eco Power Limited 7.25, Kinyara Sugar Works Limited 8.10, Bugoye Hydro Limited 8.61, Mpanga Hydro Power Plant 9, Hydromax Limited 9.5, Sugar and Allied 9.5, Kakira Sugar Limited 9.54, Bujagali Limited 10.63. This as of quarter four 2016.

I am surprised where the 13 is coming from. Jacobson Uganda Limited is 16.10, Electromax Uganda Limited 16.83. These are the highest ones. 

The minister must tell us where the 13 is coming from. Looking at this, even if you reduced, it will still be among the highest, which the minister has not yet clarified to us here. Last time, he said that we shall reduce it to about 9 but he has not come back to give us the correct figures on these issues.


Madam Chairperson, I also did observe that before assessing the merits of this proposal of the minister, the following should be observed by Members; 

According to section 12.1 of the Power Purchase Agreement, Bujagali Electricity Limited committed to pay all taxes applicable to the company except where there is a good faith dispute with the UETCL. Presently, there is no dispute unless we are told otherwise. Please, clarify that to us. 

Secondly, section 4 (1),(2),(3) of the annex (d) of the Power Purchase Agreement only provides for upward or additional cost or taxes not downward or reduction of the cost or taxes.

What the minister is attempting to do is not even to reduce taxes but to bring it down to zero because he is asking for exemption. On what basis are we deciding on this?

Taxes can only be adjusted upward and not downward. Section 4.5 of the Power Purchase Agreement stipulates that Bujagali Electricity Limited shall pay corporate income taxes based on the net income generated from the Power Purchase Agreement and reasonable imports are to be undertaken to minimise liabilities.

Therefore, non-payment of corporation tax is a liability. Honourable colleagues, corporation tax is charged on profit. It would be best for the tax exemption intervention to target productivity activity for it constitutes 59 per cent of the final consumer tariff.

Therefore, the corporation tax does not reduce production cost rather they remain the same or higher but enhances the company’s profits. Honourable colleagues, I invite you to analyse this before we make a decision.

There is no way you are going to waive or exempt corporation tax for this company with this in the agreement but also, I would like the minister to explain how a reduction or exemption of taxes is going to reduce the cost of power; because what he is attempting to do is on profit. It has no relationship with the cost.
I am speaking here as somebody who was taught Economics by Prof. Kamuntu at the first and second degree. I am happy Prof. Kamuntu is here. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am glad that many of the issues were exhausted. The contract, which I went through thoroughly says that Bujagali is not supposed to revise the tariffs downward. That means whether we exempt them from paying the corporate tax, the cost of electricity will not come down. Secondly, Bujagali is not a Ugandan company. The tax we are going to exempt on; which you think will be reinvested back into the economy might not be the case. 

The country will not be gaining from it and above all, if they are not making profits, that means they are not paying taxes. There will be no reason for us to say that their profit should not be taxed; that would be mean that we are making a great mistake as a country.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for several reasons has been struggling to make sure that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development where I sit should not reduce on the tax base. How do you come out that you want the tax base of the country to be reduced? I do not see a reason for exempting Bujagali; they should do business.

To some extent, I have been reliably informed that there are discussions going on to make sure that that dam becomes a Ugandan issue. We are the ones to pay the loan; so, why doesn’t Cabinet exhaust that kind of discussion? Thank you, very much.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The total cost of Bujagali was $862 million. This is one of the Public Private Partnership projects that this country has undertaken. Madam Chairperson, the minister should also inform Ugandans that all the power that is generated at Bujagali is not consumed and yet, all the electricity generated at Bujagali is paid for. The minister has not explained to the people of this country that deficit; that whereas in Bujagali we are producing power, all the power that they generate there is not all consumed but all that is not consumed is still paid for.

Secondly, we are simply saying that we are waiving taxes on Bujagali but when we waive on Bujagali, Madam Chairperson, I do know the lens in which we view our country. We have got small scale entrepreneurs in Uganda who are struggling day in and out. They borrow money from the banks but even when they borrow, they are still taxed by this Government and Government does not go down to establish who these people are to see how they can be lifted up.

This money was borrowed from the World Bank and it will be paid by Ugandans. Therefore, would it be fair, Madam Chairperson, at this point in time when we have that debt burden of Shs 38 trillion as of now. We have seen the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laying some of the loan requests on the Floor today that we want to borrow and yet, we want to exempt Bujagali from paying taxes. Where is the logic, Madam Chairperson? It is not there. 

I would be interested in seeing Government coming with a proposal of strengthening mechanisms on how to raise revenue for this country. That is what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be coming up with.

Thirdly, we visited Bujagali; it has not done much with the corporate social responsibility. The people around Bujagali project are not comfortable with the project because what they promised to do is not what they have done. It has inconvenienced them but it has done little to have them developed in a manner that is related with what was agreed in the agreement.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I will not be party to that arrangement where we are borrowing and we want to waive taxes and we put ourselves in a more precarious situation.

I would like to beg the honourable members present that this is our country and because it is, we owe responsibility to our country. It would be unfair, Madam Chairperson, today for us to move in that direction and waive taxes on Bujagali. I would, therefore, like to persuade the Members that we throw out this proposal and we maintain that we should not waive taxes but instead see how to revitalise and have our revenues raised as a country. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This proposal is coming for the second time. Hon. Peter Okot has come up with something logical to inform any resolution that we may adopt in this House today. We are here to legislate for this nation but we are also here to act on figures.

First, he has clearly shown the extent of the consumption and the average cost for every Ugandan. We agree that the negotiators did us a disservice and that is why we have arrived at paying one of the highest tariffs for electricity in the whole world but we cannot be seen to be abetting the second round of irresponsibility. Our voters have sent us to this August House in order to protect them but also to protect the future of other tax payers to come.

We would like a comparative analysis to be tabled by the minister. Hon. Nsamba re-echoed it and said we must know the alternative foregone to make this choice and bind our countrymen to paying tax that should be compensated for a foreign company that will repatriate it in future. We must be clear; as we exempt these foreign companies, which has become a norm now to exempt them from the only tax that we have to harness.

Madam Chairperson, when we are inviting investors, we convince Ugandans that they will not only provide jobs but we shall also tax them. The only taxes that we hope to get from them now are also going to be exempted. Why should Ugandans forego their land and money but only to see that even the little that we hoped to get is even exempted? Honourable members, a waiver means that the tax collected from you and other Ugandans shall be used to compensate those people in form of an exemption. Therefore -  (Member timed out.) 

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The issue of Bujagali and the power tariffs is a natural matter and when talking about it, we need to have an objective lens. I felt that it is pertinent for us to go down to the core of the figures and later, approve if it is really economical.

Madam Chairperson, 13.8 American cents per unit for power extracted from Bujagali compared to what Ethiopia, for instance, charges at 3 American cents, discourages our investors from coming to Uganda and that is why Entebbe Airport is never busy. The aeroplanes that you see there are minor ones similar to the size of taxis that I use when travelling to Kumi because investors cannot come to invest in Uganda due to the charges on power tariffs. However, we as a House should unite and objectively look at these tariffs and see how best we can calculate and bring the tariffs down to below 5 American cents per unit and that is the only thing that will change our future as Uganda in terms of what we will gain –(Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, hon. Aogon, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give my brother is that there is evidence that Bujagali Electricity Limited does not pay all the taxes but pays only Value Added Tax (VAT) but not corporation tax. Let the minister show us evidence that they pay both the corporation and VAT? (Applause)

MR AOGON: I thank my colleague for that information and if that is true, it only escalates the amount of the cancer that we have economically.

Madam Chairperson, what we need to do is to think about refinancing Bujagali because an error so big –(Member timed out.) 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The matter we are handling here is very sensitive. However, on a sad note, we are told some officers and ministers misled this country and signed a wrong document. In my opinion, I would request the minister to mention such people so that they are on record here and we see which action was taken to them. If not, this House should take action. 

However, power is very necessary for the development. I am told the tax you want to exempt is this tax which is put on the profits they have made. I would not be happy with that but I want to request this House that if we are to exempt or to reduce the tax, we should let even a local villager from Kamuli, Omoro and Butaleja benefit. It should not only benefit industries because the minister’s target is about the rich industrialised people, not a typical villager. 

Therefore, I would like to request members that if we are to reduce the tax, let it come to around seven cents but the minister is just making estimates. Let him come with the figures. You know when they talk about cents, Madam Chairperson, the next day they will see that the dollar price shot up again and people will be charged.  

We made a resolution here that this thing should be in Ugandan Shillings. Why can’t the minister come and exchange the cents into Ugandan Shillings? I want to thank you and members let us reduce the tariff, not only to the factories but also to a local villager. 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to make an intervention from the point of view of public service. Just about one and a half weeks ago, public service conducted interviews for young people in this country; they were about 9,000 for just a few posts of around 124. 

Madam Chairperson, we got 29,000 applications. The crisis we are facing is acute. If nothing is done to make sure that jobs are created for our people, we are going to be in serious problems. Nevertheless, this matter of creating jobs, particularly from the private sector, is part and parcel of electricity. 

If we have electricity in the country, we are likely to attract a lot of industries to come here and they will create jobs. If that electricity is very expensive, then the people, who would be interested in coming here, will be scared away. If we do not have a lot of jobs, then we are going to have a lot of problems -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, could you explain to us how reducing a tax profit will reduce the tariff? Why don’t you tackle the production costs? 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: The minister will explain the problem. However, Madam Chairperson, this whole matter is designed to correct what went wrong. This will ensure that the people we dealt with in the beginning, who are going to take a lot of money and therefore make our power very expensive, are put aside. Then we have people who are going to run this business at a lower cost and therefore attract a lot of industries to our country, create a lot of jobs and employ a lot of young people; they pay and the economy is evenly skilled. 

Hon. Nsereko and honourable members, I would like to appeal that we take a decision and allow this exemption for at least five years. Madam Chairperson, if it does not work out very well, then we can take another decision. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I do not know the trouble that has really killed this country. This thing started in 1998 with AES and in the wisdom of Parliament, we rejected it. However, the President, in his own wisdom, decided to have a concession with Aga Khan but it was the highest and most expensive. It cost $ 900 million and the cents per kilo watt was 13.8. It was therefore very expensive for the country. 

The President has been blaming Parliament that it made mistakes but now we have seen the mistakes that were made squarely fell on the President. Parliament had rejected it; that if we are to have a clear policy and programme on electricity for our country, we cannot do what the President did when he went on a commercial loan and concession and it was the most expensive. 

This loan we are talking about is on commercial rate and was over inflated. It cost $900 billion for 250 megawatts; it was very expensive in the entire world. Now today it has been cast out. We are being told today that we need to reduce the profit and that Aga Khan should earn more so that, we, Ugandans can reduce. Who is earning actually? For 13 years, that company has been charging Ugandans 13.8 cents per kilo watt, which is the most expensive and enjoying the profits. 

Today, honourable members, having enjoyed profits for over 15 years, now we are the same Parliament that is going to say that we are adding more to them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that instead of reducing or cutting the - (Member timed out.) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have one minute to conclude. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: I would like to propose a fair deal because we do not want to continue running in circles that people keep on earning while we are losing out. 

I wanted to be recorded in cabinet so I said our people negotiate when their hands are in their pockets. I said this statement and today the problem has already come to us. I want to propose, Madam Chairperson, in the wisdom of Parliament that let us not go for exemption of tax. However, let us go for a buy-off so that we get a loan from one bank and then buy off the loan; as a country, this will enable us manage our own projects.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity. When you look at the situation we are facing today, you realise that we are at crossroads and it is our responsibility to see that we get out of this dilemma. I want to request colleagues that as we discuss this issue, we approach it from a broader point of view. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the deliberation by my colleague, hon. Okupa, because he gave us a background and also the cost of electricity from the various dams. It really gave this House a better picture of what is happening in the case of Bujagali. We need to note that electricity is one of the key drivers of development and it is our responsibility as Parliament of Uganda and Government to make sure that we promote the development of our country.

As my senior colleague, hon. Muruli Mukasa, said, there is no way we can think of developing Uganda without industrialising it. If the cost of electricity is still very high, then we should forget industrialisation. As we look at the cost of electricity, we should also look at the multiplier effects of the affordability of electricity.

As members of this House, I would like to suggest that we allow for the waiving of this corporation tax, but of course we limit the period during which we do it, and we put it up for review. If we can do it for five years and we realise that we are doing well, we can then review it. We would be doing this in the –(Interruption.)

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Chairperson, our interest as Members of Parliament is to legislate in the interest of the people we represent. As we legislate, all we are doing is looking out for the interests of the people we represent. However, somebody is insinuating that we do not want to industrialise. Is she in order?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that she was only making a case for the proposal. However, honourable members, I would like someone to explain to us how by paying the full price, and then the other one gets a profit and we also give it to him, this reduces the tariffs. That is what I would like to hear.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also thank you for giving us an opportunity to explain this situation. While we are also here to fix what we were blamed for in the past, the most important thing is that we must forge a way forward, so that we have a future free from the mistakes that were made in the past.

When we were bidding to get power from Bujagali, at the height of the shortages we had, we put in our bid document and we said that we shall guarantee an internal rate of return for this investor at 19 per cent, net of all corporation taxes, payable by the company in Uganda. What does that mean? If I can put in simple terms so that we understand this matter; you may have an employee, for example, and you set their net salary, net of taxes, at Shs 1,000,000. If you want to charge this employee taxes and you have agreed that at the same time that his or her net will be Shs 1,000,000, it means that the gross that you will give them will go up. I do not know whether everybody understands.

We guaranteed a rate of return of 19 per cent, net of taxes. That was the agreement. Now, the rate of return we have here for Bujagali is net of taxes. If you say that you charge 30 per cent, then the tariff goes up and this tariff will be borne by the people of Uganda. That is the situation we are in, colleagues, and that is the situation the Tenth Parliament intends to correct by passing this clause. It is this situation you must correct. It is this action that will actually help us to industrialise the country. Madam Chairperson, I have tried to explain it in simple terms and all the documents are here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you are talking about a bid document; what did we finally agree?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we finally agreed the way it was; we guaranteed a return of 19 per cent, net of taxes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What has happened now? What has happened to cause this change now? If we guaranteed, it means we have been giving. What has happened to warrant this new position? That is what we want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, for us to continue incorporating the corporation tax in the formula, we must waive it by law. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think the contribution from the minister is causing more confusion. You simplified the matter by asking him to justify how he can reduce on the tariffs. We are interested in tariffs. You asked how he can introduce the tariffs if we waive the tax. I think you asked a very simple question, and that is what I have been waiting for.

What the minister did not tell us is that corporation tax is charged on the profit you have already made. From the profit that you have already made, you take away the tax component. Therefore, for you to waive, it means that you are adding more money to this person that has already earned profit.

However, it would have been a good idea if they were putting money in the production capacity. This would enhance our ability to employ more people and produce more so that we get more supply of electricity, and of course the higher the supply, the lower the price. That is a simple economics calculation.

Mr Minister, can you please help us to clarify what the chairperson has asked? Secondly, I would like you to also clarify on how you differentiate between a public private partnership - a private company working jointly with Government and therefore Government has an interest in that company - and a Government company.

Secondly, although the law under section 30(1) of the Public Private Partnership Act, 2015 requires that the Auditor-General must audit Bujagali, I would like you also to clarify why up to now, it has not been audited. On what are you basing your calculations? What figures are you giving us, because there are no authentic audited figures? Can we know this? We are quoting from your report, therefore we would like to know whether there have been audited accounts by the Auditor-General and can you table it because we want to analyse it further?

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I think for us to go to the bottom of this matter we have now agreed - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to hon. Ogwal. I want to thank the minister for bringing up the issue of the rate of return. This time I would like to declare that I am an economist and an accountant. Now we are going to discuss the internal rate of return and yield.

Madam Chairperson, if the internal rate of return has been placed at 19 per cent, supposing in a year they do not produce that power and their profit is zero and yet they have expenditures, that means the net would be a net loss. Therefore, where will you get the net yield, which you are talking about, of 19 per cent? This can happen during drought and other times. 

Madam Chairperson, I have the formula, which was used for computing the tariffs. Members, the agreement was signed on 13 December 2005 -(Interjections)- There was the then Attorney-General, lawyer Byenkya, some whites and blacks and the then Minister of Finance. 

Madam Chairperson, on the issue of internal rate of return, there is a formula on page D-22, and I wanted to show it to hon. Ogwal. I have some copies and I will share with you. It says, TERRm = AggTE, which means aggregate tariff equity, multiplied by EY which means equity yield you expect; you have already got it because you have said you are expecting it. It is the 19 per cent, which is already in the formula. The formula is: 



(Interjections)- Please relax, honourable members. I can give you a copy. Madam Chairperson, the information I wanted to give hon. Ogwal is that in the formula I have just read, there is no component of corporation tax. The Equity Yield (EY) is already determined - 19 per cent; the Aggregate Tariff Equity (AggTE) is also going to be determined by whatever you have decided. Therefore, in that formula, corporation tax does not come in because it is a tax on profits and these profits - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I have just remembered I did economics at university. I am a member of the finance committee and I want to give information that none of us in the committee appreciated this economic principle hon. Nandala-Mafabi is elucidating. 

I would appeal to this House that maybe we would need a team of economists and specialists to understand these economics formulae to advise the House. The committee was not competent to advise the House on these technicalities. This is in good faith.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to conclude. Given that, I would like to state the following: The problem we got, and which I would like to advise the President of Uganda about, is that it is wrong to appoint ministers who have been working in the sectors, which they are supposed to oversee. It is very dangerous because they are coming to clean their mistakes when we give them the opportunity. However, I am advising him, and I am even going to write to him.

Madam Chairperson, what I wanted to explain here is that profit is a result of first income minus expenses and these expenses include interest, which my brother raised. I would like to tell him that what hon. Ogong raised, I was party to it in 2001 and you know what we proposed. So, if you deduct expenses, which include interest, then you get what we call a net profit or net loss and that is what you subject to corporation tax.

We invested $900 million in this project, and if this project is genuinely there and we can see it - By the way, the law says that you must consume their power. It is the first on the grid so you must pay. In simple language, assuming Nandala-Mafabi is selling goats and my brother here and the one there are also selling goats, then they say you must buy his goats whether you want goats or not, and they will pay him but for us we must first wait for him to sell his before we sell ours. That is the Bujagali project. It means that whether it is peak or low season, their power must be paid for. That means whether you are sleeping or awake, you must pay for that power. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, in conclusion, I wanted to say that in Section 12.1 of the Power Purchase Agreement, Bujagali Electricity Ltd committed itself to pay all taxes applicable to the company except, and I want us to note this, where there is a good faith dispute. As of now, Madam Chairperson, there is no dispute of that nature. It says they must pay all taxes except if there is a dispute in good faith.

I thought that the minister would come to us and say, “We have a dispute here, can you help us settle it? The agreement stipulates that where there is genuine dispute based on good faith, this would be done.” That proposal is lacking. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I want to totally agree with you that before we can further discuss this matter, the minister must go back and calculate for us - I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi has helped you to use those equations of arriving at –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, the information I am giving attempts to simplify this conversation so that everybody comes on board. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has rightly stated that Bujagali Electricity Ltd have the first call to sell to the Government the power that the produce, and they are selling it at 13.8 cents. The overall objective of this is to facilitate industrialisation. 

We want to mitigate that cost of 13.8 cents because it is very big and we must bring it down - (Interjection)- Now that is the question. One of the methods is if you give a tax waiver of the profits they will be getting going forward, there is an agreed cap of 8.5 cents. This waiver goes with – (Interjection) - Information is key, honourable. I am giving information. The waiver is given on condition that there is a cap on the tariff – [MRS OGWAL: “I withdraw the time I gave you.”] - It is important that you understand.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: You are now abusing the time I allotted to you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I hope the minister can explain to us in very simple terms what has transpired that has now given rise to the need to remove the tax.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the concerns of colleagues and I thank them for their contributions. I would like to clarify and hopefully, this will help us understand the matter before us. 

The minister in charge of finance as well as the committee shared with you the formulae used to determine a tariff. It highlights the components that constitute a tariff. 

When you look at the formula, the tariff constitutes the cost of the financing, - that is, the debt servicing - the returns on equity which the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development highlighted, corporate tax, operations and maintenance; all these are part of the formula – (Interjection)- It is in the report which the committee shared with you. The committee shared this and put it out for everyone to see. When determining a tariff, those components show you what goes into arriving at that figure. 

When Bujagali came on board in 2012 and started generating electricity, there was a waiver of taxes for four years. When you look at the projectile for the tariffs, you will see that this year the tariff jumped from 11.8 cents to 13.8 cents because the waiver period of four years had expired. 

Between 2012 and 2016, there was a tax waiver. Therefore, the component of tax waiving in the tax formula was removed. The minute you bring back the component of corporate income tax, the tariff shoots up. That is why we are requesting for this. We want to attract investors. We want industries up to the rural areas. We want cheap electricity. We can only achieve that if we have affordable tariffs.

On the issue of consumption, Bujagali’s capacity is 250MW. Indeed, during the peak period, it can generate 250MW. However, during off-peak when our consumption goes down, the water is reserved for the peak period. As a result, it generates much lower power. Look at the capacity and the amount of money you have to pay; you have to pay the amount of money that went into putting in place such a plant to generate electricity for us at that value. 

What we need, colleagues, is many industries to consume that power so that the tariff goes down even further. Therefore, our request is, if we continue with the corporate income tax waiver, the tariffs right now would be at 11.8 cents –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I did not want to interrupt, but the minister has been giving a lot of misinformation. In 2012 when there was a waiver, we were still paying 11.8 cents. That was for four years. When the waiver expired, the tariff went to 13.8 cents. We were still paying highly when they were not paying any tax to this Government. Now, if you cut the tax, is the tariff coming to 11.8 cents? That means you have been cheating people.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does this waiver cut across the power producers? 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My brother, Felix, that is exactly what I was explaining. The minute you remove the corporate income tax waiver, the tariff jumps from 11.8 cents to 13.8 cents. What we are saying is that we continue with the waiver but in addition, we want this loan refinanced so that we are able to reduce the tariffs further –(Interjection)- We want industries. With many industries in this country, we are going to generate taxes and jobs, and we shall add value and the economy will improve.

Madam Chairperson, I want to further assure Members that we are not looking at industries alone; we are looking at the ordinary person as well. That is why we are now going in for free connections. We want the ordinary person to enjoy electricity so that tariffs go down.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are witnessing a very unusual debate here. The Ninth Parliament set up an ad hoc committee and I was the humble chairperson. We had specific findings on Bujagali. We discovered that it was the most expensive dam in the whole world. Government at that time – (Interjection) - I wish we could listen to one another.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members!

MR OBOTH: The report was debated here and adopted. This is further evidence that the report was impeccable. We are the ones who pointed out to Government and at that time they called us names – hon. Okupa, hon. Baryayanga, hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa, hon. Ajedra, hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Medard Sseggona. Two of them are now ministers. 

Madam Chairperson, what is before us is a realisation that what was there before is not working. We either decide to continue with the same problem or we fix it. (Applause)  

Madam Speaker, we all know as small financial managers at individual level that when you borrow in one place and you find that it is expensive, you look for other sources of finance. When hon. Nandala-Mafabi read the formula, little wonder, maybe our negotiators signed some of these things.  The specific terms of reference – Madam Speaker, luckily you were the Speaker then. This should be a pointer to us that when our negotiators go out to negotiate, they should take time. No one is doing you favour.

Now, when the minister gets up to give information, we appeared to be biased. I loved the information from the minister because it is an acknowledgement that things are going berserk. As an individual who interacted with the same minister then, who said this was a good deal, to see her say this today, I am a very happy man. I am ready to offer my support to make sure that this is fixed once and for all. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose? You are leaving us in the same place. 

MS MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to say that there are three problems affecting our economy: transport, high bank rates and electricity. Before, we did not have electricity but now that we have electricity, it is very expensive.

Madam Chairperson, investors fear electricity rates, and we are not attracting investors to come to the country because of this. We do not have industries because of expensive electricity. Industrialisation is the biggest contributor to our employment in the country. According to statistics, we have 1.2 million, people employed by the small factories around and 400,000 people are engaged in the public service.

Madam Speaker, from that point of view, I would like to say that we should find other ways to support this and this can be done by buying the company. We need to do something about electricity. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is no doubt that we all want power. That one is understandable. The issue is how can we give cheaper power to the people?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My conviction is that the mistake has already been made and we have the responsibility to ensure we improve on what we are experiencing. I have also listened carefully to the minister’s submission and no one has objected that there was a waiver. My understanding is that the minister would like to renew the waiver because the time has expired. 

Now, if the waiver helped us, there is a need for us to renew it. However, we need to look at the duration. I, therefore, propose for a lesser duration but not 15 years, and it is subject to a review. Also, the minister should explain to us the experience when we had the waiver.

Further, since we are debating this issue, I would like to request the minister to come up with more suggestions; apart from this waiver, how can we help a taxpayer and the people of Adjumani get power at a lower cost per unit? We need more options not only the waiver. 

Madam Speaker, I agree with retaining and renewing the waiver. However, what other alternatives are there so that the reduction is felt by the users at the lowest level by having a unit cost which is less expensive? Therefore, my proposal is that we retain the waiver and come up with other alternatives in order to make it cheaper. Thank you. 

MR ONEGIU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What we are looking at is how to bring electricity charges lower so that our communities can benefit. As we talk now, the African Development Bank (ADB) is having a meeting to consider alternatives for access to electricity. You are here, honourable minister, but I hope your colleague has gone for that meeting.

The only way we can address this challenge is to ask a body like ADB to buy off Bujagali power and give us a longer repayment period, like 100 years. Bujagali power was given a short period of repayment. The only proposal is to buy it off. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, as the Minister of Energy and Minerals informed the House, there are two measures that we are taking simultaneously. One of the reasons why this power was high was because Bujagali borrowed money at a very high cost and for a short time. They are engaging with ADB to buy off these numerous loans they acquired at a cheaper cost but repayment is for a long period. That is measure number one. This, coupled with the waiver, will bring down the tariffs from 13.8 cents to 8.5 cents. Those are the two measures.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Chairperson, currently, we are producing about 850 megawatts of electricity and utilising about 530 megawatts. This means that the balance is being paid for by us because we signed the capacity agreement. If you connect electricity to all the subcounties in Uganda, you will consume another 320 megawatts. One phosphate plant would use 200 megawatts. Kampala Cement uses 50 megawatts. You only need to attract two phosphate plants and they would use power which nearly all our homes in the country would be using. 

Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is very simple; you must make tariffs for power for factories as low as possible so that we attract them. What you should remember is that we are adding on Karuma that has a capacity that is three times the size of Bujagali; we are also adding Isimba and we have many other small hydroelectric stations and you have signed capacity agreements with all of them. 

Honourable members, unless we get factories to consume this power, we are going to pay for it -(Interjections)- You must pay for it because you signed capacity agreements. Therefore, the only solution is to have factories. Honourable members, why can’t you support this?

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thought I had understood economics until I entered Parliament. It is only today that I am getting new economics principles and theories. 

I know very well, and the ministers have been telling us, that we consume over 500 megawatts of power. Bujagali alone is producing 250 megawatts. This means that the power we use is actually from a pool - from Bujagali and other power generation companies. Therefore, aggregation alone should actually bring down the cost of power to whatever level. However, the minister is continuing to say they are waiving tariffs so that the cost of power can come down from 13 cents. 

We would like to talk about the average. When you aggregate this currently, how much are we paying per unit, even before you mention what we are paying for Bujagali because no one is consuming power from Bujagali alone? Madam Chairperson, every day we are having new industries and as the Committee of National Economy, we have been approving loans for interconnection to countries within the region. At how much are we selling power to our neighbours? All these are factors.

As for now, I would go for refinancing because I know we will get a loan and pay off. Profit is not a factor of production, so even if you exempt corporation tax, actually you are simply making it more equitable for the investors so that they can invest somewhere else and not necessarily in Uganda. You will be increasing capital flight.

As the Committee on National Economy, we shall be eagerly waiting for a decision on whether they will come with a loan so that we process and bring it to this House. We encourage you, honourable members, that when this loan comes and if the minister still thinks it is necessary, please support it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the meantime, what do we do while waiting for that refinancing? 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for giving me this opportunity to also deliberate on this matter. I know very well that most of the foreign investors, after exhausting their tax holidays, usually close shop and invest elsewhere. As we are deliberating on this waiver, we should be mindful of that. 

If we would like to reduce the cost of electricity, why don’t we waive taxes across the board instead of considering only one generating company? For purposes of industrialising, if we waived across the board, all the generating companies would reduce tariffs and Ugandans would benefit.

Secondly, from the inception of Bujagali power dam, we have lost income from tourism, which we used to generate from Bujagali Falls. On top of the income we have already lost at the falls, we want to also lose more income by waiving tax on profits that have been made by the company. I think it is a very sharp contradiction when we are even choking with debt for us to lock out income that is already obvious for this country.

When the minister insinuates that we are going to create employment, if it is important we can even collect that money and give it to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) as start-up capital. In that way, we shall have created more employment for Ugandans so that they invest that money.

Another thing I would like to tell the minister is that we have Hima Tibet Company, which is generating its own power in Mubuku, and that is free power. We had KCCL which was also generating their own power but they have closed shop. What justification can you give Ugandans that by you reducing the power tariffs, you are going to industrialise this economy when even those who have free powers are closing shop?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the debate today reminds me of what we did in the last Parliament when we were debating the exploration Bill. That is why Parliament passed a resolution saying every power sharing agreement must be approved by Parliament.  

From the minister’s side, and the arguments I have heard from my colleagues, we made a mistake that we must agree with. (Interjections)- I am saying we made a mistake because Government was committed to a bad deal; take it or leave it. 

The moment you made an agreement with that formula of corporation tax –(Interjections)– It is included in the tariff; please, listen to me. If you have been listening carefully to hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the minister, they said in the aggregated tariff formula, corporation tax was included -(Interjections)- It is there! That is what the minister said. If I misquoted you- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, at least I am very good at remembering what I say. By the way, for your information, I am one of the few tax experts who exist. I have not mentioned that in the tariff there is tax. Therefore, you need to apologise. If you apologise to me I will leave you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Maybe I heard from the minister who accepted and said the formula which aggregated the tariff included cooperation tax. Isn’t it true? I have seen the agreement, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi has given me, and there is no room for termination in that agreement. That was a mistake; there is no way you can make an agreement without a termination clause.

The only way that Parliament can save this country after that mistake is to renegotiate within the law, and this is the Bill we are debating today. Clause 4(ac) says we should exempt Bujagali up to 2033 but I do not accept that. If the principle is accepted that we –(Interjection)- Yes, it is up to 2033 in clause 4(ac). The only way to save this country is to renegotiate within the law.

If we have powers, Parliament will come in because the law is before us. We have to say that what Cabinet has been doing to us and the people who have been negotiating for these deals is a disservice. The way out is for us to say that we made a mistake with the corporation tax and in clause 4(ac) we are not going to exempt them for all those years, so that we have a room for negotiations. We can even give them up to the time of the expiration of this Parliament.

Therefore, the best way is to stop them as a tax measure and we revisit the law within a specified period. If we revisit the law within a certain period, we shall come back to negotiate the terms and conditions and monitor their performance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there was a bad agreement but it is ours and we are bound by it. I do not think that the investor should have all the benefits while we take all the losses. Therefore, I would like us to agree that we go back to the waiver but for a limited period of five years, so that we have time to- I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had suggested an amendment and the chairperson of the finance committee withdrew the committee’s amendment in favour of mine on the waiver on SACCOs for a period of five years. I am waiting to hear from you because it was unanimously supported according to the deliberations in this House. I am waiting to hear the question being put. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In our report, we made an observation that there is need to exempt SACCOs in order to promote financial inclusion across the population in Uganda. Our proposal was improved by hon. Bintu’s proposal, which the committee agreed with, and I invite the House to adopt our proposal as amended by hon. Bintu.

MS BINTU: Madam Chairperson, I propose on clause 4 to insert a paragraph immediately after paragraph (ac) to read as follows: “(ad) income of a savings and credit cooperative society up to 30 June 2022.” I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that five years?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I come from cooperatives and I think we need to understand the cooperatives we are talking about. I will give a simple example. There is a group called Kwagalana in Kampala here and it is composed of billionaires; supposing they decide to form a SACCO and each of them brings Shs 30 billion -(Interruption)

COL KULAIGYE: Kwagalana is not a SACCO but an association. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to mislead the House by using Kwagalana as an example?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know what they are.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if my colleague had listened, he would have known what I was saying. Assuming they form a SACCO and each of them brings Shs 50 billion and they are 60, that is Shs 3 trillion. When they start lending it out, it means the profit they will make will not be subjected to tax. That is where you have to be careful with SACCOs. That is why I am making a case for the committee. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, what I am bringing up is that we must distinguish the SACCOs and put a threshold, for example-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this matter was debated and was supported. I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed-

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, this House was severely generous to the extent that it explored the possibility of giving a tax waiver for 15 years -(Interjections)- I said “explored” initially. Savings and credit organisations today, even in your constituency in Kamuli, are literally the full lifeline of our community. Madam Chairperson, I seek your gracious leadership and the grace of honourable colleagues that can you explore the possibility of upping the waiver from 5 years to 10 or 15 years. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a view that we should support the SACCOs to grow by giving relief for ten years; is that okay? 

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the clause as proposed by hon. Jalia Bintu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, whereas we welcome the proposal, we would like to put something on record. Is it procedurally right for an ex officio Member to vote? Hon. Muloni also said “aye”. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, it is within your powers to put the question again so that she keeps quiet and we take the rightful vote; otherwise, this will be challenged. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Muloni is known as a smiling minister; I think she was just smiling. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, as you are aware, we have cooperatives for farmers and these farmers must sell their produce to be able to save so that others can borrow. Since now we have said that SACCOs where money is saved are exempted, I would like to move an amendment that the cooperative societies of farmers should also be exempted from tax.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have not discussed this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I brought it up the other day. For those who grew up long ago, they will know that every cooperative society had a credit and savings fund so that when a farmer sells his produce, if he cannot use all the money he saves it. If he wanted to borrow he would go to the cooperative society.

Operation Wealth Creation, which you are giving seeds, wants farmers to produce and encourages them to produce so that they can have more to save after selling. You are not going to tax the places where they save but you want to tax their produce and yet in the law, a single farmer cannot be taxed after selling milk or coffee. 

When you form a group, you are taxed and yet individually, you can sell goods up to even Shs 1 billion and you are not taxed. I cannot be taxed alone, neither can my brother or mother but if we form a group to get optimal prices to be able to save, why should we be taxed. That is the justification I am giving.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. I would like to bring to your attention two letters; one was written by the President and the other by the Prime Minister to the Minister of Finance. (Interjection)- Don’t you know that I am also in Government, even if I am on this side of the House?

On 23 May 2015, the President wrote to the Prime Minister of Uganda and the reference was “taxation of cooperative societies and unions”. These letters were laid here. On 10 September, the President wrote that taxes on SACCOs and cooperatives should be abolished. Therefore, I support what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying because it agrees with what His Excellency the President had proposed in 2015.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that the President wrote in relation to both SACCOs and cooperatives? We did not discuss this. Chairman, tell us what you think.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The letters hon. Okupa is referring to were some of the documents we used and they formed part of the basis of the recommendations we made. If farmers are involved in the business of saving and lending money as a group, they qualify to be categorised as SACCOs. The objective of this exemption is to enable the SACCO movement to grow and the spirit also captures the cooperative societies.

We need time, and since these tax laws are reviewed on an annual basis, we will need to study and understand whether what hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal is seeking does not amount to business income. It is true that we need to promote financial inclusion and growth especially in rural areas. However, at the same time as a country, we need to enable ourselves grow and we can only grow this country by paying taxes. If a measure is aimed at exempting activities and transactions that amount to business income, the proposal would not be in good spirit. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, the purpose of the amendment by hon. Jalia, as the chairperson of the committee has said, was to promote financial inclusion. The cooperatives have the liberty to form a savings and credit arm of their operations. 

Secondly, given the fact that we have not internalised the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and also given the fact that there are a number of other measures favouring farmers, for example a number of tax exemptions this House has passed on inputs and things like that, I suggest that we hold off this amendment on cooperatives and move on with SACCOs. We can deal with it in the next financial year. I beg to persuade the House that way. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is good but we did not have time either in the committee or plenary to discuss it. I ask the Committee on Finance to continue engaging on this matter. The budget circular will be here in October, we can bring it up again and debate it within the committee and come back to the plenary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for that advice. The people whom I am talking about are those poor ones in the villages. A farmer is never in town but in the village, and that is where we are taking the SACCOs.

There is an Indian who has formed a SACCO on Parliamentary Avenue yet we have just passed a law which exempts his income from taxation. He is a moneylender, but he has formed a SACCO and yet in the new law, such a person is allowed tax exemption. A farmer growing crops in a village, who is collecting and taking his produce to a primary society at Namulesa and Busoga Growers Co-operative Union, is supposed to be taxed yet the one dealing in money is not.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg, as much as you have already advised, that if you would like to do a test, you will find out that one of the reasons why co-operative unions and primary societies have collapsed is because of taxation. Therefore, if we are promoting co-operatives, one of the incentives, which should be given to co-operatives, is exemption from corporation tax –(Interjections)- I am giving you information because I am involved in co-operatives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have not said that we do not like it, but we are saying that we need more time to study, internalise, synthetize and come back to the House. It is just a few months away. Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, we will pass this into law, but we have agreed in this House that the Bujagali agreement was badly done by the Executive although few were involved. I wish the names of those who signed that agreement can go on record so that we put them on the radar. They put up a spirited fight here, but now that Parliament has passed it, they will take all of us to be part of them. 

I recall in 2006, it was the same argument in this House, but in the end - We would be light today, but we are very sceptical again that the same people are involved in this thing. Five years from now, they will come here again and say there was a mistake. We will not take exception to that, but they must be named before honourable members can support this Bill.    

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should do that when we are in the plenary. Let us leave the committee first. I ask the minister to move and then we can make that submission. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we stood over clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We passed it. 

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT)(No.2) BILL, 2017

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2)” be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate those who are clapping after having passed this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances. It was the Speaker who asked a leading question that we give them a waiver for five years, just to strike a compromise, because we had taken over three hours on one clause. However, now that we have passed the law, I would like it to be taken by this House as an assurance; it should be treated as a Government assurance. Whoever is the chairperson now - I guess it is hon. Fungaroo - should take note please. In the next sitting, these issues should be tracked; the Minister should make a clear assurance that the agreement which hon. Okupa raised, which the whole House is crying foul about, should be dealt with extensively. 

We would like the minister to give an assurance before the Speaker that they will consider other sources of funds and loans and bring them before this Parliament within a specified period of time, so that we solve this problem once and for all. As of now, this agreement is valid up to 2033. I would like to request, Madam Speaker, that the minister responsible comes here and makes an assurance. Having the tariffs come down a little bit is not enough. It is like someone who has got an accident at the roadside and he is crying that he needs a bandage and you come with a perfume. 

Therefore, can we get a clear assurance from the minister that he will come up with a major solution to this problem so that we do not cry year in and year out, and we do not exhaust the patience and kindness of the person chairing the House.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to add, honourable minister, that we would like you to come out in clear terms on when exactly the reduced tariffs start, so that people know. Is it in July this year? Yes, that is the reason we have passed it. We would like to know when exactly you are going to reduce on the tariffs so that the country knows, and there should be no passing the buck to the regulation authority, stating that they are the ones responsible for that. Therefore, please go to the microphone and commit. 

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to first thank the minister and the House for passing this agreement. However, there was an issue which hon. Okupa mentioned. Honourable members, honestly, I would like to ask the minister to name the responsible officers who signed this bad agreement; those who negotiated badly and signed this agreement. 

Why are we saying this, Madam Speaker? We are always here and these civil servants keep on negotiating bad or good agreements for the benefit of the people of Uganda. When shall we begin to expose these civil servants who negotiate bad agreements on behalf of the country? 

I would like to ask the minister to come and read the names of those people before us so that the country knows that whatever we are going through was caused by the following people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that those who signed the contract are known. First, we have the former Attorney-General of 2005; I think it was Khiddu Makubuya. We have Erias Kiyembe, who was the Managing Director of Uganda Electricity Transmission Company. We also have a secretary general called Denis L. Wamala. Therefore, Madam Speaker, those ones who signed will be got. 

However, there are also those who were involved in the negotiations and they are here. Madam Speaker, I want to tell you, by the time the contract is signed, there is group which has negotiated, and some of them are here. I know them –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear that when you make an allegation, you have to substantiate it. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just said some of the ministers or Members of Parliament who were involved in the deal are here. Is he in order to make wild allegations without naming the persons involved, because some people could even be suspecting me or the Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know our rules. Can you substantiate or withdraw your statement? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was waiting for that opportunity. As you are aware, there are some companies that emerged from Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) such as Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL), Uganda Electricity Transmission Company and even Umeme, and you know the people who were there. At one time, Simon D’ujanga was the Managing Director of Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) and Irene Muloni was also there. These are the people who have been part of this wrong deal. They were involved in these deals and yet they are the same people in the ministry. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, if you want, I can even bring some private information to you for your own consumption. However, having said that, I want us to come up with a committee of Parliament to scrutinise those people that led us to this loss. The names will be read but there are those people who were really involved. Let them be known; even if they walk around, we shall always remember that they cheated us. 

In India, if you are a thief, when you enter a restaurant, people leave. (Laughter) If you have been involved in theft while you are a minister related to –(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to inform hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi that the Ninth Parliament discussed in detail the power agreement and legality concerning the oil sector. I, therefore, think this House should be privy to that information that was given to Parliament during the debate. It is important that we understand the report that was made available so that we share that information. 

You recall that the minority report, which I was a party to, was accepted and approved in detail. This means that the information that we unearthed is very useful for us. It was not only for the Ninth Parliament but the Tenth Parliament could also benefit from that. I only wish that we knew it before we discussed this particular Bujagali tax waiver. It probably would have led us to defer issues that are not obvious to see but are there. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am just saying that if possible, can the Clerk and the administrators help us to get the information on these people that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking about? I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mama Cecilia, thank you very much and there was- 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am about to conclude. There was also a report by hon. Oboth. It is a very good report and I would like to congratulate my brother, hon. Oboth, for doing us a favour and writing a good report in the Ninth Parliament. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, as the minister is going to give us his assurance, we would like to have a committee. What Mama Cecilia has raised will be referred to as a working document. What hon. Oboth did with his team will also be a working document. This time, we will be able to get those who were involved. As I was saying, we can allow them walk on the streets but when we see them, we pass by, run or salute and say “you did us harm”. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, you have granted five years but you know now we have already spent one year in Parliament. This means that it will be the next Parliament to deal with this issue. I always make predictions; I am not so sure if those who will come back will remember this but I want to tell you the turnover of MPs, which I always tell people about, is 83 to 85 per cent. Members, you sit there but you might be among the 85 per cent –(Laughter)- and that is why I had wanted to move an amendment at that time, but I was not given an opportunity - 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Members, I think let us think about the issue of the committee. We need to identify the areas and terms of reference. We cannot do it now but let us think about it and we shall get back to you. 

Honourable minister, we need a commitment from you for the Hansard. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek the indulgence of Government. We have Tibet Hima Company in Kasese that has been generating its own power but it has closed shop. I just want to seek the indulgence of Government and ask how they are going to actualise this law to bring that company back to operation. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to seek the indulgence of Government and ask that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry Gender, Labour and Social Development give us projections of jobs that will be created so that Ugandans can know that is the commitment of Government. In October 2016, you constituted a select committee to investigate Isimba and Karuma hydro power projects, but they have not done their work up to today. 

I, therefore, want to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker; if this committee could do their work, possibly some of these deficits that the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals are coming here with could possibly be addressed. I would like to seek your guidance on when that select committee will begin its work. 

THE SPEAKER: The committee could not start because at the very same time, our sectoral committee was doing the same work. It would have therefore been futile for the Speaker to send two committees to do the same work. 

Let us hear from the Committee on Natural Resources and then we shall take a decision on whether we need additional work. Minister, give us a commitment; when is the reduction starting and by how much? Put it on record. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, our commitment is on two issues; the first one is that tomorrow, we will bring the names of the team that negotiated Bujagali and also lay on the Table the agreement, which will actually have the names of those that signed it, so that it is a record for Parliament. We also commit that the effect of the measure that we have passed today will start when the law becomes effective. 

THE SPEAKER: It can only start after assent; I think that is what he is saying. When it assented, we shall know and then we shall hold the minister liable.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, where is the chairperson? We expect you to just give the highlights. The figures will be dealt with by the Budget Committee and all of us. I have seen some ministers running away; this is not fair.

6.05
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, in accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and sections 9 (7), 12(1) and 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure, the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports is mandated to, among others:

(i) 	Examine and comment on policy matters affecting Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) under its jurisdiction; and 

(ii) 	Examine critically Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them.  

The committee presents this report for your consideration and adoption in respect to the policy statements and budgetary estimates for the fiscal year 2017/2018, for the following votes under the Ministry of Education and Sports - Madam Speaker, since you are talked about giving highlights, I did not want to read the votes. However, if you so suggest, I could read them.

THE SPEAKER: Are they not uploaded?

MR OPOLOT: Yes, they are uploaded, as per the main report. Here I am presenting an abridged version of the report. We have 18 votes, and I also would like to inform the House that the committee considered the policy statement for two ministries; Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. By design, they both fall under one ministerial policy statement. The details are scheduled in the detailed report, but I would like to quickly go through some key issues. 

The budget estimate for the education sector for Financial Year 2017/2018 is Shs 2.771 trillion, out of the national budget of Shs 28.99 trillion. This represents 9.56 per cent allocation to the education sector.

Observation and Recommendations 

The following are the critical observations and recommendations: 

1. 	The committee observed that there is a persistent delay in the payment of salaries to the various staff, be it in universities, primary schools, the ministry headquarters and also in local governments. The committee observes that the delay in the payment of salaries, especially of teachers, has always caused endless unrest. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always prioritise the wage recurrent in its release of funds to the Ministry of Education and Sports, and to ensure that the staff salaries are cleared. Further, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that teachers are paid by the 28th of every month as per the Government policy on payment of salaries.

2. 	Absence of a National Early Childhood Education Policy 

The committee observed that the ministry has no effective institutional mechanism for coordinating and guiding early childhood development, neither is there a policy on early childhood development, a draft having been made in 2007 and shelved. 

The committee recommends that ministry establishes the necessary institutional and policy framework to govern early childhood education and development, including coordination and uniformity of curriculum. The local governments’ education committees should be equipped with the necessary tools to carry out effective supervision and oversight as actors in this regard.

3. 	Absence of a Strategic Plan 

The committee observed that the ministry is operating without a strategic plan and only intends to engage a consultant to come up with one. The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry uses its internal human resources to develop a strategic plan as soon as possible, to provide a strategic direction to the sector. Engaging a consultant would now mean an outflow of the scarce resources.

4. 	Increasing Arrears 

The committee is concerned that contrary to section 21 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the sector’s domestic arrears are projected to double from Shs 5.22 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017 to Shs 11 billion in Financial Year 2017/2018. The ministry has indicated that this is as a result of debts owed to various examination boards, including the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examination Board, Uganda Allied Health Examination Board, among others. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry Works and Transport and the Ministry of Finance clear the arrears and strictly adhere to the law in regard to commitment control.

The committee further observes further that the ministry had very high unspent balances as follows:
    a) Skills development, Shs 37.8 billon
    b) Higher education, Shs 18.04 billion
    c) Quality standards, Shs 9.13 billion

A number of these unspent balances were already in the ministry despite the domestic arrears. 

The committee recommends that the ministry streamlines its procurement processes and strengthens the technical supervisory function for work as most of these absorption delays are related to construction and purchases of instructional materials, equipment and machinery. 

In addition, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to release funds to the ministry in a timely manner in order not to constrain procurement processes and implementation of planned activities. This can be done by releasing funds normally at the end of the financial year, which cannot be utilised, since most of these entities fear to make commitments unless they have been given the money.

5. 	The National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) 

The committee realises that NCHE is indebted to the tune of Shs 2 billion, which is owed to a contractor. This indebtedness arises despite the fact that this is money that was budgeted for and the ministry was committed to the release. It was never released, and this is therefore an outstanding debt. The committee observed also that NCHE, with its mandate to ensure provision of quality and relevant higher education was grossly underfunded, resulting to failure to achieve its core mandate of monitoring and regulating institutions of higher learning. 

The staffing levels at the NCHE stands at only 35 per cent of the required establishment. 

The Higher Education Students Financing Board

The committee observes that the ministry has not provided funds for the students’ loans under the Higher Education Students Financing Act. In addition, the ministry has not provided the necessary resources meant for higher education students’ financing in a single basket under the management of the Higher Education Students Financing Board.

Madam speaker, the law on higher education financing provides that all scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall vest in the board according to section 42 of the Higher Education Financing Act

The committee recommends that all resources allocated to the higher education students financing, including the 4,000 -government sponsorship at universities and the over 6,000 government sponsorships at tertiary institutions, the State House scholarships and bilateral aid/scholarships be sent to the Higher Education Students Financing Board for proper management and transparency.

In addition, the committee recommends that all government funds meant for higher education students’ financing should be provided to students’ on loans basis because all students are Ugandans and should be treated the same to avoid creating privileges based on a social divide of who can afford the best schools, to be able to get best grades to get government scholarships.

The committee further recommends that the budget for the Ministry be reallocated from within the ceiling to provide at least Shs 5 billion to be given out as loans to new recruits in the new academic year.

General Observations and Recommendations on Universities

Inadequate staffing at universities

The committee observed that in all public universities, the staffing levels are below 50 per cent. 

The committee recommends that Government considers waiving the ban on staff recruitment in public universities, or at least for essential academic and key support staff to enable universities recruit staff. 

Inadequate Funding for Government sponsored students

During this review, the committee observed some discrepancies between university needs and the actual resources availed to them to facilitate Government sponsored students. For instance, they receive only Shs 4,000 per day per student for meals (Breakfast, lunch and supper). 

In addition, this financial year, the budget cuts across ministries have encroached on living out allowances for government-sponsored students. The committee is concerned that this is a recipe for student strikes. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance reinstate the living out allowances that were affected by the budget cuts across all public universities.  

Dilapidated Infrastructure

The committee further observes that most of the infrastructure in public universities especially halls of residences and road networks are dilapidated. These universities lack resources to carry out renovations. For example, part of the Lumumba Hall at Makerere University has not been in use for over eight years now for this reason. 

The committee recommends that Government should increase development budgets for universities for renovation of the current crumbling infrastructure. Universities could also be encouraged to acquire Government guaranteed loans for infrastructure development activities.  

Further, universities should explore the possibility of engaging private investors in Public Private Partnerships for the construction and management of halls of residence. 

Wage bill of Universities

The committee observes that while Government has enhanced wages for university staff, it has not taken up the full burden of paying the staff salaries. Universities have to pay 30 per cent of the wage bill from their non-tax revenues. This is affected by the slow realization of fees payments by students.

The committee recommends that the ministry takes over the entire wage bill of public universities to free Non Tax Revenue (NTR) for other development activities at universities.

Improper consideration of NSSF on budget

The committee noted that NSSF funds constitute a huge part of the non-wage of universities budgets and yet it is a statutory payment that should be budgeted for under the wage component. This creates a wrong impression about the fund available for universities for activities under wage components.

The committee recommends that NSSF payments should be removed from non-wage and budgeted for under the wage component of universities’ budget because it is a statutory payment.

Inadequate funds for Research

The committee observes that there is inadequate allocation to research and development in all universities and yet the core mandate of universities is to carry out research. 

The committee recommends that Government allocates more funding towards research and development in universities to build capacity on lecturers and increase on the stock of professors in the academia.

Support to Private universities at the expense of Public Universities

The committee further observes with concern that the ministry has allocated Shs 3.8 billion only towards facilitation to private students to Kisubi University and support to four other private universities at the expense of the underfunding to Public universities. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 3.8 billion should be reallocated to cater for other unfunded priorities within the sector as indicated in the main document if you can follow from the iPad.

Busitema University

The failing multi-campus model 

The committee observes that Busitema is a multi-campus university with six campuses in Busitema, Namasagali, Mbale, Nagongera, Arapai and Pallisa. Each campus is specialized in a different field of study increasing demand for staff in the different specialties. 

The university is so constrained with limited resources being distributed among the different campuses. This financial year, for instance, the university has a decrease in their budget while the other universities have a slight increase. 

The committee recommends that Busitema should be considered for additional funding for development. In addition, the ministry should rethink the multi-campus model in favour of strengthening the existing institution before giving it responsibilities to establish and run additional campuses elsewhere. The committee is concerned that the multi-campus model is not a sustainable approach given the limited resources available to these universities.

Makerere University

The committee is concerned about the dental training school.
The committee observes that the appalling situation in the dental training department at the College of Health Sciences is a point of concern. This school is supposed to be closed as per the recommendation of the East African Medical Dental Association.

The second joint East African Community Partner States Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council/ Board raised a number of issues including inadequate staffing, inadequate infrastructure, inadequate laboratory facilities, inadequate equipment and inadequate training materials.

The board observed that the department of dental training had no facilities to afford the course and recommended improvements, without which, it would be recommended for closure. 

The committee recommends that there should be a reallocation from within the budget of Makerere University to a tune of Shs 3 billion from output class (282 – miscellaneous and other expenses) towards the urgent revamping of the department of dentistry in the college of health sciences. 

In the medium term, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funds towards the school of dentistry, which is the only one providing training in dentistry.

Soroti University – their indebtedness before opening

The committee observes that Government owes contractors for the construction of buildings at the university to a tune of Shs 8 billion. As a result, the construction works have stalled and are less likely to be complete in time for the university to open, yet staff are already being paid and the university should have opened last year. 

The committee recommends that the contractors be paid the outstanding balance to enable the completion of the building in time for the university to open this academic year. To address some of these, the committee has proposed intra-sectoral reallocations within the ministry’s budget.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports be approved as per table 8 in the main report and as per the observations, recommendations as well as the proposed intra-sectorial reallocations.

Madam Speaker, like I said, the budget for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is also part of the same ministerial policy statement. I, therefore, would like to quickly go through our report on that. This captures Vote 110 – Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST)

The sectoral budget estimate for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is on page 74 of the report. The ministry’s budget for the financial year 2017/2018 is Shs 66.85 billion, which is 0.23 per cent of the national budget.

The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation has an allocation of Shs 42.53 billion, Uganda National Council of Science and Technology has an allocation of Shs 10.32bn while the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has a budget of Shs 13.99 billion.

Operationalising the National Research and Innovation Fund

The committee observed that Shs 35 billion has been allocated to the ministry in the financial year 2017/2018 towards the Research and Innovation Fund. However, the ministry has not yet finalised with the guidelines for operationalisation of the fund.

The committee recommends that the ministry expeditiously develops the relevant guidelines for the innovation fund to enable research groups, individuals and organisations across the country access the funds that are intended to go a long way in advancing science, technology and innovation.

Amendment of Uganda National Council of Science and Technology and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute Acts

The committee observes that the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, which was misplaced in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as the UIRI under the ministries of tourism and trade are now under the science, technology and innovation sector. 

However, there is need to amend the legal frameworks creating Uganda National Council for Science and Technology and Uganda Industrial Research Institute to streamline their operations under the science, technology and innovation sector.

The committee recommends that in order to attain coherence among the sector institutions, science, technology and innovation policy and regulatory framework should be urgently reviewed to streamline operations of all the entities and ensure that the ministry provides policy guidance and direction.

Inadequate funding

The committee noted that the ministry was not allocated any development budget for the financial year 2017/2018 despite submitting a proposed development budget of Shs 11.172 billion. The committee is concerned that the ministry will not carry out the important development activities, including acquisition of office accommodation and start-up equipment. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails the Shs 11.172 billion as development budget to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to allow it kick-start its activities next financial year.

Vote status for UNCST

The committee observed that UNCST is a subvention under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation vote (Vote 023). In order for the council to work independently and effectively there is need to grant it a vote status. The committee further observes that UNCST collects NTR, but cannot utilise it at source despite its gross underfunding. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development grants UNCST a vote status like UIRI under the science, technology and innovation sector. In the meantime, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should authorise UNCST to use its NTR at source like universities.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House approves the budget of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovations as indicated in table 8, taking into consideration the observations and recommendations made by the committee.  I beg to move and thank you.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the signed report of the committee and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the chairperson and members of the Committee on Education and Sports. Let us just have a few comments because there are many reports. There were those I had indicated hon. Olanya, Atkins - Let us start with those ones then I come this side.

6.34
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports for the wonderful report. I would like to start by seeking clarification from the committee chairperson. On page 27, he mentioned clearly that Shs 3.8 billion was allocated to support students in private universities. In your recommendation, you have said that the Shs 3.8 billion should be reallocated to Government students.

I would like us to note that not all students in private universities are citizens of Uganda; some of the students in private universities are citizens while others are not. Therefore, support must be given equally to them. Why do you recommend that Shs 3.8 billion be reallocated to Government universities? I would like to seek clarification on that.

Secondly, I would like to thank the chairman for raising the issue of automatic promotion. Automatic promotion has killed the quality of primary education. Many schools under Universal Secondary Education are complaining about this policy. How can you say that you will let a child who failed in primary one to be promoted automatically to P.2 or those that fail P.6 are promoted automatically to P.7? 

I feel that this policy is very irrelevant. From your recommendation, you have said that the policy should be reviewed. I think that the policy should be eradicated so that the quality of primary education is seen. 

Thirdly, you talked about schools. The Government promised that secondary schools must be constructed in all sub counties and town councils. As I talk, I have not seen any budget for the construction of secondary schools in those sub counties that do not have them. For example, Amuru Town Council and Amuru sub county do not have secondary schools. There are very many sub counties without secondary schools but I have not seen anything on that.

Fourthly, I am very grateful that you have recommended that State House scholarships be run by the board. I think this is a very wise decision because we do not understand the selection of students for State House scholarships. If you visited certain statutory universities, you will hear that State House is sponsoring either 30 or 70 students in Makerere University. However, you will not understand how these students were selected. This scholarship scheme had a lot of irregularities. 

Therefore, I am very grateful that you recommended that State House scholarships must go through the board –(Member timed out.)

6.37
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairman and your committee members for that great job.

Madam Speaker, we are where we are as a country because we have not paid particular attention to higher education. I will restrict my talk, in the interest of time, to higher education.

Madam Speaker, universities play six fundamental roles. I am happy that the minister in charge of higher education is right here. The first thing is that universities serve as knowledge banks to store vital knowledge both for the existing and future generations. 

The second thing is that universities are known to generate new marriage; marriage that is supposed to solve conflicts in emerging problems. They call that research. 

Thirdly, universities circulate or disperse knowledge from a point of higher concentration to lower concentration. They call that dissemination of knowledge. 

Fourthly, universities transmit knowledge from one generation to another. They call that education and training. 

Madam Speaker, every time we hear the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and Government talking about figures. We are not filling these figures in our constituencies for one reason; that as a country, we are focused on economic goals. It is only universities that will help this county to translate economic goals to economic development or in other words, looking at quality of life.  

I think this country should be encouraged to address the public and private or university and private partnership. There is a ground breaking system called knowledge partnerships and I am very sure that the minister is aware of that.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude my submission, it is very sad to recognise a Government giving a university like Makerere, which supported a hub, a nucleus in knowledge, a paltry Shs 40 million to support the research. The minister is a PhD holder and he is fully aware that Shs 40 million cannot even support a Masters’ student. It is a pity and I think this House should be encouraged to implore Government to fund and increase support for universities, particularly Makerere University.

Lastly, you are aware that every other time we have strikes in Makerere University and funding is the – (Member timed out.)

6.42
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports and his members for a very good report.

Madam Speaker, as I support his move to request the House to pass the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports, I have a few issues that need clarification, especially from the minister and possibly from the chairperson of the committee.

Madam Speaker, I wonder if the minister knows that learning is not taking place in most Government schools across the country. We are pretending that learning is taking place – Actually, the children of most Ugandans are suffering in primary and secondary schools and tertiary institutions owned by the Government. Why do I say this? 

Madam Speaker, the biggest problem that the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to solve, which I want the minister to clarify – because if there is need for this House to do something special so that this matter is ironed out for good, we would really be happy that our children will learn. 

The biggest problem is understaffing. Most of our Government schools have staffing levels below 50 per cent. You wonder about a school having only four teachers with over 1,000 pupils. This is across the country with the exception of Government schools in the central region. This is disadvantaging our children who are learning in village schools. That is why you see an influx of children coming to look for better primary schools in the central region because the services are better. 

As an example, most of the secondary schools in my district have staffing levels below 20 per cent. Lira Palwo SS, with a population of over 700 students, has just eight teachers and you know how many subjects are in a secondary school. How do eight teachers man a secondary school with a population of over 700 students?

Therefore, this matter must be sorted out. We have to be honest because by –(Member timed out.)

6.45
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report and I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute. 

First of all, I am concerned that a very powerful ministry does not have a strategic plan. It is there in the report and it is a big concern. There are very powerful people in the ministry like directors and others with Masters’ degrees and PhDs but without a strategic plan. That is my concern.

Secondly, the inadequate funding for educational activities in this country is a problem. The report has clearly stated that there is inadequate funding for research. I have been a lecturer for 17 years in Kumi University. When you talk about quality, you cannot leave out research and this is where we have a problem in Uganda. For example, there is a problem with funding for innovation. Our research institutions here also have a problem. That is why I am concerned, Madam Speaker.

Thirdly, I am also shocked and disturbed that we have a National Council for Higher Education in Uganda. Every student pursuing course in higher education pays Shs 20,000 and approving a programme costs Shs 10 million. Can you imagine that every university in this country is paying Shs 10 million per programme? How many programmes do they pay for at the National Council for Higher Education? However, at the same time, there are quack doctors and nurses in this country treating people. The way they treat people is very funny and that is why many people are dying. That is why I have a concern. 

Madam Speaker, there is also the issue of Soroti University. The university has a debt of Shs 8 billion and yet it is incomplete. I visited the university a month ago. The place is good but unfortunately, it is incomplete. Now, there is a debt of Shs 8 billion. My view is that this Parliament and Government should put more money in this university so that it starts this year. 

Madam Speaker, the other thing is about staffing. I would like to give you a simple example that I raised here. Kobwin Seed Senior Secondary School in Ngora is having - (Member timed out.)

6.48
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports for the report. I also observed the following things that need some improvement. 

One of the issues that have been spoken about is recruitment of teachers. At one time, I talked to the Prime Minister about science subjects, which are poorly performed especially in rural schools. Honourable minister, if you do not do something about this matter, sponsorship of students who qualify for science courses at the university will always go to children from well-to-do families and we will leave out children who come from poor ones. This is a very serious issue that Government should think about.

Secondly, aspects of the student’s loan scheme are a problem. As leaders, we are asking ourselves how our children can access the loan scheme. Where do we get it from? This is not known to our local governments. I think this should be taken down to the ground so that the local governments can inform parents on how to access the loan scheme for their children. 

In addition, university branches in most areas are found at regional levels and yet some of the parents cannot afford bringing their children to universities in Kampala. Is the minister thinking about introducing some branches in areas, which do not have access to tertiary education? 

Government outlawed vocational education in all sub-counties in the country but you find that there are some districts, which do not have even a single vocational institution. What plan does the ministry have about this? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall try to make sure that many people speak on many subjects. Therefore, if you miss to speak on education, you can speak on something else.

6.50
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I also have the following observations.

Madam Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament, I chaired the Committee on Science and Technology and we fought very hard to have the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Madam Speaker, one of the core areas we were looking at was linking research to development in this country. In this country, we have a lot of research lying idle in universities and other institutions but we are not connecting them to solving the problems in this country. Therefore, it is a pertinent issue that the ministry and the committee should direct us on how we can use the research we are generating to solve our problems.

The issue of innovation centres, linking research to industry, connecting our researchers to the industries in the country, job mapping and encouraging technical education - Madam Speaker, I am very proud that I studied technical education and I cannot disturb anybody for a job because I have my skills. However, in this country, people are just studying to get degrees and moreover, the mind-set is very low and the skills are not there. When we get Chinese and Indians doing jobs, we start quarrelling but we do not have what to offer. Even in business, we are failing because of our mind-set and orientation. 
 
Therefore, we need a comprehensive policy and direction on this issue so that we can help our country to have skills to link them with what we produce in agriculture, innovation, forestry and in other activities. All these problems you see will be solved by science and technology and technical education.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think this is the direction we must take. The ministry and the committee should give us that direction clearly so that we have a work plan in the Vision 2040 and in the National Development Plan, which shows what the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is going to do to help the Ministry of Education and Sports actualise these loopholes that we have had for a long time. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Kabagyenyi comes, I would like to add my voice to what hon. Ngabirano has said. We were really excited when the ministry was created and the minister appointed. However, there is not much being put there. 

I was invited to the College of Art and Design in Makerere. Those young people are really doing great things at the university but when they finish showing you their work, they do not know what to do or where to go. 

When we were in the United Arabs Emirates, the Minister in charge of the Presidency told us that they have a very efficient service delivery monitoring system designed by their university students. That is what the Government gets from their children. Now, just at a punch of a button, they can know who has no water or food. The Prime Minister is not here but I do not know what we can do about innovation. I do not know how we can help because it is the future.

6.54
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the Chairperson and the entire Committee on Education and Sports for a good report. My contribution is on the students’ loan scheme. 

Last week in the press and on TV, there was a presentation by Ministry of Education and Sports that there are no funds to roll out the student’s loan scheme for the new students.

Madam Speaker, you realise that this is the only opportunity for students who have not performed very well for Government sponsorship but who would wish to join university on private sponsorship. These are disadvantaged students and this has been their only hope.

We would like the Ministry of Education and Sports to clarify on this and possibly to give us hope because students are calling us. In my district, the situation is alarming. We would like an assurance that these funds will be provided as it has been indicated in the report so that we have what to tell our people. I beg to submit.

6.55
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was happy when you talked about the delayed salaries of the primary teachers. However, there is a new scenario, which has developed in the recent past whereby in rural areas, the teachers are getting salaries in shifts. I do not know whether honourable members are aware of this problem. If this month maybe 200 teachers have got salary, in the next month you find that around 50 teachers have missed. The committee has not realised this and I thought it prudent to put it across so that we are able to look into that problem.

I would also like to address the issue of pupil teacher ratio. In Bulambuli, we have a very serious challenge whereby in a classroom you find a teacher teaching 200 pupils. I am saying this out of experience. Like I have always said, I have been at a local level as the Chairman LCIII and I have always been looking for a chance to present this problem to the Floor of Parliament. It is a serious problem and sincerely, pupils in rural areas are not studying. The teachers are keeping them because there is no way a professional teacher can teach 200 pupils. Moreover these young children are very playful.

Lastly, I would like to suggest that Government also interests itself in the districts, which are hard to reach such as mountainous and island districts. That is why there are very high failure levels in those rural hard to reach areas. 

I have to put this on record; I am preparing a motion to present on the Floor of Parliament about the poor performance of rural districts, which suffer year in, year out. I am compiling a report and very soon, I am going to present that report on the Floor of Parliament. Maybe in one way or the other, the Ministry of Education and Sports can come up with a better way of handling rural schools. 

I studied in a rural area and I have to confess that I would be the best Member of Parliament because people know that I am a talkative Member of Parliament down there. However, because we are using English, which is a foreign language, how do you express yourself and put serious issues across? In one way or the other, you can be bogged down and keep quiet. You cannot talk Lumasaba here. Therefore, it is a very big challenge. I will stop because of time but – okay, thank you very much.

6.59
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the good report. I have a few remarks that I would like to make about this report. 

You know that a leader is one who will look at today, tomorrow and the years to come. Therefore, as we debate, our focus should be 10, 20 or 50 years from today. The foundation of what we are debating is very critical. Who has not realised that indeed, our education background or foundation is shaken? We need to begin from there.

Madam Speaker, we have commissions, policies and plans that have been put in place over a period of time. However, the reason why these have been put there is because education was not progressing in the right direction. For example, we have the Ssempebwa Commission report, the White Paper and policies like the UPE policy. We also have the Education Standard Investment Plan and all these should have guided us to ensure that we have a firm background.

However, we all realise that we are not working. What do we do? The time is now for us to have another review of specifically, the primary education of this country. I would like that this time round we make a review, and even put a provision for this in the budget. We appreciate the UPE policy and programme but how best do we review it to make it relevant to the education that we desire even before we reach the higher education results –(Interjection)

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that let us not be part of that bad history where we will be part of the list that we were in positions of responsibility but the entire generation –(Member timed out.)

7.02
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairman of the education committee for your report and recommendations. 

Before I can make my comments, I would like to appreciate a few things that have been highlighted in the discussion of this report; issues of staff ceilings, scholarships and student teacher ratios. I think these are cardinal issues that I would like to appreciate.

Other than that, I think there is the question of resuming the skills issue that has been raised here. Our biggest problem, which has become a big waste, is that our students focus on CVs, PhDs, Masters’ degrees, among other things, as opposed to resumes that focus on skills. I think there is need to put money in that direction to reform and overhaul the system because that will help a lot in respect of production.

The other issue that is pertinent to my constituency is the issue of parent schools. I have ten subcounties in my constituency. The place is huge and many parents have formed what they call a parent school. These lists have been presented to the ministry and I am told they are unfunded priorities. There is need to put money in this area.

The other matter is about affirmative action. I know we have talked of vocational schools and scholarships. We have had war in the north and going in the campaigns, many youth have missed the opportunity to study. I think there is need, whether through scholarships or vocational schools, to prioritise this so that we do not have a natural disaster. We are in a serious crisis of parents who have no future to take care of their children. 

Finally, in the interest of time, is the question of campuses. Given the geographical distance, among other things, there is a tendency to concentrate universities in cities or in certain locations or Government programmes generally in one area. If you are in the north, it is either Gulu - We were almost in Karamoja area and yet not in Karamoja. Many times we find ourselves left out. There is need to have campuses in those areas and give opportunity to our people. Thank you. 

7.05
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for the good work. However, I would have been happy if, in your report, you captured UNEB. I do not know whether UNEB falls under the Ministry of Education and Sports or it is not supposed to be supervised by Ministry of Education and Sports. 

UNEB has turned out to be a business entity in Uganda. As we speak, poor people cannot afford to register and sit for exams. A primary pupil pays Shs 50,000 and a secondary student pays Shs 185,000 as examination fees and these are sons and daughters of peasants.

Therefore, I wish to ask the minister, who regulates this money? Honestly, I have a feeling that the issue of UNEB should be cleared before we pass this budget. This money is not affordable for poor peasants unless you want only the children of the rich to access education and the children of the poor are left out. 

Finally –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Mbwatekamwa. You have raised a very big point. Why should peasant children pay examination fees and yet we have the Ministry of Education and Sports? Why don’t we appropriate money here and give it to UNEB so that every student or pupil who is in S.4, S.6 or P.7 just sits and does the exams? 

Many children have dropped out because after studying for four years, at the last minute they cannot raise Shs 180,000 for UNEB examinations. This is despite the fact that to become an LC I chairman nowadays, you must have reached senior four.

MS OKETAYOT: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to add onto what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said is that in 2009, a student from Pajule College School, Pader District committed suicide because he failed to raise Shs 4,000 to complete his registration for examinations. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, this money I have mentioned excludes other charges because we are supposed to fill forms online. Online registration in villages where there is no internet means that you have to pay about Shs 15,000 per child to register online.

In addition, the centres where our children sit from also have certain charges. One has to pay for photos, which they are saying must be submitted electronically. At the end of it all, you find a primary school pupil paying over Shs 100,000. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, we need to put the record clear. The examination fee that my colleague is talking about does not apply to pupils and students under UPE or USE. It is only pupils and students who are not under UPE or USE who are paying the examination fees. As a country, currently we have very few students who are under non-UPE or non-USE. Therefore, we need to put the record straight. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the Government pays for them? 

MR OLANYA: Yes. Government pays for all the students who are under UPE and USE. They do not pay UNEB fees.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

7.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to add my voice to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report and – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure, Madam Speaker. I am not stopping the Minister of Health. The procedural issue I am raising is that because education is very expensive in towns, there are small private schools, which are coming up and supporting village children. However, they do not get access to UPE or USE.

Madam Speaker, where do those who cannot access UPE or USE benefit from? They are all Ugandans but they have not managed to join a Government school, which is providing USE or UPE. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we amend the report to say that any Ugandan child who is going to sit any exam should be paid for by the Government? 

THE SPEAKER: Have you worked out the cost? Anyway, the minister will tell us. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. 

Whereas we agree with the observation of the committee about the issue of inadequate funds for research, the committee also rightly mentioned the research funds in the universities that come through grants. Our universities, be it Government or private, write research grants and a lot of research grants are passed through the universities. These grants are not captured in this budget. Some of them are recurrent and some are for five years.

Much as we said that research funds allocated from the Government are inadequate, the money that goes to these universities for doing research is quite a lot. I speak from an informed point of view because I have been one of the – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson of the committee wants to say something. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas the minister is saying that a lot of money goes to universities for research, I would like to report that in the last financial year, out of almost Shs 190 billion that was supposed to be given, less than 30 per cent was given and yet most of the universities are funded by development partners who even dictate on what they are supposed to research on. Therefore, Government should put in more money so that they do the research that is relevant to our country.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that the funds that come from external sponsors is not captured at all in the Budget and for that matter, it is a bit difficult to plan when the external - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you honourable for giving way. I would like to get clarification because I know that Government’s reporting on budget requires that every money that is channelled to institutions of Government like universities and so on is supposed to be recorded. Therefore, when they report to us in the ministerial policy statement, there is always Government of Uganda and non-government of Uganda funds. Are you implying that research departments are so special that they do not disclose to Parliament or to Government some other monies that they receive like the grants you are talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Also in the Public Finance Management Act, I think we have tightened the sources; they must all be appropriated by this House. So, I do not know whether those grants are really able –

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and that is what I was raising so that probably the chair can tell us whether we capture all those sources of money.

The second issue I would like to raise – and it is still tied to that - is about training. In the report, it is realised some of the training which has been here was sponsored like masters’ programme, which is tied to Government resources but those other trainings which are tied to external resources like from the research funding, have not been captured, which is the same thing and probably the chair will tell us.

Anyway, finally, I would like to thank the committee for the pre-university entry exams, which they have noted. My colleague said that some of the doctors and medical professionals are not well trained and the quality has gone down. Probably, I would also like to urge that there could be need for having pre-entry exams for medical schools to help us to improve the quality. I thank you.

17.17
MR JOEL SSEBIKAALI (NRM, Ntwetwe County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee that made a report on education. My concern is about Mulago Medical School. I am a member of the Health Committee and we visited Mulago Medical School. However, when they were making a report they only singled out the dental school leaving out the rest of the departments like the ones of radiology and medical officers. 

This was important because when we asked the Director of Mulago Medical School why they take few numbers of students, he said that Mulago Medical School was built in 1960s and it could accommodate only 60 medical students, but that presently Mulago has more than 3,600 medical students. So, he told us that there is no way he can accommodate more students. He further said that he needed an extension - and the building itself is dilapidated and it is in a bad situation.
 
However, when they singled out the dental school, I imagined about the other ones like the radiology, among other departments of Mulago.

Another concern is about regional referral hospitals because we know that education considers even health. They are saying that medical officers are insufficiently trained, but when we conducted a survey, all regional referral hospitals are insufficiently staffed. For example, Jinja Regional Referral Hospital, which is supposed to have 18 specialists, has got only four specialists. You can image that the junior medical officers train in these institutions. Where do you think they will acquire the necessary knowledge and skills to enable them serve in our public hospitals? I think that as they report even these components should be reported on since they fall under education and sports.

Madam Speaker, one of the honourable members raised an issue about the salary of teachers in secondary schools. I am sorry to inform the minister that money for secondary school teachers is got, the district education officer –(Member timed out.)

7.21
MR CHEKAMONDO KULANY (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for their report. However, there are a few things I have noted. 

One is the quality of education; since primary education was decentralized, there is a very big gap. In the first place, the recruitment of teachers is a problem. You may find that there is a very good qualified teacher, but when they are recruiting because of decentralization, if such a teacher is not known to the person who is recruiting, they will not get that job. So, you find a good teacher staying back and somebody who failed is recruited into the service. 

Madam Speaker, another area of concern is about salary. When you consider the salary scale of the primary teachers, it is decentralized at the district. You find that if, for example, this month teachers get their salaries, the following month it will not be there. The payslip is given but the money will not be in their accounts. The teachers move up and down in the district trying to look for their salaries.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when you compare the education during that time when it was centralised - for me I was taught by different teachers in the village in Kapchorwa. My head teacher was from Busoga, another from Bugisu, Teso and Tororo and I performed very well because I was the best in the whole district.
 
However, when you compare that time to today - the teacher is born in Kapchorwa, goes to school at Kapchorwa Primary School, Kapchorwa Secondary School and Kapchorwa Teachers Training College. He is again posted to Kapchorwa Primary School where he has a home, children and a garden to attend to. So, Madam Speaker, teachers cannot concentrate and perform well when near their home areas because they have so many things to attend to. Because of such, I suggest that education should be centralised again. 

Secondly, I do not know whether the Minister of Health is aware that the quality of nurses and medical officers has deteriorated. Madam Speaker, I did my research on medical officers and found out that they had transferred the training of medical staff to education. 

In education, if a teacher does not have a paper for practical sessions they can improvise, but in health, it is difficult to improvise. If an injection is supposed to be injected on the skin, one cannot do it on the –(Member timed out.)

7.24
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for their report. 

On the issue of the staffing levels, there are districts in this country with very low staffing levels and Amudat is one of them. This House has been referring to Amudat in relation to issues of low staffing levels where it has been reported to be having only 23 per cent of the required staffing levels. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I call upon the Minister of Education and Sports to link up with the Minister of Public Service so that districts with very low staffing levels can have those gaps covered. 

In Amudat District, Madam Speaker, it is not only the teachers that are few but also in the education department of the district we have only one officer who is the District Education Officer (DEO); works as the district inspector of schools as well as the sports officer. How do you expect such a person to perform? 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of delayed salaries for the teachers, I think this is very unfair. Teachers have a lot of work, for example, they lesson plan on a daily basis in addition to making work schemes. But they also have to mark learners’ work and are supposed to do it that very day so that the learners can have their books for the following day. Therefore, these teachers do not have time to do other things to make ends to meet.

Finally, there is delayed payment of allowances for the Government-sponsored students. I would like to say that these students suffer a lot, especially when it comes to their accommodation allowance. Due to the delays, the landlords and landladies sometimes force these learners to move up and down trying to look for this money and in the process, they miss a lot and cannot concentrate. Now what quality do we expect from these learners?

Honourable minister, through you, Madam Speaker, there is need for timely payments for allowances so that they can concentrate and we get quality students for the outside world. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I indicated earlier that we shall have a limited debate so since 50 Members have contributed I now want to invite the minister, if he has any responses, to make them.  

7.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John C. Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for a job well-done and also thank the Members for the issues they have raised that have beefed up the committee’s report. 

Madam Speaker, it is true we have some challenges but quite a lot is being done. Probably in the interest of time and in the future, I will have to come back and highlight a few, which I might not be able to talk about this evening. 

Nevertheless, I think there is some information that the Members of Parliament do not know yet and they should have it on their fingertips. When you read that policy statement, for example, a lot is said about Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB). Government pays UNEB fees for the poor students from primary, secondary and even at the higher level. Therefore, under the student loan scheme, examination fees are paid. 

Therefore, when a Member of Parliament stands on the Floor and says that the poor people are not catered for, I think –(Interruption) 

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that what the ministry lacks is inspection at all levels. The truth of the matter is that there are some schools that ask parents to pay money for examination. I can come to your office and give you examples. So, maybe you need to carry out a lot of inspection and collect feedback from the ground. That will help the ministry. I want to thank you. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, when the minister talked about the poor students in the country, I really got concerned about what is happening now. If you asked Members of Parliament now about where they take their children for school, you will realise that none of them actually sends their children to Government schools. 

Are you saying you are creating a class of education in the country to a level that the poor people should be studying in the poor schools? Should those who are better off be doing better yet at the end of the day, those studying in good schools are the ones going to go to good secondary schools and further get the Government scholarships in the university? Are you aware of the fact that the poor person whose child goes to a poor school will end up in poor secondary school and thereafter even fail to access that said Government loan because they studied in local and poor schools? 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable minister, as you respond to these issues, I would want you to point to this: when somebody studies from P1 to P7, it is obvious that this person should sit for PLE. If somebody goes to S4, we expect that person to sit for UCE. 

Now, I would like you to clearly explain to us because I know that Government is indeed paying for these pupils’ at O’level and A’ level. However, how much does Government pay for them for the exams? Is Government paying an exam fee of Shs 185,000 for those in secondary schools – because exams should be the same and so why somebody should be charged an exam fee of Shs 185,000 while Government is probably only paying Shs 20,000? Could you clarify that to us?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you for the information. The fact is: Government pays examination fees for all Universal Primary Education schools, where the children of the poor go –(Interjection)– the whole amount as reflected in the report. 

Madam Speaker, where some headmasters or –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a point which needs to be corrected here. I wonder whether the minister is really in order to get swayed by members. For example, when Members were asking how much money is paid by Government towards examination fees - is it Shs 20,000 which you pay or it is Shs 185,000 as other students pay? So, is it in order for him to get an answer from the chorus from Members of Parliament like what hon. Col. Felix Kulayigye said? How much money do you pay for these children?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister is a very experienced teacher. I think he got the answer from his head. Please proceed. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. Colleagues, allow me to give you information. I know there are some head teachers, who have taken advantage of the situation and are cheating Ugandans. If you got this information, I would expect you to work with us to bring such people to book so that we put the system right. What I am telling you is that Government is paying a uniform figure for all the primary seven children, who are in UPE schools. All those schools where children are being asked to pay should be brought to my attention and we put the situation right. 

Secondly, and this is very useful information, I told you that UNEB comes out with a circular detailing all the fees for particular examinations –(Interruption) 

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I did my PLE in 1999 and already by then, there was UPE. I remember I did not pay any fees for examination so Government catered for everything as the minister has said. 

THE SPEAKER: So you just walked in and did your exams? 

DR MUYINGO: Colleagues, help me. If you know of a UPE school that is charging UNEB fees, draw it to my attention. I will force that school to refund that money. The same applies to secondary under USE and so it is with UPOLET, that is at a higher level and so it is with the loan scheme. We have even those that are Government sponsored at the university. There are some people that are not trustworthy. If we don’t work together, this country will not achieve its objectives. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about our challenges. We have challenges with funding. Our docket is extremely underfunded. When you read that ministerial policy statement, you will see quite a lot about it, the issue of understaffing is real, at all levels. That is the reason why we are always coming here to ask for more funding.

Somebody talked about Automatic Promotion Policy. We have started reviewing the White Policy, which has been our main policy and in this review, all these issues are going to be addressed. We are reviewing the curriculum at all levels, from primary up to the end of the education system and there are some areas where we have done work to completion. I would like to tell you that the focus is now on hands-on; the skills that are badly needed on the job market. Of course, we have not covered everything because they all require funding. So –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Honourable minister, I would like you to talk specifically about the issue of the student loan scheme. Members are putting it up, but it looks like you are not taking it seriously. That matter is not making us settle in our constituencies.

Last time, Government gave money but the money was totally insufficient. In my district, only six students got services of that loan scheme. By the time the rest came, there was no money. They came to my house right away and expected me to pay their tuition. What are you saying? What is the commitment from Government about the student loan scheme? Please rescue our situation.

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This one goes straight to the minister on the issue of funding. Everybody in this House, refer to page 22 of the report. There is a lot of money unspent. If we can point out skills development - Shs 37.7 billion; higher education - Shs 18.04 billion; quality and standards - that is the inspectorate part of it, where I have not even seen anywhere at the Ministry of Education. I don’t know where the inspectorate went, which has actually affected the standards of education but has unspent Shs 9.13 billion; policy and planning - Shs 3.3 	billion; secondary education - Shs 1.7 billion; and Makerere University - Shs 12 billion; and Kabale University - Shs 2.5 billion. But we are here lamenting about funding in the education sector.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the minister to conclude this, please answer the question.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I think –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister. By the way, I am a qualified teacher – yes, I did a PGDE and have taught too. Madam Speaker, on the loan scheme is the place that is “killing people.” To begin with, somebody applies. After applying, they ask for “Kitu kidogo” – and I am telling you a true story. The applicant must bribe in order to be given a scholarship. 

Honourable minister, we appropriate money here for loans. Every Ugandan qualifies. Why do you introduce interviews in a selection process relating to activities for which money has been appropriated for all Ugandans? Why don’t you just find out how many people that have applied and distribute the money that you have got among the applicants? It is so painful – I have two children that paid a bribe of Shs 300,000 each but at the end of the day, they were not given the loan money. Their fathers had sold the only cows they had in the household, to take to those people of yours that give loans.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, the Higher Education Student Loan Scheme is not meant for every Ugandan. It is made for the poor people. I would like that to be understood, ladies and gentlemen. It is meant for the poor –(Interjection)– we passed that law here on the Floor of Parliament. Go back and read that law. You know that there is a lot of corruption in this country. What I am asking you to do is: in case you know of someone that is selling or who is being bribed, please bring him or her to my attention so that I deal with him. Otherwise, I know that it is a scheme that was designed for the poor who are academically excellent but financially are unable to pay their tuition.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, it seems that hon. Mary Mugeni has something burning her, please allow raise it.

MS MUGENI: Honourable minister, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just told you that he has children in his area who have paid money to get a loan scheme and these are poor children that he is talking about. May you, honourable minister, kindly specify the level of poverty that you are talking about because we all come from districts that are rural and with poor children who have not befitted from this scheme?

Secondly, I would like to inform you, honourable minister, that this statement that you are making about the loan scheme and other issues that we have raised, especially about the money for UPE, USE and senior four and primary seven candidates, let these statements be published in the media, so that all Ugandans are aware of where to find the loan scheme and how Government will support such students and what amount is being put.

DR MUYINGO: Honourable colleagues, if you know of anybody that has been bribed, draw that person to my attention, I will deal with him or her. Secondly, this loan scheme is meant for the poor, and I will repeat it because that is what the law says. 

Three, colleagues, in order to get this loan scheme, one must have passed and admitted to a university that has been –(Interjection)– yes, and we have a formula that captures the levels of poverty. That formula has been agreed upon and everything has been –(Interjection)– maybe I will probably come back and educate my colleagues about the loan scheme, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, the loan scheme is on the priority list of our activities as a ministry. It so happened this time that it is not funded. We have been engaging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for us to get money for this loan scheme. Otherwise, it is at the top of all the priorities we have. We have several priorities that have not been able to attract funding this season. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The question is that the House adopts the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that the House would sit again tomorrow at 10 o’clock. Therefore, House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10 o’clock in the morning. Tomorrow we shall deal with reports from finance, then foreign affairs, although I thought that finance should come last but we shall also have physical infrastructure and presidential committees. Thank you very much, honourable members.

(The House rose at 7.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 May 2017 at 10.00 a.m.) 
