Thursday, 28 May 2015

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Leader of Government Business and the members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Before we start, I would like you to join me in welcoming a team of students from Drake University from the State of Iowa in USA. They are visiting Uganda on a study tour under the theme “Sustainable Development in Sub-Saharan Africa.” They are working with Makerere University Business School and they are here to observe proceedings of the House. (Applause)  

Honourable members, when we completed the consideration of the reports yesterday, we assigned the Budget Committee the work for refining the figures so that we can supply. They are still busy working; they have not been able to complete that. Therefore, I want to give notice that we shall be required to sit tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the morning because the Fifth Session commences on 4 June 2015 and we are required to prologue the Fourth Session latest by Tuesday because Wednesday is a public holiday. 

Therefore, whatever we have to do must be done between now and Tuesday. So, please, come tomorrow so that we can finish the work that is still outstanding. Thank you very much.

3.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to say that one of our colleagues, hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, has a function tomorrow and I would like to request Members of Parliament to first come to the House. I am aware of that function, Women’s Day cerebrations and I know that Madam Speaker, you will do the needful so that the House is adjourned in the morning so that we can rush to Mbarara in the afternoon. There will be transport here; if we can set off at 1 p.m., then we will be able to arrive at the function by 3 p.m.

THE SPEAKER: Sheema is near Mbarara; we shall hasten the work. There were some matters of national importance. Hon. Veronica Babirye followed by hon. Migadde, hon. olanya - two minutes each.

3.23
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year, the Government of Uganda advertised vacancies for cadets in Uganda Police and all Ugandans were entitled including Buyende District.

People of Buyende applied. Twenty two students went through the exercise and they were considered for the final recruitment. Last week, the final list came out and from that list, each district was given slots including Buyende but it was very unfortunate that the students who were allocated to Buyende District do not come from there.

Madam Speaker, it is a very big concern that even people in my district, including the DISOs have all called me asking where those names came from. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that issue is very important. Last year, hon. Amoit had the same complaint here and I do hope that the government will resolve this. What do you say? If the students are not from Buyende; where have they come from?

3.24
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the concern will be brought to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs who will be asked to come and make a report about this complaint of where a district quota is given to another district in the recruitment of police cadets. I think they will have to come and explain here in this House, not only in this district but all over the country. They have to explain.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, on the same issue, I would like to therefore propose that this process is put to a halt until it is sorted out because the problem is general everywhere. Therefore, we propose to the Minister of Internal Affairs and to Government that the process of this recruitment is halted until this is resolved.

GEN. (RTD) ALI MOSES: Madam Speaker, I think the proposal from the Leader of the Opposition is premature. I would suggest we wait for the explanation of the Minister of Internal Affairs then you take whatever decision you want. However, to take decision before explanation, then what happens if he comes and explains? This is not fair; I think we have to wait for the minister to come and explain.

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you say that it is affecting many parts of the country. It is, therefore, a very urgent matter. I am directing the minister to come tomorrow and explain those anomalies to the satisfaction of the country. (Applause) Thank you.

GEN. ALI MOSES: Most obliged.

3.27
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the select committee of this Parliament investigating land belonging to public schools in Kampala Capital City Authority. You had given us an assignment and we were supposed to report within a month but we have been unable to secure meeting rooms for the last three weeks because of the budget process and of course, ministerial policy statements are of higher priority than business of select committees.

We have been caught up by time and it is our humble request that you give us additional three weeks to allow us report adequately. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is true that we put all other work in abeyance until the conclusion of the budget process. Therefore, I put the question that that committee is given an additional three weeks.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall put it in writing.

3.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the high prevalence of malaria in the districts of Amuru, Nwoya and Gulu. In Amuru District, Atiak Health Centre IV, last week, out of 90 patients that were tested for malaria, 85 of them were found having malaria ++ (plus, plus). 

Currently, the drug for malaria in Amuru District is over. The test kits for malaria are no more and more so, Government introduced a programme of Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) some years back, but since the beginning of this year, Government stopped that programme so abruptly and the level of malaria has risen very high in Amuru District.

Our prayer is that the National Medical Stores should supply drugs for malaria and the test kits immediately so that people are tested and the medical personnel control the high rate of malaria.

Secondly, there is need for the Ministry of Health to send a team of medical officers to ascertain why malaria has risen very high in Amuru District.

Thirdly, we appeal to Government to supply the microscopes and malaria test kits right from the Health Centres II. Currently, health centres II are not allowed to test for malaria; malaria treatment is being done clinically from Health Centres II. The tests normally begin from health centres III, IV and the hospitals - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your prayers have been noted.

3.30
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two months ago, I raised a matter of public and international concern regarding the presence of the UPDF in South Sudan in a manner, which is seemingly contradictory and in breach of international law. The Leader of Government Business vowed and promised that he would bring a comprehensive report to update the honourable members about the presence of the UPDF in South Sudan.

You know very well that Uganda is a member of the United Nations, which means that our presence in any country all over the world must be in line with the UN charter. Measuring from what is happening, Madam Speaker, continued presence of UPDF in South Sudan is in breach of Article 2(4) of the UN charter, Article 24 and 25. 

Members of Parliament would like to know why the UPDF is in South Sudan as - (Text expunged). When are we receiving the report?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lyamuzi, I would like you to expunge the last words “aggressors” and “mercenaries” unless you can produce proof that the UPDF are mercenaries or aggressors. What you want is to know what is happening. So, stand up and withdraw those last two words. (Applause) 

MR KEN-LYAMUZI: I beg your pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Withdraw those words, “Aggressors” and “Mercenaries” because it was this House which approved the sending of those troops there. 

MR KEN-LYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I assume they are not aggressors.

THE SPEAKER: No, withdraw those words.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: For the time being, let me gracefully withdraw. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I direct that those words “mercenaries” and “aggressors” be expunged from the Hansard. 

MR KEN-LYAMUZI: I withdraw those words, for the time being. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: They have already been expunged; there is nothing to withdraw. (Laughter)

3.33
MR CLEMENT ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this issue on short notice. I rise on an issue of national importance; as we are all aware or probably not, today is World Menstruation Day. (Laughter) The reaction from my colleagues tells me that this day needs to be discussed fully because we do not understand the implications of this day on our children, especially girls.

The majority of our girls are going to drop out of school today because they lack access to basic sanitary requirements such as pads, water and they do not have any education about hygiene. 

This is a day I am shocked to see not being recognised in Uganda. Most of our mothers in prisons today cannot go out to work because they do not have access to sanitary pads. This is a very cheap thing to buy and distribute to our girls to keep them in school. However, they are dropping out because we think the word “menstruation” is taboo. 

It is time this country began walking the talk and it begins with this House looking at menstruation as the Greeks used to do. The Greeks used to celebrate fertility through their bodies - Aphrodite. What is a better sign of fertility than menstruation? (Applause) Madam Speaker, I pray that this country begins taking these issues seriously if we have to keep our girls in school. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. For the record, today, I launched a charter on safer hygiene for girls in schools with a washer team of the Parliament and many students and civil society organisations. We did it this morning. So let us walk the talk.

3.35
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. In my district, the Resident District Commissioner has turned into a full administrator at all levels. As a Member of Parliament, he has instructed that I should not preside over any function because he represents the President in that district.

Secondly, he has even equally threatened all the media houses where the Opposition MPs - I am alone in the district - and he has gone ahead to arrest the journalists in the district.

I would like to find out from Government; is it Government policy that a Resident District Commissioner harasses Members of Parliament, designates who is supposed to speak in the district or not, arrests all journalists who host people with differing views? Is it the policy of Government? If it is not, can this Resident District Commissioner who has never been transferred anywhere beyond Aswa bridge be brought to order? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, I hope Government will be able to answer. 

3.36
MS WINIFRED KIIZA: (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding our gallant daughters the She Cranes who this House recognised for an excellent job after they had qualified for the World Cup. Madam Speaker, the She Cranes have failed to get facilitation to enable them attend the prestigious competition.

The competition is slated to take place in August; the She Cranes are supposed to participate in other side events in South Africa and Namibia; the South African Netball Federation is ready to purchase them air tickets but our Government cannot facilitate these ladies to attend the games in South Africa. They cannot go for the African Cup of Nations in Namibia which is supposed to take place between June and July so as to enable them enough training and to enable them compete favourably with other countries in the World Cup. 

As we speak, Madam Speaker, on 21 May, the International Netball Federation wrote to the Uganda Netball Federation a letter threatening that they may kick them out of the competition and bar them from further contests if they do not fulfil their obligations by a particular date.

Madam Speaker, I beg to request Government of Uganda to look into the plight of these people who are marketing our country, yet, we are looking at ways through which we can market Uganda. Now, our women are excelling in sports and using netball to market Uganda as a country. We cannot miss this opportunity. I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business what plan the government has to ensure that the She Cranes represent Uganda at this World Cup competition. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the government has an answer. When we were celebrating the victory of the She Cranes here, the Minister of Education stood on this Floor and assured the country that this time, they would be ready and that they will support the She Cranes but they have missed their practice in the UK. Yes, they were supposed to go in April. So, I do not know what the government says about this.

3.39
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education is here. Let him come and explain.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Tickodri Togboa): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would request that my predecessor submits that answer.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysestom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My ministry is doing everything possible to ensure that the She Cranes participates in all the upcoming sports competitions. I do not know where the honourable member got the information that they have failed to be facilitated. 

The media has given us a lot of information before but sometimes, we need to crosscheck this information because the latest I have, as the minister, is that everything possible is being done to enable the She Cranes participate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minster, maybe, you do not have enough information but I have a letter here from the International Netball Federation dated 21 May 2015. They are writing to our Netball President here in Uganda:

“Netball World Cup 2015 outstanding payments and forms
I have been viewing the status of the submissions of documents and payments for all teams for the Netball World Cup with the organising committee. 

I am most disappointed to learn that the following items are outstanding for your team;
Payments, which were due on 30 April, preliminary team entry, which should have been done by 7 May is incomplete.

I must urge you to rectify this situation immediately and send this payment and information by the 31 May at the very latest. 
The Netball World Cup organising committee is working hard to deliver a first class event and is relying on all participants to keep the events deadlines. There are a number of important deadlines coming up.

Please, be advised that INF is considering the position of sanctions for teams who do not provide payments and forms in line with the events guidelines, which may include fines or reductions from the profits share for the event.” 

This is the position.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, for the benefit of the minister, when this letter came to the President of Uganda Netball Federation, she forwarded the letter to the minister and the answer was, “We are doing everything possible to make sure you travel.” The only commitment that the Ministry made was to push to the account on Saturday 22 May, Shs 250 million out of a budget of Shs 2.8 billion. They only made a partial commitment of Shs 250 million, which was put on the account on Saturday and the letter arrived on Friday. I beg to lay it on the Table for the minister to acquaint himself with this information so that he does not take it as media propaganda and fabrication. 

All we have to do as Government is to ensure that the She Cranes represents the country in this prestigious competition, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Government is committed to ensure that the She Cranes go. The information I have is that some money - I do not know exactly how much - has been put aside for that activity. (Interjections) What I would like to ask you, Madam Speaker, is that you give us time. I will come back tomorrow with the details of how much we have been able to do so far.

THE SPEAKER: Next item, I think there was a question -

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a payment slip generated by the Treasurer General to the Uganda Netball Federation of Shs 250,348,800 as partial commitment for the participation out of a budget of Shs 1.8 billion. I beg to lay.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank for your ruling. I am a member of the Committee on Education and we have had all these problems coming year in, year out. Today, it is the She Cranes, tomorrow it will be the Uganda Cranes; the other day it will be Moses Golola and many categorises of players.

Procedurally, I would like to find out whether the minister can affirm to this House that in the budget allocations of the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports there is any money meant for sports. We have raised this matter in the Committee on Education, Science and Sports and we have been challenged by the ministry. 

Otherwise, we just hear the minister continuing to tell us, “Tomorrow, I will come. We are devising…” and now he is running the responsibility of the ministry to the entire Government, yet this a sector they are supposed to manage. So, can we know whether the Ministry of Education and Sports under which my senior is, has an allocation for sports? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope he can come back with those answers tomorrow; how much you have budgeted and how much you have spent and when are they going? That is what we want to hear. 

Prime Minister, are you going to respond to the issue of RDCs?

3.46
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, if the report is true, then we shall take action. However, we shall need to investigate to make sure that natural justice is done and we shall report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, please, give all the relevant information to the Prime Minister so that he can assist you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister? Minister of Tourism? – No, the committees of the House have done their work. Is there no one who can move the second reading? You know, we are about to prologue the House and then they will say the Parliament did not do the laws. For us we are ready.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? You members of the Cabinet –(Members rose­_) Okay. It has been seconded. Can you give justification; the objectives? Why does Government want this law?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill seeks to re-orient the current Uganda Wildlife Training Institute into a modern institution based on specialised and well-focussed professional capacity to undertake research and ensure effective development of the wildlife sector and human resource.
It also seeks to avail reliable and adequate data on the complex issues associated with crop and livestock raiding, the threat to human life, encroachment, poaching and disease transmission.

Madam Speaker, it seeks to fill the gaps in the research programme, planning and make priorities for the wildlife sector resulting from dissolution of the former Uganda Institute of Ecology. It is a Bill that we have been waiting for in this House. 

Madam Speaker, I move that the House considers it for the second reading. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. Can I invite the chairperson of the committee? Hon. Epetait?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like first to commend the improvement from the Office of the Clerk in notifying Members about business of the day. This Bill, surely as the minister has put it, has been with us for some time. I am also concerned. I am aware that that ministry has two ministers. When we are considering a Bill, at least one of them ought to be here. I am sure they must be aware since all of us were informed that such business will be transacted on such a day.
I would like to find out whether it is procedurally right for us to continue handling a law without the sector minister. Really, they are bogging down work. May we get to know where the ministers are? This is because issues will be raised that answers may not be provided for immediately here. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I know that you have a minister and a minister of state in that ministry. Are they coming? We want to proceed with this Bill.

3.52
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER $ DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): The cabinet minister has gone overseas. The minister who was left behind has an urgent issue that has forced her to go to the village. (Laughter) However, that will not stop the government from moving with the Bill. The Minister of State for Planning can stand in for the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife and business will continue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us receive the report and discharge our obligation, then we decide. If by the time you finish they have not come, we shall take a decision.

3.54
MS SARAH MWEBAZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to present the report of the Sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013.

The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013 was read for the first time on 6 March 2014 and referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012).

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the objectives of the Bill are;
    1. To establish the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute to replace the current Uganda Wildlife Training Institute.
    2. To re-orient the current Uganda Wildlife Training Institute into a modern institution based on specialised and well-focussed professional capacity to undertake research to ensure effective development of the wildlife sector human resource.
    3. To avail reliable and adequate data on the complex issues associated with crop and livestock raiding, the threat to human life, encroachment, poaching and disease transmission.
    4. To base the wildlife sector programme development process on well-informed and effectively guided options for improvement of people’s livelihoods and growth and development of the national economy.
    5. To guide the exploitation of Uganda’s wildlife resource potential to ensure value addition and job creation for improvement of people’s livelihoods, growth and development of the national economy.
    6. To effectively and sustainably contribute to the wildlife sector for growth and development of the national economy and social transformation.
    7. To fill the gaps in the research programme, planning and priority setting for the wildlife sector resulting from the dissolution of the former Uganda Institute of Ecology.
    8. To return through a legal framework the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute from the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

Methodology

Madam Speaker, in the process of analysing the Bill, we held meetings with the following stakeholders -

THE SPEAKER: No, for those ones, Members can read.

MS MWEBAZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We held a workshop and the observations and recommendations are;

    1. The committee observed that there is a research and monitoring department under Uganda Wildlife Authority, which carries out day-to-day research to help in the running of the protected areas such as national game parks. However, the Uganda Wildlife Training and Research Institute Bill seeks to include the research component to enable the institute carry out scientific research.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Wildlife Authority continues to carry out its day-to-day research but works hand-in-hand with the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute in carrying out scientific research and capacity building of its staff.

    2. The committee observed that the Uganda Wildlife Training Institute admits students who have completed Senior Four and Senior Six only and does not offer degrees and other awards. The committee recommends that the institute be expanded so that it can offer certificates, diplomas and any other awards since it is going to be a centre of excellence.

Madam Speaker, before I conclude, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes and the report that we received from the different interactions. I lay on the Table.

Madam Speaker, the Bill, if passed into law, will have a legal status to the institute and will provide an adequate law to regulate its existence and operations.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013 be passed into law subject to the following amendments as we shall table. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether the honourable minister is in position to answer the policy issues in this Bill. Would you be in position to defend the rationale behind this Bill?

Let us defer debate and the minister is directed to come. We must do this Bill before Tuesday. The minister is directed to come tomorrow so that we can have debate on this matter and conclude the Bill. Thank you, chair and your committee.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE SECOND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (NDP II) 2015/2016 – 2019/2020

(Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the honourable member wanted to know about the update on the request made two months ago on deployment in South Sudan. I do not know whether anybody is going to respond to this.

3.58
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER $ DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): The Minister of Defence has just gone out. Please give us a few minutes until he comes back to answer. Madam Speaker, I request that you give us two minutes. The minister just walked out and he is coming back to answer.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development - 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek guidance whether if we delayed this Bill, the Certificate of Financial Implications would not expire.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance - 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, you recall that we moved in this House to stay all the work of the different committees as we transited from one year to another and whatever documents accompanied the Bills are still valid. Therefore, the Certificate of Financial Implication is still valid.

4.00
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on National Development Plan II 2015/2016 to 2019/2020.

In accordance with section 86 of the National Planning Authority Act, 2002, permit me to present to you a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Second National Development Plan. 

The Second National Development Plan (NDP II) 2015/2016 to 2019/2020 draft was referred to the committee after being laid on the Table by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 30 April 2015.

Madam speaker, we have the methodology and performance of NDP I for the period 2010/2011 to 2013/2014. 

These are statements of fact and because of the limited time, I would request that you allow me move straight to page 7 of the committee’s report that talks about committee’s findings and observations.

Chapter 4 - Strategic Direction 

Vision 2040 - Partial framework

The committee appreciates the partial framework. However, the committee observed that it is important that this framework also links to the National Physical Plan for the country so that different urban centres that are getting conjoined are well managed.

Prioritisation Framework

The committee observed that it is desirable to have a prioritisation framework which should be linked to the result framework for the NDP II. Equally, the decision that drives prioritisation should be linked to the level of achievements of various targets in the NDP II and then when targets are achieved or at a level where they do not have to stay a priority area, decisions can be made to make the changes.

The committee further observed that the prioritisation framework proposed in the plan seems to be based on a subjective process of selecting the priorities. 

The committee also noted that the prioritisation framework attempts to make a good flow diagram of the connections between the different parts in the framework. Reference is Figure 4.1, page 132 of the draft NDP II.

However, there is a need to ensure that the value chains are located within the sector intervention where the priority areas will be implemented. Currently, the value chain analysis stands in the middle of the development priorities and the sector interventions that make it hard to know who would be responsible for their development and execution.

The committee recommends that value chain be located within the sector intervention where the priority areas will be implemented.

Micro Economic Strategy and Financing

The committee observes that NDP II under this section clearly articulates the objective of maintaining stability while positioning the country to be competitive by emphasising infrastructure and human capital investment driven by public and private investment.

The sources of growth and the strategies of financing these growths are presented and there is an attempt to clearly communicate the linkages between financing development project/intervention and the result growth and other macro- economic benefits.

However, the committee makes the following observations:
    a) While the NDP prioritises human capital development as one of the fundamentals, the proposal to increase human capital development spending from 4.7 per cent to 6.5 per cent of GDP as 30 per cent increase is not justified in the document.

    b) The NDP II duly notes that higher fiscal deficits over the medium term could affect international confidence in Uganda’s public finances and hence, downgrading the country’s credit rating currently at B. Already, Uganda performed worst on VAT revenue performance among peers in East Africa.

    c) The NDP II states that as a result of the projected growth rate, the level of employment created would partly address the surging employment problem; projecting an average of 640,000 jobs to be created annually. Cognisant of the fact that over the past 20 years, Uganda has recorded impressive growth rate but not enough job creation, resulting into jobless growth, the committee observes that NDP paints a highly optimistic picture on how growth will convert into employment creation.

	The committee strongly believes that the average of 640,000 jobs is not sufficient to curb unemployment in Uganda where the stock of the unemployed is more than five million persons at any one given time.

    d) The NDP II, in Table 5.1 on page 173, makes assumption on debt sustainability, which is very critical for the macro-economic performance and stability of the nation. What is not clear is how the exchange rate, which is expected to depreciate over the NDP II period is good for the economy given that Uganda is a net exporter and a further depreciating exchange rate would yield economic havoc.

The committee strongly recommends that the NDP II and the subsequent NDPs should prioritise addressing unemployment holistically and make the tracking of job creation and unemployment numbered; a macroeconomic variable to be tracked on a quarterly basis.

The committee further recommends a policy shift away from the full liberalisation of the current market with a view to a quasi-free foreign exchange market to minimise a free entry and exit of major currencies such as the U.S dollars as it is in South Africa and Ethiopia.

Agriculture

It should be noted that the African heads of State at Maputo, Mozambique in 2013 committed to allocate 10 per cent of their National Budget to agriculture in order to generate 6 per cent gross rate as part of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP). 

The NDP II does not clearly align the commitments made by the African heads of State at Maputo in 2013 in achieving the CAADP.

The committee also noted that over the NDP I period, the sector registered sluggish growth from 1.0 per cent in 2010/2011 to 1.33 per cent during 2013/2014. The committee was informed that farming is still dominated by smallholder farmers engaged in food and cash crops, horticulture, fishing and livestock farming. 

The committee further observed that approved new macro-structure of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has a standing staffing gap of up to 41 per cent with even bigger deficits of 76 per cent and 91 per cent at the district and sub-county levels respectively. 

Additionally, the committee observed that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is segmented in numerous semi-autonomous bodies and programmes with weak coordination mechanisms leading to inefficiencies and poor resource use. 

The committee further observed that the ministry that is mandated to coordinate operations of the sector lacks full control of the semi-autonomous agencies like National Agricultural and Advisory Services, National Agricultural Research Organisation, Dairy Development Authority, Coffee Development Authority and Cotton Development Authority, which operate under their own Acts of Parliament. 

The committee therefore recommends that to enhance the sector’s contribution to wealth and job creation, there is need to address the critical issue in production, post-harvest, financing, processing and marketing of agricultural products so as to maximise the benefit accrued to agriculture.

The committee also recommends that a harmonised framework for coordination, regulation, planning, reporting and implementation among the various semi-autonomous agencies should be adopted.

The committee further recommends that NDP II should be aligned to the African Heads of State Maputo Declaration of 2013 in order to achieve the CAADP. 

Tourism

Paragraph 383 of the plan recognises tourism as a high potential for generating revenue and employment at a low cost, implying a high return on investment. In 2012, Government expenditure on tourism as a percentage of the national budget was only 0.13 per cent and yet, its total contribution to GDP was 9.0 per cent as of 2011/2012.
The committee observed that tourism is another important sector that has been growing consistently since the restoration of peace and security and now, accounts for around 9 per cent of the GDP, amounting to $ 1.7 billion. 

The committee was informed that foreign visitors brought into the country an equivalent of $ 1.003 billion in foreign exchange earnings in 2012 from $ 662 million in 2010. 

The committee on page 144 of draft NDP II also noted that the access to the tourism sites is also an area that is getting serious attention from Government as depicted in the infrastructure development especially the roads network in the draft NDPII. The committee was informed that the following roads shall be constructed:
    a) Hamurwa - Kerere - Kanungu/Bulembe - Buhoma - Butogota - Hamayanja - Ishasha - Ikumba (149 km)
    b) Ishasha - Katunguru  (88 km)
    c) Kabale - Bunyonyi (22km)
    d) Kisoro - Mgahinga Gate (14 km)
    e) Kisoro – Rubuguri - Muko (48 km)
    f) Karugutu - Ntoroko Road (55 km)
    g) Nakapiripirit - Muyembe (90 km)
    h) Apoka Lodge - Kotido (136 km)

The committee further noted that while tourism has created an important source of income for the economy and conservation efforts in Uganda, the intention to develop oil and gas in the country’s prime bio-diversity asset (Albertine Graben) forces a severe and potentially devastating risk to these globally important bio-diversity assets and to the sector. 

The committee recommends that for the sector to create wealth and enhance employment, Government should increase and diversify the stock of tourism product, intensify aggressive marketing and link the tourism development areas along the Rift Valley with bio-diversities to create tourism zones. 

The committee further strongly recommends strong legal framework and associated technical capacity to regulate and minimise attendant risk of the country’s prime bio-diversity assets. 
Minerals, Oils, and Gas Sector
The committee observed that the draft NDP II recognises the sector as an emerging and growing sector with significant contribution to GDP and a potential driver in employment creation and GDP growth over the medium term through value addition. 

However, the committee noted that the challenges abound including incomplete mapping, inadequate infrastructure, policy and legal framework, and acute shortage of skilled personnel. 

The committee also noted that the draft NDP II is spot on in linking the justification and challenges with specific interventions and paints a very optimistic picture of the minerals, oils and gas industries in Uganda’s future. 

However, the committee noted that NDP II recognised that the petroleum sub-sector is stressed with numerous challenges as outlined below:
    a) Inadequate industry infrastructure to support upstream petroleum activities.
    b) Excitement and high expectations from the general public.
    c) Lack of skilled manpower both in the public and the private sector.
    d) Inadequate financing.
    e) Land acquisition for infrastructure development for oil prospecting.
    f) Low institutional preparedness.
    g) Huge capital requirements and technical expertise needed for projects.
    h) Inconsistent fuel supply leading to scarcity of petroleum products.
    i)  Absence of a legal framework and associated technical capacity to regulate and minimise the attendant environmental risk.

Equally, the committee noted that like the petroleum sector, the mineral sub-sector faces a number of challenges that include:
    a) An incomplete geological, geophysical, and geochemical mapping of Uganda.
    b) Inadequate infrastructure (electricity, railway, water, and roads) to support exploration and mining activities.
    c) Difficulties in accessing land for mining products.
    d) Lack of geothermal development policy and legal framework coupled with inadequacies in the mining policy.
    e) Unregulated wide spread small scale and informal mining.
    f) An acute shortage of skilled personnel and high proportion of small scale artisanal miners who use indigenous and poor mining technics.
    g) Inadequate earthquake disaster management infrastructure. 

The committee observed that the interventions proposed in the draft NDP II on page 192, 8.2.2 under objectives and interventions, are not adequate enough to address the above challenges.

The committee recommends that NDP II should strongly address challenges by corresponding each with an intervention.

Environment and natural resources

The committee was informed that the development objective of the environment and natural resources sub-sector is to promote and ensure the rationale and sustainable utilisation, development and effective management of environment and natural resources, for social economic development of the country.

The minister submitted that the sub-sector’s targets over the next five years are:
    a) Increased wetland ecosystem coverage from 10.9 per cent, in financial year 2013/2014, to 12 per cent in financial year 2019/2020;
    b) Increase the percentage of forest cover from 14 per cent, from financial year 2012/2013, to 18 per cent in financial year 2019/2020;
    c) Increase automation of climate monitoring network from 10 per cent, in financial year 2014/2020, to 40 per cent in financial year 2019/20;
    d) Ensure 20 per cent increment in national coordination and monitoring of the implementation of the international standards and commitment as well as of the National Climate Change Policy and in implementation strategy in financial year 2019/2020; and
    e) Enhance environment compliance from 70 per cent in financial year 2013/2014, to 90 per cent in financial year 2019/2020. 

The committee examined the sub-sector target identified and to a large extent noted that they are limited and leave a few things to desire. 

The committee observed that natural resources over exploitation in the context of population growth, is not clearly addressed in NDP II. It should be noted that depleted land, soil, forests, bio-diversity and echo-system reduces the availability of these resources for the current and future growth, and meeting the needs of the poor, making development unsustainable.

With doubling population in the last two decades, it is difficult to see how much population growth can accommodate with an already struggling and diminishing resource base. Renewable sources of energy and its role in protecting the environment had been left out in the plan.

The committee recommends that considerable efforts be made in rebuilding the stock of renewable resources; improve their management to strengthen resilience to reduce vulnerability and to ensure a long term sustainability including the establishment of a disaster rate management infrastructure to confront an increasing number of natural disaster.

Trade Industry and Cooperatives

The NDP II identifies the sector targets to increase exports as a percentage of GDP from 12.9 to 16.5 per cent of GDP by financial year 2019/2020.

However, the committee observes that as the country moves towards monetary integration, there is no mention of how Uganda will enhance trade in the next five years, to tap into the regional market.

The committee also observed that plans do not enumerate the challenges the trade sector faces outside legal, policy and infrastructure yet they are several supply capacity constraints, market standards and barriers, unfavorable rules of origin set by the importers, removal of export taxes, to mention but a few.

The committee recommends that Government addresses the above challenges in NDP II.

Infrastructure Development - Strategic Road

The committee observed that during the NDP I period, the paved road stock increase at an average rate of 123 kilometers, lower than the targeted increase of 220 kilometers per year.

The unpaved national road increased from 17,120 kilometers in financial year 2010/2011 to 17,202 kilometers in 2013/2014 financial year. While the national road network increased from 20,000 kilometers in 2011 to 21,000 kilometers in financial year 2013/2014, representing a 5 per cent increase. This was as a result of Central Government taking over responsibility for construction/rehabilitation of national roads from the districts. 

The committee therefore, recommends that a more ambitious strategy of paving national road be put in place and the operationalisation of the National Road Fund, by transferring funds direct to the fund account instead of the Consolidated Fund.

Standard Gauge Railway

The committee observed that the railing infrastructure has not changed over the last five years. The current railway network comprises of long meter gauge railway lines running from the East to the West of the country.

The committee further noted that the railway operations are limited to 640 kilometers between Kampala-Malaba, Kampala-Port Bell, Kampala-Nalukolongo and Tororo-Gulu, while the rest of the network is defunct.

The committee also noted that joint formal agreements for plans to build a new standard gauge railway have been signed by the East African countries.

The committee recommends that Government should address the procurement delays to construct a standard gauge railway without further delay.





Water Transport Infrastructure

The committee observed that water transport, despite being very important, not many investments have been made to fully utilise its potential.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should put in place measures to improve the existing marine infrastructures so as to reduce the costs of transportation and increase connectivity.

Air Transport

The committee observed that air transport constitutes the necessity for a wide range of economic activities. The committee recommends that a large airport at Entebbe would be a good economic hub for the region and airfields in the districts and can spur local economic development.

The NDP II recognises that good quality airports and airfields are vital to the comprehensiveness of Uganda and can act as a magnet for various companies that would like to invest in Uganda.

The committee supports the position of the National Planning Authority to revive the National Airline in order to promote tourism.

Human Capital Development - Education and Sports

The committee observed that the sector has made considerable progress especially in increasing access to education at all levels. However, a number of outstanding issues still need to be addressed in the next five years, key of which include: lack of Early Child Development Programme and policy direction, low quality of education at all levels, low completion rate at primary and a high drop-out rate between levels, especially among girls. In addition, the committee noted that the education system does not facilitate adequate skills acquisition, especially at post-primary level. 

The committee further observed that learning, as a measure of success, is not reflected in the draft NDP II. The committee therefore makes the following recommendations:
    a) Government in the next five years introduces early childhood development with a strategic focus of developing the human capital of the country;
    b) Government should urgently come up with deliberate measures to improve the quality of education and ensure equity and retention, while consolidating the gains made in access to education at all levels;
    c) Government should expand access to skill in the education system particularly beyond the primary level;
    d) The NDP II must clearly focus on learning as a measure of success and cease to regurgitate the same old interventions that do not deliver learning to the pupil in the school; and
    e) The thematic curriculum, where instructions are given in local languages up to P.4, should be revised.

Physical Planning and Urban Development

The committee observed that Vision 2040 proposes the establishment of four regional cities namely Gulu, Mbale, Mbarara and Arua and five strategic cities - Hoima for Oil, Nakasongola for industry, Fort portal for Tourism, Moroto for mining and Jinja for industrial purposes.

The committee also observed that Government does not have a national urban policy to provide a framework for the management of urban areas. We further observed that rapid increase in urban population is not merged with adequate physical plan preparedness or implementation of growth and development of basic infrastructure, housing and social amenities. This has led to overcrowding, traffic congestion, growth of slums and informal settlements, dilapidated housing and poor sanitation.
The committee recommends that Government should urgently come up with a national urban policy and a planned urbanisation policy to provide a framework for the management of urban areas to ensure productivity, livability and sustainability.

The Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area

The committee observed that Kampala, the Capital City of Uganda, has grown fourth times since 1980s in structure and shape at a pace faster than its population and structure readjustments.

The committee noted that a city that has been estimated to host 300,000 at the maximum is now hosting almost 2 million people. The rapid growth in the physical development as well as in its population since early 1980s has caused Kampala to expand.

The committee further observed that in 2013, Cabinet approved the Greater Kampala metropolitan Area Development framework 2040 that provided the new boundaries and its associated map – Entebbe, North towards Luweero, Wakiso and North West towards Mpigi. 

However, the Minister responsible for Kampala has not yet instituted the Kampala metropolitan Authority as required by the KCCA Act. The committee recommends that Government urgently institutes the Kampala Metropolitan Authority as required by the KCCA Act.

The committee further recommends that Government establishes an administrative city away from Kampala as it has been for Abuja in Nigeria and Petaling Jaya in Malaysia.

Good Governance

It should be noted that good governance is a term that is based on eight major characteristics. It is participatory, consensus oriented, accountable, transparent, responsive, effective and efficient, equitable and inclusive and follows the rule of law. It assures that corruption is minimised. The views of the minorities are taken into account and that the voices of the most vulnerable in society are heard in decision making. It is also responsive to the present and future needs of society. 

The committee noted that the tenets of good governance are not clearly articulated and therefore recommends that all the tenets of good governance should be included.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I think what you meant was tenets not tenants of good governance, if they are to be corrected.

MR OKELLO: Tenets, most obliged, Madam Speaker.

Social Development

The committee observed that what is included in this section is what the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been focusing on but not that strategic decision for the five years.

The committee also noted, in paragraph 600, the challenges in this sector. However, when it comes to the interventions, they seem not be addressing the challenges, for example, coordination, information dissemination, data collection, management and usage. 

The committee therefore, recommends that another objective be introduced to strengthen structures, system and coordination.

Sub-National Development

The committee observed that this chapter covers  very significant issues in the delivery of the NDP II. The committee further noted that this chapter needs to be stronger because the decentralisation is a policy framework and delivery approach that Uganda uses.

A discussion of how stronger decentralisation will contribute to the delivery of the NDP II needs to be added in various parts of the plan. The situational analysis and development context should reflect on the decentralisation context and be able to demonstrate how it will be strengthened so that it enhances the delivery of the NDP II.

Regional Balance Development

The committee observed that though still relatively low, compared to the vision 20140 comparator, Ugandan’s level of inequality is increasing. The committee noted that Government has, over the years, attempted to address the regional disparities in poverty and development, through the introduction of the equalization grant and the introduction of special programmes.

The equalization grant was introduced in financial year 1999/2000 as a top block grant to a number of districts mostly in Northern and Eastern Uganda to give them wider fiscal space to address some of the most pressing service delivery gap. 

The committee however, noted that the grant has consequently not grown in tandem with the increase in the resource envelopment nor the numbers of districts that have continued to qualify for the grant. In addition, the grant did not incorporate an element of building the local economy and/or raising the incomes of the people in those districts.

The committee further observed that Government, in the past, came up with the special programmes like the Karamoja Integrated Development Programme, the Luweero and Rwenzori Development programmes and the Peace Recovery and Development Programme that includes the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, Karamoja Livelihood Youth Programme and Northern Uganda Agricultural Recovery Programme, under the Office of the Prime Minister, to deliberately harmonise the regional imbalance.

In order to ensure regional balance, the committee recommends that specific programmes targeting areas with significantly higher poverty rates and poor social indicators be urgently implemented to rebuild and revitalise the local economy as well as increase income of the local people in the highly poverty stricken areas.

Monitoring and Evaluation

The committee observed that this chapter does, in detail, a review of the monitoring and evaluation related challenges, lessons learnt and capacity development. However, falls short in terms of offering a conceptual framework for monitoring and evaluation in Uganda.

The committee recommends that it is important for NDP II to develop, coordinate and integrate monitoring and evaluation under National planning Authority to ensure value of money and timely implementation of Government programs.

General Conclusion

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this plan, the NDP II, is a second of the six/five year NDPs that will be implemented under vision 2040 and covers the fiscal period 2015/16 to 2019/20. It builds on achievements attained under NDP I, mitigates the challenges encountered during its implementation and seeks to take advantage of regional and global development opportunities.

Unlike its predecessor, the NDP 11 will serve as a point of reference to inform Government planning processes thereby eliminating parallel planning. The number of prioritised growth opportunities and development fundamentals has been narrowed to only three and two respectively to increase impact and create growth momentum. 

The three prioritised growth opportunities include: agriculture, tourism and minerals, oil and gas and the development fundamentals are in infrastructure and human capital development.

The NDP II emphasises prioritisation of interventions through a value chain analysis, a spatial framework, the alignment of sector/MDAs/local governments, priorities and budgets with NDP II priorities, appropriate financing modalities; for the priority interventions and addressing the challenges of  the weak  public sector systems, among others.

I move that the report of the committee be adopted and the second National Development Plan 2015/16-2019/2020 be approved by Parliament. I beg to report.

However, Madam Speaker, before I take my seat, I beg to lay the following documents on the Table: the original copy of the report of the committee on NDP II 2015/2016-2019/2020; minutes of committee meetings; the rapporteur report for the retreat the committee had on this report; and the civil society organisations’ view on the draft NDP II.  I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman and the committee of Finance. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the government this time for bringing the NDP early enough. Last time we were really stampeded; there was no time for debate. But now we have that opportunity. The report has been signed by at least one third of the members though I have some questions to the chairman of the committee. 

A few weeks ago I was a Guest of Honour at the Namirembe Cathedral; I was with hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. But while there we were confronted with a situation where we were told that we have one pathologist and three radiotherapists in the country.

We both undertook that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa will take it to the cabinet; and for me that when the NDP is brought here, I will ensure this matter is addressed.

I think I will want an answer - what is the relationship between our National Development Plan and the admission of students in our tertiary institutions and the courses they are taking? How are we facilitating the process of acquiring those professions which are missing? I want some answers on those issues. Think about it, and when you report, let us know. We must know the relationship between NDP and the overall process of capital development. We are still bringing children of BA Arts for administration, administering where? I do not know. People are still doing masters degrees in medicine of their choice. What are we focusing on as a country? Those are the answers we want.

The matter is now open for debate. Clarification on what? The report is done. What clarification, hon. Cecilia Ogwal?  Maybe you want to just contribute. You have a point of procedure? Okay, get onto the Floor.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the chairman should have informed the House that there was supposed to be a minority report, which I intercepted. Well, I thought that in the interest of harmony, it would have been better to discuss it, rather than bringing it as a minority report. It is important that the House takes note.

For two reasons - Chapter 17 on Regional Balance Development talks about dealing with disparity in the development of the country. We had thought that this is a matter where the issue of poverty in the East and North ought to have been addressed. This is important because these have been raised as a matter of policy, Government concern - it is just a question of implementing it. In fact, I urge members of Parliament to read the latest report written by Uganda Bureau of Statistics, which comes out with all the details about the disparity. 

I thought this is the only opportunity we have to address disparity. And one of the proposals that I would have wanted to give is that children, from very poor families in the East and North, be given special scholarships. That is very important. They should be given priority by granting them scholarships so that they can attend – yes, we have State House scholarships, but really the poverty levels in the North and the East, Members, particularly where Kony operated for over 20 years, is a matter that needs to be addressed.

Some of you who come from the South and West should take trouble to go there and see; it is pathetic. This was the only opportunity for the NDP II to address the issue of disparity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I have a small point of clarification. As hon. Jack Sabiti was yesterday contributing to a debate relating to the passing of a loan, he said he does not see any difference between Western and Northern Uganda, regarding these special programmes.

But now the hon. Cecilia Ogwal has invited those who come from the West and South to go to the North and see the difference. Since hon. Jack Sabiti was here as she is raising this very pertinent issue, I get lost. According to hon. Jack Sabiti, while we have been putting a lot of money in Northern Uganda the difference is zero. They are not any better. That is the point hon. Jack Sabiti was pushing. In other words, it is not all about sending money; it is about how money is being utilized. That should be the point really. That is the clarification I am seeking from my big sister.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, for seeking that clarification. It has come in very timely. I happen to be the Whip to the hon. Jack Sabiti. I spoke to him before I came to make this statement. I also talked to the Shadow Minister of Finance. 

The point is: I am referring to an official document, which is available on the website. It is the latest report on poverty. It has all the indicators and government is very concerned and it was issued by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics.

If we Members of Parliament have this official document but pretend that it does not exist, then we are not leaders. I am just concerned about poverty in the West as it is in the North. And during the budget discussions today I was telling people that we cannot raise the issue of the budget process without dealing with the issue of Karamoja. I do not come from Karamoja. But as a Ugandan and as a nationalist - we need to address these matters as national matters. So, on the issue raised by the hon. Jack Sabiti, I have a discussion with him. He is a nationalist and understands the position I am making right now. I thank you.

4.47
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for their report.

The 5-year National Development Plan must give a clear direction for the country. Countries that develop have one or two lead sectors that spur growth. It can be tourism like in Mauritius; it can be human resource, like in Hong Kong. But I hear about a development plan, which is touching everywhere and wonder - what is the lead sector for Uganda in the next five years? Where are we going as a country if we say, agriculture is our priority, and the National Development Plan is starting 2015/2016? Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected.

THE SPEAKER: Who is bothering you? Order! Hon. Magyezi is on the Floor. (Laughter)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you Madam Speaker. As I was saying, how can we say agriculture is a lead sector but in the same year we design a development plan, we see allocations to this sector decreasing from 3.4 to 2.7 per cent. Therefore, chairman of the committee, which sector, in the next development plan, is actually the lead sector for this country?

Secondly, on the issue of decentralisation policy, I would like to agree with the committee’s observation. The lack of clarity in terms of which direction we are taking with regard to decentralisation - are we going for the regional tier Government? Are we going for small districts? Are we going for urban authorities?
Madam Speaker, if we say, we are committed to decentralisation and in terms of revenue sharing, we do not change the current configuration, I think we are not sincere to ourselves. 

In the year 2000, the local authorities were getting 34 per cent of the national budget. This time they are getting 15 per cent and we are saying we are now going to ensure that local governments actually assist to implement the development plan.  I think, chairperson of the committee, your spot-on – we would like to make a recommendation that yes, we approved the development plan, subject to an amendment in which we see revenue sharing between the central Government and local Government totally changing.

Third, on the issue of minerals, oil and gas, the chairperson said the development plan sees an optimistic picture of this sector. In my constituency, in a place called Mashonga, we have Gold but surprisingly we have left this Chinese company to mine the Gold. While this company has reached the Gold rip, there is no Government official who knows how much Gold is being taken away but they simply say they are still exploring to find out if there are commercial quantities. Therefore, it is unfortunate when God gives us wealth yet at the end of the day, our people remain poor. 

I would like to request that in the development plan, the people who are in charge please make sure that – (Member timed out.) 

4.50
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, District Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity and thank the committee for this report. Under education, I would like to thank the committee for having identified the issue of lack of childhood programmes and policy direction as a big challenge which is affecting our country.

The demand for this programme and policy direction is overdue. Because we do not have this programme and policy direction, the communities are busy trying to do something to ensure the children are enlightened before they join primary school.  This has also affected the leaders because there is so much demand for leaders to intervene and help them. Therefore, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I request that this should be prioritised. I know when we implement this, it will help our people. 

On the issue to thematic curriculum where currently we use the local language up to primary four, I think we did a big mistake to have accepted this policy direction. I had meetings at various schools in Adjumani District and as a teacher, when a child reaches primary four, I know what it means. The workload increases. They need to be analytical in whatever they are doing in every subject. And in our rural communities, speaking English is secondary in families, unlike in schools. Therefore, we have disadvantaged the rural districts highly.

Madam Speaker, we need to review this urgently otherwise this is one of the issues affecting the quality of education and the performance of the learners in the rural areas. 

There was an issue about quality of education and retention of enrolment. I think Government has to review its statement on its commitment pertaining to its contribution to education. Currently our communities have been misled because what is on the ground is that people perceive that education is free. If you take the initiative – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this issue of thematic education, I think it is time we had a substantive motion so that we can debate the pros and cons with figures. How were the children performing before and then after? I have objected to it from the beginning and I still object to it. So I think it is time we had a debate on that matter. By the way it was not brought to this House for debate; it was just implemented by the ministry.

4.54
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, District Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the report on the National Development Plan. However, I would like to mention that there are a few things that have missed out in this report. When you go to page 11, about tourism - we are all aware that the Busoga Tourism Initiative has done a lot of work in the Busoga Sub region where we are promoting tourism in that great region.

But there are two roads which have not been considered for construction. That is Kaliro-Nawaikoke Road and the Irundu-Kagulu Road. Those are very strategic roads for the tourism in the Busoga sub region. So, I want to ask why the ministry hasn’t looked at them. This is important to know because we were promised that these roads are going to be constructed as soon as possible; we really need them? I hope the minister will be able to give me an answer.

Also, let talk about the special programme for the Busoga Sub region; I will never get tired of talking about it. This programme –(Laughter)– was passed by this Parliament and we really appreciate the efforts of the Members of Parliament because you considered Busoga Sub region as a region that needs a special programme. However, I do not see it here in this National Development Plan. Mr Minister, have you forgotten about Busoga sub-region? We have a special programme and we need to appear there please. Thank you, very much.

4.56
MS JANIPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative Buvuma): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Before I debate, you have said something that I have not understood.
 
THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MS EGUNYU: The chairman of the committee was requesting Parliament to approve the NDP II yet I heard you say it was not brought here for debate. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I meant the previous one and thematic education were not debated in this House. 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from the islands and despite the fact that most people debate on issues of service delivery in rural areas, the islands in Uganda are not only rural but are islands in nature whereby the only means of transport to those places is by water. Islands in Uganda have their own uniqueness and are so behind in terms of education, health, infrastructure and others.

According to what I have heard from the chairman of the committee, there is nothing that touches any island in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I am requesting you - minority reports are known to come from the Opposition – that before we approve the NDP II, please give me some time and I write a minority report on behalf – (Interjection) - yes because everything was forgotten. There is nothing at all that has been put in the five-year development plan for the islands of Uganda, Buvuma inclusive.

This means the islands in Uganda never got a representative in the discussions that took place and now that I am in the Parliament of Uganda plus other colleagues, I am requesting you to suspend all other laws and rules of Parliament and give us time to also factor in island problems and programmes as needed to be put in the National Development Plan II. This is important because for the five years to come, islands will be out. I am requesting you, Madam Speaker, to give time to factor in island programmes and problems that are needed to be worked on in Uganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course it will not be possible to raise a minority report now but I do appreciate that the issue of the islands is unique. The problem is that the planners are from the mainland. I have advised the chairman of the committee to check with the technical people and see whether the issues of the islands are included. We shall not take a vote on this until I am satisfied that the islands have been addressed. Let the debate continue, but I would like to see proof that the matter has been addressed before we conclude.

5.00
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA SSENGENDO (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The National Development Plan II, as we have heard from the report, we all need to support all these programmes as far as the NDP II is concerned.

When it comes to development programmes, it is my wish and prayer that we all speak the same voice. I do not want to see party colours when it comes to developing our country as long as we take the right priorities.

Madam Speaker, they have talked about the Kampala Metropolitan Authority or master plan. Indeed when the KCCA Act came into force, what was supposed to be in place in order to create a conducive environment for the expansion and development, was to team up with all the neighbouring districts, but as we talk that is not in existence. But there is no way we can talk about developing Kampala, with the two million plus people, without encroaching on other districts. So the earlier we do it by having this metropolitan authority in place, the better for our city. 

Madam Speaker, we should also put into consideration - as we try to have that plan, those who are making arrangements for all these developments - the urban poor. Any programmes and plans that leaves out the urban poor cannot be taken as serious plan. When you look at the programmes carried out now in the city, there is no place for the poor. I have never seen any city in the world for all the planners without planning for the urban poor. As we try to develop the city we should plan also for the urban poor. 

The issue of having an administrative city has been my dream for many years. We cannot continue - (Member timed out.)  

5.03
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address my mind to unemployment. I had imagined that this plan would specifically show, in detail and give critical attention to the unemployment challenge we are facing as a country.

I read just about four sentences about unemployment and basically it is recognition of the high levels of unemployment in our country. I think it is high time we gave great detail on how to deal with challenge. I am certain that colleagues every day in our offices, other places of work and homes, so many young people find their ways of meeting us seeking for something to do. It is such a very serious problem and we must collectively give it the adequate attention it deserves.

The last statistics that we saw mentioned 400,000 young people who graduate with degrees and diplomas every year but that only about 8,000 of them only get jobs. If we do not address this urgently then we can be certain that a few years to come this will be out hand.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of highly poverty stricken areas, I had an opportunity to do community work immediately after school, before I joined Parliament, in the Acholi Sub-region. Honestly, it is something we cannot do away since there are some regions in our country that need urgent and special interventions. (Applause) I know we assume so many things, but there are certain things we must address; that we cannot run away from. You see the quality of life the children live, the mothers in such areas and feel like no, something has to be done. This is a special area that needs special intervention. Therefore, as we budget, these areas certainly must receive the adequate attention they deserve. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I have gone through the NDP II and would like to make this comment. I will address myself to the issue of sustainable population and environment. The committee has highlighted key areas of intervention like sanitation, decent housing and urban planning. But in the priorities under decent housing, I do not see any concrete interventions as to what we call decent housing. We have a lot of slums in and around Kampala; I do not see any suggestions on slum upgrading. 

There are already programmes and interventions by the UN in Africa, to which Uganda has even signed partnership in implementation but the NDP does not seem to pick on these interventions. Why don’t we focus on slum upgrading to provide decent housing and housing financing for the poor? How can the poor people access housing financing so that they can own homes? 

On sanitation, we know that in this country we have a shortage of public places – toilets - on highways; even you, Madam Speaker, God forbid; if you had an emergency, you have nowhere to branch except in somebody’s home or a petrol station and if you are denied entry, I do not know what would happen. Therefore, sanitation is very paramount and the NDP should focus on this. 

The other issue is about good governance. We did consult the NPA and we showed that NDP 1 did not at all include the issues of the media. We know how the media is influential in good governance and democracy but even in NDP II, we do not see issues of the media. How can the media facilitate good governance and development? 

It is very important that we include the media as a key priority and intervention in promoting and ensuring that we have good governance. Those are the concerns I have. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman; this is a good report. However, let me first address myself to Chapter 7; Tourism. I do not know whether the person who suggested these roads was not under duress because these roads - Hamuwa, Ishaka, Kabale, Bunyonyi, Kisoro and Karugutu - as if all the tourism is that region. I see a blessing in disguise in this area as a result of the former Prime Minister. This is very dangerous. 

Busoga has tourist attractions; Kitgum - we have gone to Karamoja; Kidepo National Park - in my constituency, I have the first brick house in Uganda but when you consider the selection of these roads; they are not independent of themselves. This is very dangerous and we cannot allow this. Ministers are that side, everything - no. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like to talk about 5(viii) on Infrastructure. Madam Speaker and members, believe me, roads which are taken up by Government from our districts are not doing anything better. You find roads taken up by the Central Government and they are still using the single tractor at the district to repair the roads. There is no difference.

By the time this Government came to power, we had 15 planes but Rwanda almost had none. Now Rwanda has so far procured 12 planes. One flies to Dubai daily and you are talking about bringing this-

On education, how are you going to improve education when up to now you are giving Shs 7000 per child under UPE per year? Divide it by nine months and look at what you are providing a child. That is almost Shs 300 and you are here saying nothing. Teachers are striking and you are just threatening them with RDCs and everybody. When you educate a child, you have educated a nation and there is no way you can improve education without giving attention to that. 

I want to emphasis the issue of agriculture. What is our budget allocation to agriculture? Most Ugandans are agriculturalist. The moment you do not provide - people who were in UPC and I am happy we have a former minister of UPC back here and he will tell you what their Government was doing about agriculture. They were giving equipment, motorcycles and extension workers, improving agriculture though I was not in support of UPC. He is in the NRM now and that is his own decision and I do not want to interfere in such matters. However on minerals, I have heard hon. Magyezi raising a very pertinent issue; how can the Chinese take up our minerals without any intervention from Government? We are giving out everything. This is shameful and actually when you talk about –(Member timed out.)

5.13
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga North Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would wish, first of all, to applaud the committee, particularly on the issue of having an administrative city away from Kampala. As we speak today, Kampala has become everything in Uganda. It is the  major industrial area and commercial city. It is also the seat of a Central Government without regional governments; everything is in Kampala. That must have led to overcrowding in the city and no individual can be blamed for being part of the congestion in the city.

However, the practice today in Kampala is that small traders are being punished for causing this overcrowding by confiscating their merchandise in places like Nakulabye, Bwaise and Kasubi. Every day, they are on the lookout; every time in a moment KCCA agents are there to punish them for causing this overcrowding. They are not part of the system that has killed everything elsewhere to have everything here. What I would like to say is that we are all in Kampala because we don’t have elsewhere.

The other point is agriculture. This is the basis of our economy. The basis of any good agriculture activity by a common farmer is having good and outstanding agricultural extension services. Last week, I was in my constituency and the only advisory body in regard to agriculture – NAADS - is now manned by soldiers without any agricultural background. Somebody was distributing chicks and he could not distinguish between layers and broilers but he was the man giving out to the common farmer to begin with.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is about good governance. To have good governance, we must have limits to individual interests. Thus we must talk about term limits. If somebody is there to shift goal posts wherever it comes to him or herself, it cannot be good governance. We cannot talk of good governance when a swam of ministers –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report.  My first area of concern is on education and that touches the thematic curriculum. The Government should urgently withdraw this programme; Uganda, as a country, does not need it. 

You are talking about a thematic curriculum and comparing Uganda that has over 40 languages spoken and because one language is spoken in China and they are very good in Chinese and we have seen it in other countries, we want to bring it to Uganda. If Government wants to promote any language in this country, it should be Kiswahili. We need it more than any of these that we are trying to promote. We want the mother tongue, fine; we all need to speak in idioms and proverbs but that can be part of just a syllabus but not talking about thematic curriculums and teaching children in vernacular.

Let me talk about biology in particular. I studied the skeleton as a structure in primary four. All the biology you will meet in university, you will get in primary four and here you are communicating in the mother tongue and you are setting the same examination in English and you expect a child who studies in Kumamu to pass this examination. Uganda is not really being serious. Therefore, go back to the drawing board; we do not need this unplanned thematic curriculum of yours. Take it wherever you are going to take it. If you care about this country, you will revise it.

The other issue is about recruitment and filling of gaps. Every year Uganda churns out I do not know how many graduates but our children are dying of unemployment. Government does not have any extensive plan to recruit these graduates. We have masters’ degree students. We have all the degree-holder students. We have all these professionals and they are there seated idle. We have very many gaps in the ministry. How has the National Development Plan thought about this and accommodated all these plans together and seen how to fill the gaps? Have these been covered?

Madam Speaker, about the Albertine Grabe, when you talk about oil in the Bunyoro region, it is only almost the Minister of Energy alone that is there and a bit of NEMA – the Minister of Environment. There is an inter-ministerial committee and other ministries are supposed to liaise with the Ministry of Energy to have a good plan of the oil region. If you go to Hoima and see what is in this oil city, honestly Ugandans, I do not know –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR YOKASI BIHANDE BWAMBALE(FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for a brilliant report and also to thank Government for coming out with the second five-year development plan. This is because when you do not have a development plan, you are actually piloting an aircraft without radar.

I have a comment on the department of health. Around 2001 or 2002, Government came out with a strategic health development plan and one of the issues in that programme was to have health centres IV in each constituency. Unfortunately, the same programme had an item that constituencies which have missionary or private hospitals will not benefit from the health centres IV programme because those hospitals will carry out the services of health centres IV programmes.

There is a problem, Madam Speaker, for example in my constituency; we have Kagando Hospital. It is missionary and purely private. When a lady goes there for delivery under caesarean section, she is charged Shs 860,000 while in other constituencies when someone goes to a Government health centre IV, she is charged nothing. If you are admitted in Kagando with malaria and you are treated with quinine administered through IV, You are charged Shs 86,000. If it is normal delivery, it is Shs 120,000. 

Therefore, constituencies which do not have Government health centres IV are not benefitting from the free health services that are being offered by Government. I would wish that in the development plan, we include that those constituencies which do not have health centres IV should have them constructed by Government.

My other issue is on climate change. I have not heard anything specific about how Uganda is going to adapt to global warming. Right now, we are in the middle of a rainy season which has come late. In a place like western Uganda, we normally start planting mid-March. It rained for about two weeks and stopped and all the crops dried. Now it is raining again when everything has dried. I wish something to be highlighted in the development plan on how Uganda is going to adapt to this climate change caused by global warming.

About the roads, in the late 1990s, Kasese and western Uganda was attacked by the ADF. One of the strategies we put in place to fight insecurity on Mount Rwenzori – (Member timed out.)

5.22
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In this report, I thank the committee for taking note of the budget allocation to our agricultural sector well aware that most of our citizens rely on agriculture.

Madam Speaker, I am standing here to pray that God willing the next budget – with you seated in that chair and I, back in this House – we should make it a point that the budget of this country should not be passed if 10 per cent is not allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. Let it be noted because all of us derive our livelihoods from agriculture. It is a shame to have the budget of individual comfort more than the budget of the citizens of this country. Imagine 2.7 per cent allocated to agriculture in this budget and we are comfortable to go back and say, send us back here.

On the issue of climate change, as a shadow minister I have been emphasising this from the Opposition side. What I would like to appeal is that until that time when the climate change is given a befitting home for us to fast-track the effects of climate change is when we shall realise. 
As we speak, this honourable House does not have an update to fast-track the climate change. We are relying on the parliamentary forum to give us information. I have been appealing that climate change should be given a befitting home so that we can be given information and even maybe the citizens benefit from carbon trade.

When I look at this report, the passionate issue which my whip expressed is disparities in this country. Nodding disease is one of those pains which has been defined, confined and condemned to Acholi land. All government budgets and undertakings do not take nodding syndrome as a problem.

Madam Speaker, we have condemned 7,000 children to die. I have pleaded to this House. We have proposed to even have a budget – you remember when we wanted money for research. We have pleaded to have an update where the CDC research information be given for us to appreciate the undertaking of Government but nothing has come up. 

Our children have been raped – those nodding children. We have babies born without their dads and we do not have any provision for them. Nobody even bothers to understand or even save their dying mothers. There is no socio-economic intervention to the families of the nodding syndrome.

Madam Speaker, my plea is that we become sensitive to these people. It is a pain. Even the report of the select committee you put in place has never been debated by this House up to now. The chairperson of that committee is the same chairperson of the Health committee. He has not even included anything to do with nodding. He is there looking at me – hon. Bitekyerezo. (Laughter). I am at pain to pass this budget when we have condemned our children to die systematically and we will answer in heaven for this.
Madam Speaker, I plead that immediately, through you – (Member timed out.)

5.26
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the good report. The quality of a nation is judged by the number of the people who are educated. In that regard, in Uganda we need to emphasise education.

Looking at the current education system, the policies need a lot of changes. Look at the policy of automatic curriculum – not only the thematic curriculum. The policy on automatic curriculum says that whether a child comes last in primary one, the child should be promoted. When a child comes last in primary six, he or she is supposed to go to primary seven and at primary seven, UNEB sets standard PLE and when the child fails, Government says no more automatic promotions to Senior One. It means the future of that child is totally blocked. You have been promoting her right from primary one up to primary seven but on reaching primary seven, the child fails and you tell her to drop out of school because there is no more automatic promotion. Therefore, our policy is extremely biased, Madam Speaker. 

Look at the thematic curriculum; this curriculum subjects a pupil from a rural school to learn English only for three years unlike the one in the urban setting who will learn English for seven years. At the end, all of them are supposed to write UNEB exams in English.

Madam Speaker, you can see the disparity of education in our area. It means that the child from a rural school will automatically never catch up and he will never compete with a child who has been studying within the urban setting. The policy is even biased; it says schools within the urban areas should teach their pupils in English and the ones in the rural setting should practice the thematic curriculum.

While visiting one of the schools in my constituency, I read the school rules and regulations for that school. The school is located in the town council of Amuru. One of the school rules and regulations says that all pupils are supposed to speak English within the school compound except P1, P2, P3 and P4. The head teacher went ahead to lay down the punishments and one of the punishments is suspension or dismissal from school if you break the school rules and regulations. 

Therefore, it beats your understanding. Madam Speaker, we need to overhaul the education system in this country. We need quality education - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, hon. Olanya, for giving way -

THE SPEAKER: No, his time is over. Hon. Fungaroo – 

5.29
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. 

First and foremost, if you go to chapter 7, you will notice that there is an increase in regional imbalance in terms of regional development. This is despite the attempts which were made to address the imbalance, for example through the Equalisation Grant, PRDP, NUSAF, NAADS et cetera. What is the best way to address this? Personally, I want Uganda to remain as one and we should move together. A solution should be found to make sure that the north and the east catch up with the regions which are ahead of them so that they can move together. 

The report here says that despite this programme - (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I am in pain; I am one of those few Ugandans who believe that this country stretches from Kitgum up to Kisoro. The amount of money that has been put in PRDP and NUSAF specifically to make sure that the people in the north can come on board is too much money.

When a man like hon. Fungaroo from Obongi pretends not to see that the Government of Uganda has put extensive amounts of money in northern Uganda in PRDP and some people in the region - not from western Uganda - have eaten part of that money, is he in order to insinuate that this Government has abandoned northern Uganda? In actual fact, a lot of money has been put there? Is hon. Fungaroo in order to incite violence in this country?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It is not me but the report of the committee. I do not know whether hon. Bitekyerezo reads reports. Are you a medical doctor for us all? The report is here; it is not me saying that despite the PRDP, NUSAF and all the other affirmative action given in favour of northern Uganda, the imbalances are still growing. If a medical doctor prescribes medicine and it does not work, he must revise and take another course of action. 

I will move to the next cause - good governance. Madam Speaker, when I was touring the sub-counties in Obongi constituency, I found that one of the elements which make us fail in good governance, especially on oversight, is: the sub-county councillors are ill-equipped to do oversight. They are supposed to be the first people to check how well Government programmes are implemented but they do not have transport facilities to move from one area of a sub-county to another. 

We need to empower the sub-county councillors and the sub-county councils. They are part of our central Government arrangement though they are called local governments. There must be money from the centre to make sure that the basic infrastructure of Government at sub-county level for the council works very well.

There is also a problem in terms of information. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, which is for the whole of Uganda, does not reach some parts of Uganda. Television and internet - Madam Speaker, if you want to talk to me through the internet when I am in Obongi, you will get problems because of the bandwidth for the corridor from Kampala here. When I went to UCC, they told me that they deemed Obongi very small because the internet costs cannot be afforded by the people of Obongi. Therefore, Government must provide some low costing for the poor areas so that the internet can be easily accessed there.

Lastly, we need transport along the river valley on both banks. People are marginalised. If you are to move from here to Gulu via Karuma and Kamdini, there is a fairly good road up to the border. On the western bank of the Nile, you can move from Pakwach, Nebbi and Koboko border. There are people in the Nile valley - take like 20 kilometres on either side of the river bank – and these people are marginalised. They have no roads. In the past, there used to be a good network of water transport along the river from Pakwach to Karuma, Pakwach to Nimule and Pakwach to Kasese along the river.

Where is your plan concerning this? When you do not plan on improving accessibility in terms of transport and communication so that Ugandans can move from one corner of the country to another, maybe this is part of the failing Government. In our new Government when we come, we shall make sure that all Ugandans are able to communicate by internet and TV will reach everywhere. (Laughter) You will be able to move from Kasese through the Kazinga Channel, Lakes Edward and George to Albert and River Nile up to Nimule. We will construct roads on either bank of River Nile from Kamuli to Obongi. (Laughter)

5.36
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we had a by-election in Katakwi, I had the privilege to reach Katakwi. Last week, we were in Nwoya and from what I saw in Nwoya and Katakwi, you can move in a whole sub-county without finding any iron roofed house. It touches my heart because in this century - hon. Kiyonga, hon. Bihande and hon. Bahati will agree with me - it is almost impossible in western Uganda to move in a whole sub-county and find only grass thatched houses. It is not possible.

Madam Speaker, for hon. Fungaroo to say that the north and east regions need special attention and planning is critical; it is something that we should not negotiate for. When it comes to paying taxes, people pay taxes from all corners of this country whether east, north, central or west. That is why we must have balanced development. 

It is at this point that I would like to bring to the attention of this House the fact that we need to be very careful in our planning. I want to take the example of what the President of this country promised Kasese District in 2001. He talked about the alpine route which would run from Kasese in the mountains, in the national parks, to Kabarole and Ntoroko. If that route was completed or worked on, I want to tell you that it would address two issues.  

One is the issue of income; the Government would benefit because the tourists would be able to traverse the entire region with minimum difficulty and also Government would be able to deliver. Two, we would also be able to address the issue of security. In the mountains, you realise that we have battled with the ADF, NALU and a number of insurgent groups that have come to the mountains. If the roads reached the mountains, it would be cheaper for Government to reach out in the mountains and be able to suffocate the rebels. The challenge is that the rebels normally have a safe haven because there is limited infrastructure in the mountains –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude on the issue concerning the mountains. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, when we were passing the Public Finance Management Act, I put a component in the debate and it was adopted - the issue of how resources can be allocated. The committee had proposed that resources could be allocated in respect to the population as well as the geographical size but I added a third component of terrain. 

We have areas in this country that have difficult terrains and also unreachable areas like Kalangala, Buvuma and so many others. It would be paramount when we are budgeting, borrowing a loan or even generating funds to finance a road outside the islands that we procure a vessel. We should budget for a loan for the areas which are outside the islands but also procure a vessel for the islands. This is so that we have one road here and a vessel on the waters. 

It would be fair that our people, especially those who seek emergency support, for example people who would be referred to Mulago in the night and are in islands –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before hon. Oketayot comes up, as hon. Nzoghu was speaking, I remembered that I was in Kasese recently and I could not understand how people walk up and down those mountains throughout their lives. Therefore, the issue of the mountain roads is important. I was thinking about the Elgon zone. I do not know how the Bamasaba also do their Imbalu there with no roads. I hope the chairperson will take into account the issue of the mountain roads as well for these areas. 

5.42
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of my colleagues have already raised the issue of agriculture vis-à-vis the issue of climate change. We are all aware that Uganda, Africa and the world at large are experiencing climate change. As far as the issue of agricultural production is concerned, we should know that we cannot stick to the old ways of doing things. There may be need to introduce new crops in some areas where they have never been grown. There is need to invest in coffee growing, for example, by introducing it in northern Uganda where it has not been grown for many years. 

On the issue of regional balanced development, I implore the Chief Government Whip not to be at a loss. They say actions speak louder than words. I would also say figures speak louder than words. What hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised is based on statistical data from a very reliable source. A recent documentation indicates that much as the Government has done well to reduce poverty rates below 20 per cent, which is about 19 per cent now, poverty rates in northern Uganda are still about 40 per cent. The poverty rate in eastern Uganda is at about 20 per cent while in the central region, the poverty rate is at about 10 per cent and the poverty rate in western Uganda is below 8 per cent. 

The unfortunate thing, and what is so annoying, is that many people keep saying PRDP money is going to northern Uganda, which is not the case. The PRDP money goes to 55 districts and I do not think northern Uganda comprises of 55 districts. The 55 districts are more or less half of this country but time and again, the likes of hon. Bitekyerezo keep saying PRDP money goes to northern Uganda. The Government of Uganda used the suffering of the people of northern Uganda to get money which is not going only to northern Uganda. I think this is an abuse to the people of northern Uganda who are suffering. 

Sincerely, Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal that this claim that PRDP money goes to northern Uganda should stop. This is because it annoys some of us very much. This money is not going to 28 districts. In northern Uganda, we have 28 districts. What colleagues are raising is based on facts - (Member timed out.)

5.45
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Government for the NDP II and also thank the committee for the good report - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members! Please allow hon. Syda Bbumba to contribute. Do not have other meetings there. 

MS BBUMBA: Can I be protected, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister return? 

MS BBUMBA: My biggest concern is on employment. We all know that we are sitting on a time bomb of unemployment of the young people of this country. To make matters worse, most of the unemployed are educated. For that matter, they are vulnerable to high crime like what we are witnessing today - cybercrime. 

It hurts to note that people of paid employment fell from 21.5 to 18.5 in the period under review. At the same time, Uganda is suffering from low productivity. You need four Ugandans to do the job which is done by one Kenyan. You also need three Ugandans to do a job which is done by one Tanzania. Productivity is also another contributing factor to the high unemployment in this country.

Madam Speaker, we need to address the education in this country. We now have universities almost in every constituency. What are we educating these children for when they cannot be made productive? Our education system needs to be addressed. You need one graduate manager to manage 10 technical people but here, it is the other way round; you have more graduates than technical people and this is contributing to unemployment. We need to address that.

The many graduates are a problem. We need to invest heavily in vocational training. We need a vocational institute or a polytechnic which will produce hands-on people almost in every district to be able to match the many graduates who are being churned out from the various universities every year. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad the minister for employment is here. This issue of employment is really painful. Many times I have informed you that in Malaysia, if you are an investor, for any foreigner you employ, you must create employment for 11 Malaysians. In Egypt, for every foreigner, you must create nine jobs for the Egyptian and they are very strict about it but here it is “to whom it may concern”.

5.49
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government and the committee for this report. I would like to know who is going to check the recommendations that have been put down by the committee. I wonder whether the Government is going to them on or not.

According to what I have seen in the report about social services, nothing much has been has been talked about. Much has been elaborately written about the infrastructure; the roads have been shown but the hospitals that are going to be worked upon have not been shown. We have Kawolo Hospital and it is in a sorry state. I wonder if Government is going to put it among the considered hospitals for re-innovation or among the tourist attractions to show how badly we are doing with our hospitals. Kawolo Hospital has been in the budget for last 10 years but up to today, nothing much has been done as no construction work has taken place.

Madam Speaker, the report mentions new cities to be brought on board. However, today we are grappling with the problem of garbage. We left it to KCCA, the town councils and the municipalities around Uganda. We are talking about climate change; the water that comes out of the garbage - (Member timed out.)

5.52
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Island County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. However, allow me emphasise a few things. 

One, the report talks about urban planning. We know very well that the whole country was declared a planning area but we are not seeing deliberate attempts being taken to make sure that there is planning in the whole country.

The report also mentions cities. I would like it to be clearly understood that much as we have a number of cities, we should also emphasise changing our capital city. Hon. Ssebagala talked about it. Kampala is already congested. One of the facilities that I would like to see move – Actually, even Parliament should to another area because we are part of the problem to this city. You can see 300 or 400 vehicles around Parliament, which is a small area. My proposal would therefore be that we should have a deliberate move to get a new city, not these other cities but a new one. This one should remain an administrative capital but we should have a new city somewhere else if we are to decongest Kampala.

The other issue is about land management. There is a deliberate effort by Government to attract investors but there is no deliberate effort for them to have land. We normally wait for investors to come and we give them land. We have always talked about a land fund; can we have a deliberate way of managing land in this country? We always talk about water being life but land too is life; water is on land. So we must manage land sustainably.

On transport, I am looking at reviving the national carrier. We are donating a lot of money as a country to a number of countries. Everyone is flying Ethiopian Airlines, Kenya Airways; what is so special with those countries, including Rwanda? Can’t Uganda revive the national carrier? This year in March, the President was disappointed by Kenya Airways when they declined an offer to fly him. In 2009, the President had to travel in economy class from a Commonwealth conference simply because - (Member time out.)

5.55
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee but will address myself to three main things.

I will start with population growth, were we are almost hitting 34.9 million. The issue of the health of Ugandans was not addressed here and I am in pain. What I know for a fact is that cancers are very common in people who have clocked 40 years and above. For those who eat very well, including myself and everybody seated in this Chamber, you are likely to die of a heart attack when you just go above 40 years of age. However, to my surprise, we are not thinking of training Ugandan health workers to work in our hospitals here, which we can make specialised. 

Whenever a rich man or a connected person gets a problem, all of them run to the President. They want him to give them money to go to India. Madam Speaker, there is one rich man who ended up in Nairobi to be treated for malaria. If we do not invest in health, our lives are at stake and none of us knows when we are to die. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs recently planned to export only specialist doctors to Trinidad and Tobago. I was opposed to their going and when we raised a red flag with hon. Chris Baryomunsi, who became a minister later on, they have now retracted from what they were trying to do.

I have a conviction that the National Development Plan – Dr Rwendeire, you are here; you come from Kabale and you know how Kabale looks like -

THE SPEAKER: Address the Speaker, please.

DR BITEKYEREZO: If we could not plan for the hospitals in this country and for retaining health workers here, we are in problems.

On the national carrier, recently I went to Lilongwe. From Entebbe, I went to Addis Ababa and moved down to Lilongwe and I came back and I was tired – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was listening very attentively to my colleague, hon. Bitekyerezo. He is very passionate in his submission and I would like to believe him, but I thought I heard him making reference either to somebody in the gallery or elsewhere. For the sake of the record of this House, it would be proper for hon. Bitekyerezo either to address the Chair or refer to any other person in terms of their official capacity so that we know. Therefore, is it procedurally okay for hon. Bitekyerezo, a very able legislator, to begin addressing the gallery or the technical bench and causing the records of this House to be distorted?

THE SPEAKER: No, the records relating to that gentleman will be expunged and I have told him to address the Speaker.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think getting a national carrier for this country is very important. I stay in Mbarara town and we have got an airfield there. When planes are taking off, the whole of Mbarara is covered in dust. I have had the chance to travel from Maputo up to Beira in Mozambique and I have landed in almost every airfield. Mozambique has all its airfields tarmacked. 

I went to Arua and found the airfield very dusty. The same problem applies to Lira, Kasese and Mbarara. I can tell you that when a plane is taking off, the whole of Mbarara is covered in dust. Surely, in our plans, can’t we put some tarmac on these airfields so that people do not eat dust whenever a plane is leaving –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have gone with the Committees on Health and HIV/AIDS to Buvuma Islands. If a woman gets obstructed labour in the islands, the ferry cannot move at night. What is happening is that the health centres IV are not functional at all as there is no operating driver. The women are dying and burials are taking place in Buvuma. 

Madam Speaker, if we do not cater for the people in the islands, I do not know what we are doing here. This is an urgent matter. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for making sure that before we adopt all these things, the issue of the islands is addressed because women are dying in Buvuma Islands. I was there and –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the very good report. 

The performance of NDPI shows that the poverty line or persons who leave below the poverty line reduced from 24.3 per cent to 19.7 per cent and the income per capita, as the national average, rose from US$ 607 to US$ 788. That is good news but not for all. When you come to areas like Karamoja, for example, we are happy that the First lady came to our region but all the same, what she has done cannot attain these figures. She has tried her best to improve some household incomes and it is now my appeal that Government supports her.

The point I am trying to raise here is that we should try to look at equity. The NDPII plans or expected results show that there is going to be a reduction of poverty from 19.7 per cent to 14.2 per cent. Karamoja now is at 75 per cent compared to 90 per cent before. Look at the difference. The national development planners have not taken into consideration what is going to happen to that 74 per cent, which is not reflected in the NDP II. There should have been an indication that whereas the national average has gone down from 19.7 per cent to 14 per cent, Karamoja region plus some other areas which are within this range are projected to go to such and such a percentage. 

My second point is that there should be special considerations, as mentioned in the NDP II, for those areas which are less developed. However, they did not outline or reflect what these considerations are. They should be able to outline this.

I would suggest that the Prime Minister and the office of the Minister for Karamoja Affairs should be able to initiate a very serious meeting, which should address the plan for developing this area, which should be indicated in the National Development Plan. Some of us are intelligent but we do not have resources. Our ideas are there but no one has contacted us. Even these national development planners do not consult. As such, Karamoja will continue to lag Uganda behind. The human development indices of Uganda - (Member timed out.)

6.04
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to address myself to what hon. Nzogu talked about concerning roads in mountainous areas. I am worried about the bridges. You have been reading in the papers how bridges have been washed away in the western region and in the Elgon zone. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Works and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) specifically to start looking at our bridges because some of them are very old. They should also start thinking about either reinforcing them or constructing new bridges to avoid delays in transportation because when a bridge sinks or is washed away, this causes delays.

An example is what happened on the Malaba River. Trucks were diverted through Mbale and many of our people were killed because they are not used to such heavy traffic. Therefore, UNRA should look after those bridges and make sure that they reinforce them or construct new ones.

My second point is on urbanisation. I am glad that the committee recommended that Government comes up with a policy on urbanisation and provides a framework for management. We are now making suggestions for upcoming cities but if they will remain the way they look now, it is going to be a great shame because cities are the face of the country. 

When I was a girl, I used to hear that Mbale was the cleanest town in East Africa. However, if you go there now, you will just cry. As we come up with the idea of cities, we should also go the way Kampala has gone. Take it or leave it, Jennifer Musisi is doing a great a job and unless we have the likes of Jennifer Musisi in these upcoming cities, we shall continue getting embarrassed. Even as they do that work, they are providing a livelihood for the people in the city. A lot of work is going on in Kampala and many people are getting jobs yet in the other cities, people are redundant and smoking bhanji and so on.

I would like to appeal to the Minister for Urban Planning. Please, as you come up with this idea, put in the budget money for cleaning, garbage removal and for the roads, which are a mess.

6.07
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee’s concern on high school dropout rates, especially at primary level. We have communities in this country that have not fully understood the importance of education, for example, Karamoja sub region and Amudat District in particular.

Madam Speaker, my own experience is that what can help reduce illiteracy levels in such communities is having boarding schools. Personally, I am here because I attended missionary boarding schools right from primary up to secondary. Boarding schools would be the best option for these hard-to-reach areas and places like the islands.

It is true that the National Development Plan I and even the NRM manifesto have been addressing these challenges but it is not enough. The facilities have not yet reached all the schools in these hard-to-reach areas. Therefore, I pray that NDP II continues with the programme of having boarding schools and even teachers’ houses in hard-to-reach areas and in the islands.

On the Early Child Development (ECD), these are the formative years of a child’s development and that is when a child learns to interact with fellow children from different families and backgrounds. However, you will realise that all this time, ECD has been a non-funded priority under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We are talking about equity but ECD is a non-funded priority and has been left to the private sector. However, most of them are business entities, thereby leaving out children from poor backgrounds. I request that NDP II takes ECD as a serious priority so that we bring children from all backgrounds - both the poor and the rich - on board. This is so that we can have the manpower that this country needs. I thank you.

6.10
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. This development plan is very good. However, we should see to it that whatever we discuss here will be implemented. 

I would like to address myself to chapter nine, that is on environment and natural resources and the use of our land. Uganda has very fertile lands but we are not using this land maximally because we do not use the physical plan, which is in place. This plan would enable us to know which arable areas can be used for agriculture while the rocky areas can be used for town settlement. For us we just build houses anywhere and you find that if you want to undertake commercial farming, you cannot manage this because there are too many houses everywhere. We need to organise ourselves so that we give enough land for agriculture and for development.

Every town is developing, from town boards to town councils, from town councils to municipalities and from municipalities to cities. As such, we need to plan well ahead of time so that we do not disorganise houses. Some people build their beautiful houses in the wrong places and when the time comes for planning, these houses are destroyed and you lose all these resources. We need to organise and use our land well.

In addition, we also need land for development. We need roads and we need towns to grow but you find that our people do not want to give land for these roads. Compensation becomes very expensive and wastes a lot of time as the money, which is secured, will not be used because of compensation. Therefore, we need to find a middle ground so that we have fair compensation rather than just increasing the money so much that Government may fail to compensate people.

Regarding health centres, during the division of local governments, there were some places which turned out bigger than others. Koboko, for example, was a county and each sub county is as large as a county. They have health centres III but now that we have upgraded Koboko Health Centre IV into a hospital, the remaining health centres III should also be upgraded to health centres IV so that they can serve the people.

Lastly, technology for the blind people is very important. There are computers for the blind and we need to see them in schools. We have talking computers that the blind persons use. In addition, physically handicapped people without wheelchairs or crutches cannot develop yet during budgeting they are given the bare minimum. Let us make use of the disabled people so that they can contribute to development. Thank you very much.

6.14
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to chapter 13 of the NDP and Vision 2040, which proposes strategic cities in the country. It is proposed that Hoima becomes a strategic city for oil, Jinja and Nakasongola become industrial towns, Fort Portal for tourism and Moroto for mining. I would like to say that this is a very good dream but in order to achieve this dream, the journey must begin now and it must begin with commitment and action. 

I say this in light of the mineral potential in Karamoja. Karamoja is blessed with a number of valuable minerals, some of which are now being exploited. The peace that is prevailing in Karamoja as a result of disarmament, the extension of power and tarmacking of some main roads has opened Karamoja for development.

I would like to talk about the minerals that are being ferried out of Karamoja. We cannot achieve this dream of making Moroto a satellite district if minerals continue to be ferried outside Karamoja. A case in point is the marble and limestone, which are being ferried by trucks from Amudat and Moroto for mining in Tororo. Madam Speaker, you have witnessed this. In the last three years, you have visited Karmoja twice and one time, you got stuck on the way from Amudat and Tapac because of the road that had been destroyed by the trucks that were carrying huge amounts of marble and limestone.

Madam Speaker, how can we ensure that industrialisation in this country becomes a real dream when minerals are being ferried from areas of production to other areas? There has been an aerial survey as well as geological surveys and mapping of minerals in Karamoja but to date, the ministry responsible for minerals has not laid before this Parliament a report detailing the amounts and the whereabouts of these minerals. Madam Speaker, I ask - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The point is noted; the aerial survey must be presented.

6.18
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the chairman and his committee for the very good report. 

I have only two to three points and one is on employment. Madam Speaker, every year about 400,000 students graduate out of our universities and tertiary institutions and yet about a quarter actually get employed. As hon. Bbumba said, we are actually sitting on a time bomb. I would like to see, in NDP II, a clear policy on how the Government intends to create employment for these people who are graduating out of these universities. If this is not done then we are in big trouble.

Secondly, on human development, I think you rightly pointed out that Malaysia and other Asian tigers developed because of enhancing their human capital. Here it seems that we are only concentrating on university education while leaving out vocational education and yet for a country to develop, we need to go the way the Malaysian and other Asian tigers have gone and that is through vocational education. Actually, as a country, we need to go that way if we are to develop because university education will not develop us.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, recently I visited some of my primary schools in the constituency and I found that in the 21st century, pupils are sitting on un-cemented floors without desks or chairs. Where are we going and yet we are talking of quality education? How do you get quality education when pupils are sitting – (Member timed out.)

6.21
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a job well done. 

I would like to raise some serious issues on chapter eight that addresses the issue of the mineral policy and so on. Uganda seems to be one of the few countries in this world that has very weak regulatory policies when it comes to the mining industry. Because of these weak policies, much as we are excited about this industry, it is very unlikely that the country itself will benefit at the end of the day.

It is only in Uganda where I see foreigners engaging in artisanal mining and yet this is an industry that is normally the domain of the indigenous citizens of a country because of the lack of adequate financial resources available to them. Therefore in our NDP II, I would have liked to see a policy where there is a financial threshold for foreigners to get engaged in our mining industry so that minimal mining is left for the benefit of our indigenous citizens.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the inspection side of our mining industry. In most countries that have a future in the mineral industry, there are serious mining inspectors. If we get mining inspectors, we will not have a situation where minerals are mined and loaded onto lorries to be exported out of the country without an audit done by the ministry in charge of mining as regards what is getting out of this country. Therefore, in NDP II, I would have liked a situation where the issue of inspection of miners is adequately covered so that our mining industry is regulated and controlled.

Thirdly, I would have liked our mining industry to address itself to the would-be effects on health. Health hazards of the mining industry are a very serious issue. If you go to places like Buhweju, Karamoja and Tororo, you find that where extraction of minerals is taking place, chemicals are being used. Mercury is being used and there are now cases where people are getting cancer because of using these minerals. (Member timed out)

6.24
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the chairperson of the committee for this very wonderful report. 

I would like to dwell on tourism. I am very excited and it is good that tourism has been included in the National Development Plan. Tourism promotes the country and it brings a lot of income to a country when it is well managed. Tourism uplifts the lives of the local people. I have seen countries like Kenya that have developed their tourism and it is not only the country that is benefiting but even the local people are benefiting. In countries like Tanzania and those in Latin America, people have developed greatly as a result of tourism. So, it is very important that this sector is put in the National Development Plan.

Madam Speaker, the other issue, as alluded to by my colleagues, is on the development of municipalities. It is very exciting to hear that some of these municipalities will be upgraded. However, in the same report, they say that the policy is not yet in place. I then wonder how these municipalities will develop without good plans and without proper management. There is still a very big challenge. If this is going to be developed then this will be good for us.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to comment on education. It is very important that this country embraces education and handles it properly. At the moment, we are only talking of the management of education in terms of jobs but there is a problem right from the beginning. Our tertiary institutions are no longer producing the quality of teachers that we used to have. Therefore, the problem begins from down. Even as we talk about the curriculum, the quality of what we have in place is not proper. 

Regarding this National Development Plan that we normally come up with, do we get issues that we prioritise? Are these issues normally handled? Do we get a report on what challenges the country has faced so that we are able to handle them? We are mentioning so many issues; one of my colleagues said that there are so many issues. Which ones are we, as a country, saying that these are the targets that we think if we can handle then the economy of our country will improve? These are some of the challenges – (Member timed out.)

6.28
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this well researched report. 

I will first talk about education. Some years back, Government instituted what was termed as the Senteza Kajubi White Paper on Education and I believe that there were recommendations that were made in this report. I think it is important to reflect on that report to see where we are and what we have fulfilled, and know the gaps that we have in our education sector. This committee has reported low quality levels in our educational institutions. They have reported that there are low completion rates of students and pupils and high dropout rates. We need to address the root causes of these problems.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, if we compare the results of our pupils in primary schools, rural versus urban areas, the disparity is so large. If you went to any of the rural districts, you will find our children walking on the roads at 9.00 a.m. or 10.00 a.m. and they have not yet reached school but in Kampala, by 7.00 a.m. every pupil is in school. How will that child in the rural area compete with a child in the urban area?

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the differential fees structures that are being paid. Today, many parents cannot manage to pay the hefty fees that are being charged in good schools; for example, last term one of the primary schools in Kampala was charging Shs 685,000 and today, it is charging Shs 850,000. Isn’t that cause for dropout of our students and children in schools because parents cannot afford? Madam Speaker, that is an area that we need to tackle. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about unemployment. Today, there are many youth who are engaged in criminal activities, including smoking of opium. We are grooming a future generation of criminals because the youth are not employed. (Member timed out.)

6.31
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to address myself to the point regarding regional balanced development that the committee talked about. This is a very good statement, which usually remains on paper. It is not implemented because when you move around, you do not see this balanced development.

The committee talked about an equalisation grant that was usually given to places, which graduate into districts. I would like to state that this amount has not been given equally to all the districts. It is usually discriminatory because some districts are given while others do not receive it. My district, for example, has never received these funds as I have been following this up. Much as we are talking about an increment for this fund, it is also a problem as not all districts receive these funds.

I would like to talk about infrastructure development. I would like to support the honourable colleague from Kasese who said that when we are allocating these resources, we should be considerate about terrains and the population. I would like to add specifically that in some of these areas, there are also some unique qualities. In Sebei region, for example, we do not have most of the materials used in construction; if we need murram for the roads, we do not have murram in Sebei region. 

As such, when we are allocating in the next development plan, we should be considerate of this uniqueness. When there is any allocation, say for construction of roads, schools, hospitals and health centres, there should be some consideration on the uniqueness of particular areas if we are to realise regional balance and development.

Thirdly, I would like to talk about health. The committee talked about increasing access to quality social services. We have policies in this country that there should be health centres III in every sub county. However, when you move around, this policy has not been implemented to its fullness. If I may talk about my district, we have 12 sub counties and there are only six health centres III. All the others have some structures that are like health centres II. I suggest that as we move into this next development plan, we should address the policies that we have and implement them before we move forward to new ones.

Fourthly, I would like to talk about education. When you look at education in this country, the quality is alarming. When you look at our education system, we do not put so much in quality. The committee talked about the number of people who are in education but we are not looking at the quality. What type of people are we bringing out? I thought that in the next development plan, we should address ourselves to the quality of education as this quality will affect even the human resource that we will bring out. Nowadays with unemployment, it will be the type of person that you have - (Member timed out)

6.35
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to say that the framework governing the area of monitoring and evaluation is very weak. I would like to address myself to decentralisation. The reason we are crying about poverty in our region is because you find a clan managing a whole office - a brother, a sister and an in-law. How do you expect this CAO to manage that family in terms of administration? The CAO is posted from Ministry of Public Service and he will find these people who are relatives who will mind only about their clan, and that is the only clan that is prospering in that area and the other people will remain poor. If it means eating money, they will eat the money within the family. 

Therefore, we need to revisit decentralisation and see whether it is working out. Those days people used to work. You would find a Munyankole working as a headmaster in Teso College or a man like Akabwai being a headmaster in another school in some place and services were moving in a better way. 

Madam Speaker, you launched the Human Rights Checklist and this Parliament has also passed the Certificate of Gender and Equity. I thought that when we are looking at the plan, these would be in line with the National Development Plan. We are being told that the budget system is in transition but for the next five years, the National Development Plan should be aligned to issues of human rights, gender and equity, which are not very clear in this plan.

Madam Speaker, when we heard that the poverty line has come down to 19 per cent, I said to myself that it must be people with disabilities who are never planned for and who make up 16 per cent of the 19 per cent. It is us who are there below the poverty line because nobody thinks about us until they get a disability and then they begin thinking this is the right thing to do. 

I have seen Members asking questions but nobody thinks about people with disabilities. Look at education. There is one school for the deaf in the whole country and one school for the blind in whole country for secondary education. You have to bring your child to Wakiso. You can imagine how one has to transport this child and the plan is silent. It is not bringing out these issues and yet in the government, there was a plan to build regional schools. They have never been built and the plan is silent about this. For the next five years, people with disabilities will remain among the 19 per cent - (Member timed out_)

6.39
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to begin by thanking the committee for the good report and to say, right from the beginning, that I support the report and the NDP II plan.

However, in the committee report, I did not see anything reported about the ICT sector. Since the ICT sector is one of the recognised priority sectors of the economy, I would have expected to see something written, at least a paragraph, about it. The sector is only allocated 0.1 per cent of the national Budget whereas it contributes two per cent to the country’s GDP. 

As of now, the ICT sector employs about 1.3 million people and the sector’s impact on the economy goes beyond what one would see. If you do not look very closely, you may not notice the impact but just one example is that mobile money transactions are now beyond Shs 13 trillion. The budget we are going to pass is about Shs 24 trillion, which is more than half of the national budget. Therefore, you need to pay attention to a sector with that type of impact.

More importantly, I believe that if this sector and the tourism sector had increased investment from Government, we would address this problem of employment much better. Right now, the sector is employing 1.3 million people with the minimum investment that it has. If we put much more money into the sector, we would get much more from it.

The same goes for tourism. These two sectors have got the potential to help us solve this youth unemployment problem. It is like a cow. You must feed the cow and then it gives you the milk. If you do not put in resources, you should not expect to get much out of those two sectors, which can really help to address the unemployment problem and also improve our economy.

The other issue that I want to speak about is that of physical planning. We need physical planning of the country and also of our urban areas. Other people have spoken about this issue but the need for planning comes from the need to provide services. When you visit Kampala’s unplanned areas, for example, the ones represented by our colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, if you want to lay pipes, it is very difficult because there is a house standing in the way –(Member timed out_)

6.42
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This very good report of the committee has briefly mentioned one issue that has always pained my heart and this is the issue relating to marine transport. 

Honourable members, you are all aware that developed countries that have an opportunity of having a water body or a shoreline take it as a treasure but for us here in Uganda or in the region of East Africa, we have a chance of having a water body in the name of Lake Victoria in the middle of the region, which we are not utilising at all and we are not even planning for it. 

It would have been a very good opportunity for us to relieve our roads of the traffic load by the trucks because marine transport can be used to carry heavy load or goods without destroying the roads. However, this cannot be done if we do not plan for survey routing on the lakes. I do not know when the last routing survey was done in Uganda. It is supposed to be done every ten years. Those of you who know about the geological movement of the earth will know that the earth keeps moving and the routes that are being used today may not be used tomorrow. As such, we need to plan for these routes on the lake but this has not been done.

Another issue that pains me and is related to the same is the southern route. As a country, we are now depending on one route to the sea and this is Mombasa but we have a southern alternative route to Dar-es-Salaam. Our brothers in Tanzania are getting demoralised. There was a plan and they have completed almost 80 per cent of their part but for Uganda, we have done nothing. 

Look at the land that was identified in Bukasa for the inland port. It has been left abandoned, people are encroaching on it and the government is just looking on. No plan is being actualised on it. 

Madam Speaker, you allowed me last time to go and follow up the repair of MV Kalangala in Mwanza. I was surprised to find out that the company that repaired the ship - Actually the most known company that repairs ships is based in Ntinda, Uganda. That is where the offices are and we have a dock in Luzira, which is –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have half a minute. I think that point is important.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I reached there, every Tanzanian was surprised. They said, “We are getting all the manpower from Uganda. You have a dock in Uganda and the company that repairs and builds ships is in Uganda but you have come to do the work all the way in Tanzania.” What does that mean? It means we do not plan well and we are not organised otherwise we would have developed marine transport much better than any other country in the East African region - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.46
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the team of National Planning Authority but I have the following observation that here in Parliament, we have been crying for operationalisation of the Uganda Road Fund so that we can ensure effective maintenance of our roads because we have opened up roads, paved them but they are quickly dilapidated. They need proper maintenance but Government has been sluggish at bringing about the systems that operationalise this fund.

Madam Speaker, I put a question to the Prime Minister, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, and he went ahead and wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and address Parliament about the progress of bringing an amendment to Section 14 of Uganda Revenue Authority Act that can allow and facilitate direct banking of money from road user funds to the account of the road fund but to date, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not shown up in Parliament here.

Madam speaker, I request for your indulgence so that we force the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring the amendment as soon as possible because they finished handling all the regulations in Cabinet but they are not tabling them in Parliament so that we can maintain our roads.

I would like to comment on the southern route. We have got Bukasa landing site or an inland port but it is not explicitly shown in the development plan. We want them to bring it out so that we can give impetus to those friends in Tanzania, and we can develop our southern route. People are concentrating on Port Bell, yet Port Bell cannot expand. Port Bell is very congested. For Bukasa, we had the industrial park of Namanve; we could have a dry port. 

However, Government is just seated there. Honourable Prime Minister, you are here and I think you are listening. Why don’t you work on that? We had a company called Gauff. You gave it the duty of carrying out the feasibility study, but you are not giving us any result. Therefore, Government should also fast-track that so that we develop a marine transport system.

Last, Madam Speaker, is on reviving the national carrier in form of Uganda – (Member timed out_)

6.49
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee for the good work. I have a few observations to make as per our National Development Plan on quality education.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with nursery education. What really goes on in nursery education is that young children leave home very early in the morning. When they go to school, they are given work that is far much above their level of understanding. 

Therefore, I am calling upon the Ministry of Education and the Curriculum Development Centre to look at the syllabus for the nursery if Uganda is going to have the early childhood development learning in every part of the country. Let us develop an appropriate syllabus that match with the development of these children’s brains.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to say something about the meals at schools which have long been advocated for. I am of the view that parents should take up the responsibility of giving children meals at school because it has really become very difficult for children to understand afternoon classes.

Madam Speaker, on technical education, I would like to know from the committee; there was a proposal that every sub-county was supposed to have a technical school where we learn something that you can do when you get out of that technical school; you do not seek for the job, but you create a job for yourself. How far has the country gone on that matter?

Thirdly, I would like to raise the issue of the fees structure in the country. Actually, school fees have become very unaffordable. Can we regulate and ensure that in these private schools/institutions at least children pay affordable fees? People have commercialised education and it has become very expensive and unaffordable. For instance, we have a university given to us in Lango sub-region. However, for a semester students are paying Shs 1.2 million. About a month ago, over 50 per cent of the students failed to raise the tuition. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the health services in the country. I thank the government for the construction of the new health centres. However, my opinion is that if we could make sure that we – (Member timed out_)

6.52
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will talk majorly on three issues: I would like to start with the marine transport infrastructure. Yes, it helps cut down cost; increase connectivity and also reduces marine accidents.

Madam Speaker, since the previous Parliament, we have been talking about having a ferry. Whenever we are talking about marine transport infrastructure, people look at the bigger lakes. We have Lake Bisina in Teso. We heard – I do not know whether to call it lies or false promises – that there would be a ferry to help connect Kumi to Katakwi District. Indeed it would even be a short-cut to Karamoja. We have since not had any update about the ferry on Lake Bisina.

Madam Speaker, I am now talking about the Standard Gauge Railway. I am one person who supports the expeditious implementation of this project. You remember this very Parliament also set up a select committee to look into the issues of the procurement and implementation of the project.

Unfortunately, we have taken long without getting a report from our own select committee and here we are praying hard that there should be no further delays in procurement. I think the select committee that was given the task to investigate on the Standard Gauge Railway should quickly dispose of that report if it is there at all. If it is not there, let them report to this House and we proceed with the project.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. There is a statement which indicts the Ministry of Agriculture for lack of co-ordination – that they do not have full control over the semi-autonomous entities under the ministry. I would like to assert here that that statement is rather misleading. It is true that these are semi-autonomous self-accounting entities established by Acts of Parliament. However, they have closely been co-ordinating with the Ministry of Agriculture. The lack of co-ordination cited in this report, to me, is an indictment which is not necessary. The problem which we have with Ministry Of Agriculture is lack of funding across the board. All those entities are suffering.

Madam Speaker, if only we could try at least once to implement our protocols. The Maputo Protocol has been talked about. We would certainly see a turn-around in the livelihoods of the people of Uganda. Can you imagine a human resource gap of 91 per cent at the sub-county level for agriculture? Human resource gap of 76 per cent; what do you expect –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude, shadow minister.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, we have a funding gap of about Shs 39 billion for agricultural extension officers at district and sub-county levels. However, that is a big funding gap which cannot be achieved even in this budget. I do not see it coming, yet we are talking about a single-spine extension system. For as long as issues of financing for agriculture are not addressed, we shall continue grappling with – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Ogwal three minutes; honourable Leader of the Opposition five minutes.

6.56
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would just like to appreciate the proposal by the Minister of Finance that whatever good proposal we come out with from this discussion can be incorporated in the document. To me, that is very important. It will help us to address the poverty level that we have talked about earlier, which is getting deeper and deeper in the North and in the east.

I would like to appreciate the point that was brought by one member on the plight of the islanders. However, I think we should not also forget the plight of the communities that live around the landing sites. I think those areas also need to be addressed. We need to address their problem in this plan.

I would like to raise three issues on pages 3 and 4 of the report. The report talks about the achievements and failures. However, what is very upsetting is that the rate of growth has gone down. 

It was predicted to go up to 7.2, but it has gone downward and the factors which have caused that have been identified. The problem is in the document itself; we do not address those factors. Therefore, how are we going to sustain any growth at all? You have identified climate change and other issues, but you are not addressing them effectively in this budget how we are going to deal with the climate change.

Madam Speaker, this is a big gap and I hope that the proposals that we are going to come up with will raise the issues which are not in this document. 

When we talk about disparity, we should also talk about disparity in terms of leadership. Madam Speaker, unless we consciously increase the leadership of women in decision making positions, we are then not serious about development. This is a national and an international issue. This Government must consciously find ways of increasing the number of women in decision making positions in this country. I am not only talking about Cabinet and Parliament; they are nothing, but I am talking of areas where decisions are made. We need to involve the women in those areas. Therefore, while we address the poverty disparity, let us also address the gender disparity.

Madam Speaker, allow me to address the issue of agriculture. When you look at the corrigenda, the figure has changed from Shs 18,000,000,000,000 to Shs 24,000,000,000,000. That brings the agricultural component of the budget to 1.9 per cent. The contribution from the budget to agriculture will go down to 1.9 per cent. I do not whether we are actually budgeting for the people who have brought us here and yet we keep saying 80 per cent of our people are involved in agriculture.  Something must be done about this. 

Even when we talk about land grabbing, nothing has come out in this document talking about demarcation of local borders and borders with our neighbours. It is very important that we get to know - we must know the pieces of land owned by Government and the ones owned by you and me. Who owns it? Who has the power to dispose of it? What plans do we have for it? It is not there. It means it is free for all; the government is free tomorrow to sell our forestry, for example, Mabira Forest. It is free to call investors to own this country and nobody cares. 

We must have a deliberate plan to ensure that what belongs to Uganda is protected by law and we are the people who are responsible for that.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about unemployment among the youth. They say Uganda is the champion in consuming alcohol. Why? It is because the youth are idle. Why should the youth be idle when we have plenty of land? 

Let there be a plan to involve the youth in production by utilising the land. There is nothing being done about it. Who is going to do it for us if we do not do it ourselves?

Madam Speaker, I think we need to be a little bit more focussed. I get upset myself when there are people who question our involvement in Somalia and South Sudan. Personally, all these developments are useless unless we are sure of our security. All these developments can be blown down in one day. 

Therefore, we must give priority to security and that security must be transparent. Do not come up with it as a hidden agendum. I am concerned with security just as anybody else. You must then bring it on the table and we discuss it to ensure that in all these developments, our security is assured. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition who wants to be called the Minority Leader. He wants to change the Constitution to be described as the Minority Leader, but I hope we shall deal with that in the amendments.

7.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, you are very right. We have to change the name from the Leader of the Opposition to the Minority Leader - (Laughter) - It is more positive and smarter.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. From what members have said, it looks like the priorities are not right in the planning. Planning is making choices and when you are making choices, you are identifying your priorities. Members seemed to be saying our priorities are not right. Everybody who has talked has mentioned this and that is what is missing.

The chosen priority for Uganda or the main goal in this planning is to make Uganda a middle income country by 2020. It means we are going to be a country of middle-class. However, what is not defined in the report is what it means to be a middle-income country? Are we all clear on that? How is it measured; in terms of money or the life we live? What are the indicators? The report should tell us that because it should be measurable. When you tell us the indicators, we shall be able to know that we are there.

I have just returned from the US and I saw they are debating to make the minimum of $15 per hour – that is mind boggling; it is a big figure. But that is their minimum - their least; it is poverty if you are there; you are just surviving. Therefore, what does it mean when we are aiming to making a middle-income country? What are the indicators? What are the main sectors that we are going to invest in to deliver that? Is it agriculture where you are investing less than two per cent? Is it industry? How much are you giving the industry? What is it you are going to do in the next five years that will make Uganda a middle-income country? Is it minerals like oil and we go in the way of Angola and Nigeria? 

Therefore, all these are not visible in the report. We need to know what we have chosen to invest more money in to deliver Uganda as a middle-income country. Is that reflected in the Budget estimate of this year? It is because sometimes the budget have not addressed what our plans are saying - the 2040 plan. Sometimes, the priorities in the budget are off tangent. 

I think it is a joke in the C21st to say we are planning for a middle-income country and you do not put money in ICT. That you put Shs 20,000,000,000 in ICT out of Shs 24,000,000,000,000? We are jokers. What will deliver that development if you do not put money in ICT? 

Our education today is largely irrelevant to our development. Every member has talked about that. It is irrelevant because we pump our kids with irrelevant knowledge which is not applied. We should be talking about knowledge which is applicable to our situation. I am always giving example of China because I am very familiar with it. China is in every home today. You cannot avoid it in your home whether you are Obama or the Speaker. You will find it in the form of socks, pens, knickers, shirts or phones. It is there. China is there because they worked for it. Any simple thing China supplies you it is because they worked for it. They invested in hands on education, not this theoretical education of learning about the ship in Australia and the prairies where I have just come from. Those are irrelevant things; we need to focus. 

Government has always talked about vocational schools. Where are they? Where I went for my primary education, there was a technical college that has been there for 30 years without electricity. We have technical schools like that where you have no power and yet they claim they are teaching technology. How can you teach technology without electricity? If we cannot do it as a Government, maybe we should lend money to private people to invest in technical education. 

We have whizz kids in this country; kids who are abnormally bright. Do we take care of them? We do not invest in them. There is no college or academy of science where whizz kids can go and develop. If you do not know, Americans take kids from here. When I had my daughter in Namagunga, some of her bright classmates were taken by Americans. These are whizz kids who we think are mad. They cannot fit in a society. We do not take care of them. Those are the people who would be doing the innovations for the country, but we do not care about them. We also do not plan for them. We need to do that. 

I also saw when the Chinese went to the technical school; they would identify very experienced artisan people. They are welders and machine operators who make things by hand and have got a lot of experience. They would attach young people to them. They would also ask them to go and teach in the universities they set up. That is what we need to plan for and then we shall see this country moving somewhere.

The craze for universities and degrees is nonsense. That is not much. Eighty five per cent of the children with degrees are not employed. We talked about this and complained about it. We know the problem; we have diagnosed it hopefully, but we do not know the medicine. I think that is where the problem is. 

The issue of planning and decentralisation; I think that planning at district level with the small miniature districts we have is not useful for this country. We should instead go to Busoga and plan for it. Let Busoga plan as a unit. Let us put the money for example Shs 20 billion in one unit and Busoga plans. I am talking about Busoga because I come from there. It is one of the poorest today in the country. It has never got affirmative action like the rest of the country, but hopefully we shall get something. 

Decentralisation in small districts and yet they cannot carry out any major planning is not useful for this country at all. I have seen it go to the extent of planning at Gombolola level. You find one sub county constructing a road and stopping in the middle of a forest because the next one is a different Gombolola. What is that? What planning is that? We are not addressing it yet we need to address it if we want to see meaningful planning. I hope our planners are hearing - planning must be coherent, connected, and something that is well thought out.
Kampala is our capital; we are very many here. The other day I was reading about the cable cars in the capital city. I do not know what is up with whatever we do. We need to plan for mass transport in this town; but I have not seen the plan. Where is the mass transport plan for Kampala? There is no railway system; there are no buses. What is it that KCCA is planning for? 

I can see Nairobi is planning something. They are constructing a railway system. We do not even have ring roads. How can you solve the problem of transport if you do not have ring roads around the city? Some cities have four or five ring roads while we have none. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have to make a choice. Are we an agriculture country so that we can invest in agriculture? Are we an industrial country so that we can invest in industry? Or are we a mining country so that we invest in mines? We must choose some of these and be the vehicles for delivering the development we want. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is a point I hoped members would raise, but they did not. Since they did not raise it, I am going to raise it. In some aspects, this plan is in conflict with the Constitution on issues of regional development. If you look at the master plan for the international airport in Uganda, it is on one side of the country. They are all in the western side: Arua, Hoima, Kasese, and also Gulu. From Kaabong to Jinja, there is no plan for an international point. There is even no plan for it for the next five years. I have looked at your plan. How can that be? 

If I am in Sipi, I must either drive to Gulu to get a plane there or drive to Kasese or Entebbe; why is that so? There was an international airport in Jinja in the days of the East African Community. Where is it and why don’t you want to revive it? This is just skewed planning. It is against the Constitution and we want answers about that lack of equity in your planning. I want to know about the islands.

7.15
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a comment on the matter you have just brought out. 

This week the Chairman Board of Directors, Civil Aviation Authority, made a tour of all air fields in the country. He found that the majority of them are faced with the issue of land grabbing. Therefore, any future plans for expansion and improvement are in jeopardy. This is because all air strips have been encroached on and there is immense land grabbing. I saw that in a report from the Civil Aviation Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the chair wish to report on the issue of the islands? Before that, let us first hear from hon. Egunyu.

7.16
MS AGNES EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I and hon. Bahati found out that despite the fact that so many things were put in for other places, there was a general plan for the islands. It looked as if we were left out. 

We agreed with the honourable minister that even Rome was not built in a day so we cannot get so many things because of financial constraints. We decided that at least on the side of infrastructure development, Bukungu, Kagwara, and Kasiro Ferry be planned for. This is a road on the water that will connect Buyende and Amolator to Serere. 

We also agreed that Kikongo and Namoni Ferry be planned for in that from Buikwe to Kiyindi you can get a ferry that connects you to Buvuma. In that instance we made a plan that Kikongo Island be given a ferry that will connect Buvuma to Mayuge District. 

We also decided that since we do not have any means of transport on the waters like road transport which includes vehicles, motor cycles and the bicycles, for our mothers to be helped, we agreed that all health centre IVs, and all health centre IIIs in the islands be given ambulances that will transport our mothers when they are given referrals. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Water ambulances.

7.18
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you and the august House for the complements you have made to the committee report and also for positively criticising this report and the draft NDP II.

We have taken note and appreciate the passionate input that has been made on this report. I think that the honourable minister will agree with me that all the concerns that you made will be captured and included in the final report that we shall have.

Just to respond to a few areas that were raised here and particularly to put the records right, when hon. Cecilia Ogwal was coming to submit on the issue of poverty, which is indeed very pertinent, she observed that I ought to have informed this House that there was a minority report, that she eventually intercepted.

I wish to report and put the record right, that this committee was not informed about the existence of the minority report. However, I was given a chit while presenting this report and it is here.

I think this House has a procedure on how the minority reports get into the House. It is not through shortcuts and it is for that reason, that I did not inform the House about its existence. It is not in any way that I intended to suffocate it.

You raised a fundamental concern on lack of professionals in essential fields or sector in this country. Indeed while we were presenting this report, we took note of the low quality at all levels and also said that the education system does not facilitate adequate skills acquisition, especially after primary level. It was for this reason that the committee recommended that, Government should undertake a deliberate measure to improve the quality of education and ensure equity.

As for equity, we were looking at how resources could be directed to priority areas, on how we could invest where there is urgent need.

Recently when we went to Hoima – I also belong to the Committee of National Economy; we were in Hoima Regional Hospital. There were doctors there, who were operating on mothers suffering from fistula; a condition where women leak faeces and urine. We were meant to realise that you can be a doctor but not one who can operate on a fistula mother. The doctors who can do this are specialised and they can be counted in the entire country.

This is one area we thought that development of human capital is quite essential. You have rightly observed, we think that Government can take up this to determine how resources could be channelled to address some of these very pertinent concerns.

In the development fundamentals the NDP II present, there is an aspect of human capital development, which should be directed to specific area because human capital development we think should be focused so as to address the gap that exists in critical areas of need.

If I may draw your attention to this report, annex 5, you realise that it talks about human capital development – staff, but when you look at the column - the row was talking about activities, it is on page 319 - it talks about activities particularly the last column.

The second bullet talks about linking schooling with labour requirements. I think this is essentially what we are talking about. If this could be undertaken, then we could probably achieve our desired objective.

Hon. Ssali Baker raised one other issue of who will check the recommendations of the committee? This committee has called for a conceptual framework for monitoring and evaluation. We have advised that it has to be developed, coordinated and situated monitoring and evaluation under NPA. We think that with this tool in place, the appropriate check can be done on what we have proposed here. 

Furthermore, to correct the record, hon. Mugema said that NPA did not consult enough. There were wide consultations. Even the consultations were extended to the members of Parliament in the Conference Hall –(Interjections)– consultations were made and I believe they were wide enough and we did not encounter any problem. 

As for projects that members think should be included in this NDP II, it is our humble appeal that you suggest – like I stated earlier, it can still be captured but also let me to hasten to add that, this is a report for only five years. It has budget proposal to implement it. I think other projects can come in the next phase of 2020/2021, 2022-2025/26. As for projects that you feel you are very passionate about and feel that we should capture them, it is in that spirit that you should mention them and we capture them.

Lastly, hon. Magyezi was wondering, which are the lead sectors to spur growth? This is captured on page 20; you will see gross opportunities being indicated as agriculture, tourism, mineral, oil and gas and development fundamentals, indicated as infrastructure and human capital development.

So, your proposals will shape this report and we would like to thank you greatly, Madam Speaker and honourable members for you input in this report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can we have the last word from you?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is very pertinent. You remember that I talked about the eight roads here. The reason I am very serious about this is – I am not talking about Kalungu, we have a murram road. Let me give you an example -

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR SSEWUNGU: I am raising a procedural matter that as he has admitted that some of these programmes can be adjusted and will be included as the island issue was raised, can’t we change some of these roads to give opportunity to those areas which have none at all?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us hear him out; the minister was listening; let us hear what he is saying now. If he does not touch those areas, maybe we can come back to that later. Let us hear from the Minister of Finance.

7.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a draft second National Development Plan which is before Parliament for approval. I would like to thank you for the input that you have offered and we would like to confirm to you that a number of recommendations, requests and proposals you have made, will be incorporated before the plan is launched on the 11 June, 2015.

Just to comment on two things of a general nature; we have taken note of the issue of regional balancing in terms of development. While we do have a whole chapter, Chapter 18 on regional development, I think the issue that you have raised particularly to do with airports and others will be considered in a week’s time before we print the final copy.

You have also raised issues of unemployment. I again remind members that the core theme of this plan is about strengthening Uganda’s competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, employment and inclusive roads.

The issue of human capital development, I am glad to inform you that in July or August, we are embarking on man power survey. We have already done the plan for the funding. We want to find out what is in the market, what are the real skills that we need in this country so that we can match the skills acquired in class rooms with the skills required in the real world.

I have seen the recommendations of the committee and we agree with most of them except for one; the one of introducing restricted foreign exchange markets. I think it will be disastrous for our economy to go back to the economic system before 1986 where we were restricting the foreign exchange and ended up having black market and the economy was almost collapsing. So, except for that, I think the rest will be incorporated.

There are two final points I would like to make; that when we approved the Public Finance Management Act, we made a breakthrough in terms of planning and implementation of plans in our country. When we put in a clause that requires all spending agencies to have a certificate of compliance with the National Development Plan, we want to stick to it and develop it. 

However, at the end of the day, all of us must own this and break the bad habit of mismatch between the five pillars of public policy formulation namely; planning, budgeting, implementation and expenditure. We have seen a number of institutions. They budget for what they have not planned, they implement for what they have not budgeted for, and they spend for what they have not implemented and worse still, account for what they have not spent on. That bad habit must stop if we are to make this plan move forward.

I also would like to request all members and all accounting officers and everybody who will be implementing to give this plan a chance. We are committed to this as members and the people’s representatives approved this plan. Let us give this plan a chance to be implemented.

Lastly, we are going to be innovative; we are setting up delivery units under the Office of the Prime Minister to follow up the key major projects that we are undertaking. This time around, I think we are on the path to making sure that we uplift the 67 per cent of the people who leave in subsistence economy to a middle-class. I also would like to invite you to continue popularising this plan and also following up through your oversight role. 

I thank you and thank you for supporting this plan. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, quite a number of members have contributed to this report. The minister has made commitment which has become a Government assurance. So, come 11 June 2015 we expect to see what you have said here - (Laughter) - before we launch.  Otherwise you are going to be - I do not want to threaten but we want to see it. 

I put the question that the Second National Development Plan be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

National Development Plan II adopted.

Honourable members, I asked this House early in the afternoon to resume tomorrow at 10 O’clock. The Budget Committee is tying one or two things. I know we shall not spend too much time tomorrow on those issues. Come on time and let us do the needful. House adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.33 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 29 May 2015 at 10.00 a.m.)










