Tuesday, 31 May 2016

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Serena International Conference Centre, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker will have proclaimed;

AND WHEREAS the First Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 19th day of May 2016; 

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 101(1) of the Constitution to deliver to the Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each session;

AWARE that it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation Address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 31st day of May 2016 at 14:00 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President;

AND FURTHER in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including the forecourt, the yard and the gardens be precincts of the Parliament for the purposes aforementioned.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on the 24th day of May 2016. 

Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Mr Museveni; My Lord the Chief Justice; Rt hon. Justin Muturi, Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya and your delegation; Rt hon. Ekwee Ethuro, Speaker of the Senate of Kenya and your delegation; hon. Manasseh Magok, the Speaker of the National Assembly of South Sudan and your delegation; hon. Dr Ngoga Martin representing the Speaker of the EALA; Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, Justices of the Courts of Judicature, Members of Parliament, members of the diplomatic corps, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Inspector General of Police, Commissioner General of Prisons, leaders of political parties, religious leaders, distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Before I proceed, I have something to add to my communication. Your Excellency and guests, I had hoped to present the Leader of the Opposition to the country today. However, when I wrote to the parties to indicate to me who they are naming, the Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) wrote to me but in so doing, indicated that he was appointing a “Leader of the minority” in Parliament; hon. Winnie Kiiza. 

However, I have noted that neither in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda nor in the Administration of Parliament Act nor in our Rules of Procedure do we have the title of “Leader of the minority.” I have accordingly written back to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Secretary-General of the FDC party, to clarify to me the proper title of the Leader of the Opposition. When that is done, I will present the Leader of the Opposition to the country.

In the same letter, he appointed the chief whip. Again under our Constitution, the Administration of Parliament Act and the Rules of Procedure, we would have an “Opposition Chief Whip” not the “chief whip”. Therefore, in the same vein, I have written to seek clarification and when this is done, I will name the Opposition Chief Whip.

Your Excellency and dear colleagues, I welcome you all to this event, which will mark the official opening of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament.  

In a special way, I would like to welcome my colleagues: Rt hon. Muturi, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya. Maybe you should stand up so that Members can see you. He has come to give us support. We also have Rt hon. Ethuro, the Speaker of the Senate of Kenya who has also come to give us support. We also have Rt hon. Manasseh Magok, the Speaker of National Assembly of South Sudan and hon. Dr Martin Ngoga representing the Rt hon. Kidega, Speaker of EALA.

Rt hon. Kidega is hosting the former first ladies of East Africa: Mrs Maria Nyerere, Mrs Miria Obote and Mama Ngina Kenyatta. They are today in Arusha to be given awards by the EALA and that is why he is not here.

As I had already indicated to you, the day is earmarked for His Excellency the President to address the nation under Article 101 of the Constitution. This will be the first State of the Nation Address to be delivered in the Tenth Parliament and it will make a landmark for the commencement of business of the Tenth Parliament.

Your Excellency, before you are Members of the Tenth Parliament. We currently have 427 Members: 287 male and 140 female. The proportion of female Members is now 33 per cent.

The National Resistance Movement (NRM) has 294 Members constituting 69 per cent of the Parliament; the official opposition: Forum for Democratic Change has 36 Members constituting eight per cent; Democratic Party (DP) has 15 Members constituting four per cent; while the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) has six Members constituting one per cent. The Independent Members as a bloc are 66, constituting 15 per cent of the membership.

The Members serving for the first term are 256; that is about 60 per cent. Members who were in the Ninth Parliament are 171 and constitute 40 per cent.

Your Excellency, I am informing the country about those proportions because in forming our committees, this will be a guideline on how we shall compose the committees of the House.

Your Excellency and dear guests, it is a position that to date, Government has not been fully constituted. The positions of the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business have not been appointed or approved by Parliament, which means that the structure and mechanisms to begin the business of the House are not yet ready.

The other organs vital for the running of Parliament like the office of the whips are not fully constituted as I indicated.  However, I would like to announce that the Democratic Party has appointed hon. Joseph Gonzaga Ssewungu as its whip. The Uganda Peoples’ Congress has appointed hon. Santa Alum Ogwang as its whip. We congratulate you and look forward to working with you. The whips from the National Resistance Movement are still awaited.

Honourable members, once more I welcome you to this momentous occasion when the President is addressing Parliament and the state today. Thank you very much for listening to me.

However, one other thing, Members is that I have received information that some of you have not registered. There were some registration forms that you were given when you came to take oath. Your tax identification numbers are required and if they are not there, the “rain” will not be able to reach your accounts.

In that regard, officers of the Uganda Revenue Authority will be available at Parliament starting tomorrow so that they can assist you through that process. Thank you for listening to me. I now invite the President to make his State of the Nation Address. 

ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

2.55
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice President, the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the person representing the Speaker of EALA, Rt hon. Speakers of the Kenya Senate and National Assembly, the Rt hon. Speaker of the Parliament of South Sudan, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Rt hon. Deputy Prime Ministers, honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, honourable Members of EALA, members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,

According to the Constitution, ministers are ministers until the President appoints new ones. If you are not satisfied, go to court and the Chief Justice will tell you. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2016.

First of all, I congratulate all the Ugandans on the recently held elections, the swearing-in of the President, Members of Parliament and all the local government leaders.

Madam Speaker, since my last address, the nation has lost a number of important personalities from different walks of life. Parliament has lost the following Members:

The late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, former Minister of Internal Affairs;
The late hon. James Mutende, former Minister of State for Industry and Technology;
The late hon. Omwonya Stanley, Member of Parliament for Okoro County, Zombo District;
The late hon. Susan Namaganda, Woman Representative for Bukomansimbi District.

Madam Speaker, I request that we all stand up and observe a moment of silence in memory of the departed persons. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

May their souls rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

On the side of politics, I have been hearing some circles talking of political reforms. Modesty is not always a virtue. When you are modest, people take you for granted. The fact of the matter is that Uganda has already carried out the most advanced political reforms.  Having followed closely world and historical events for the last 50 years, I am not aware of any society anywhere in the world that is more democratic than Uganda as far as the forms and structures of democracy are concerned.  (Applause)

This is because the architecture of this democracy was put in place by mainly the freedom fighters, working along with the other delegates of the Constituent Assembly who had been fighting for democracy for a long time both here and in other parts of Africa. 

How many other countries in the world have special representation for the women? (Applause) I want you to audit all the parliaments of the world. (Interjections) Okay, Rwanda one; South Africa two; Kenya now recently, three and South Sudan four. Fine. We have got four now. 

You go and audit them. How many other parliaments have special representation for the youth, the disabled, the workers and how many for the army? (Applause)

We have also done away with the sub-colonialism of the colonial and the time following the end of colonialism, before the advent of the NRM leadership.  This is, for instance, the first time we have a Member of Parliament representing the Ik people who had been described as the “vanishing tribe of Africa” by one of the writers in the 1960s.  

We have, also for the first time, a Member of Parliament for the Tepeth.  We have, for long now, had MPs representing the Ssesse Islands and the Buvuma Islands. (Applause)  

I do not know why we forgot the people of Kome Islands whom I intend to visit in the near future. I mentioned that the people of Sigulu Islands already have a Member of Parliament. 

Our democratic structure is comprehensive, thorough and massive.  It is not easily rivalled.  The only pollution to this glorious and massive liberation movement has been the mistake of the careerists introducing the use of money in electioneering.  (Interjections) I will attend a court where I will be tried properly.  

Therefore, democracy is one area where we do not need aid because that is what we fought for here and in the rest of Africa for many decades. (Applause) The story of Uganda and the NRM is a long one. We went through the decades of resistance and the liberation (1971 to 1986) and we have been through the decades of recovery.  The size of our GDP in shillings was Shs 6 trillion in 1986 and by 2014, was Shs 74 trillion. 

The size of the GDP would be and will be much bigger if we were to export and when we export more products. We would, then, already be a middle-income country. The shilling depreciates because we import too much and we export little and, mainly of low value. We still export quite a bit of unprocessed raw materials.  

We are donating $875 million to China each year in imports.  We are donating to India $1.154 billion each year in the form of imports, to the United Arab Emirates we send $406 million each year in imports, to the European Union we send $637 million in imports, to the USA we send $89 million, South Africa $257 million.

Yet our own exports to these countries are as follows: India only $24.8 million, United Arab Emirates $ 62.6 million, European Union $433 million, United States $27.2 million, South Africa $4.7 million, to China $54.7 million.  

While the economy of Uganda has recovered, as pointed out above, we were not yet able to end this haemorrhage because we lacked the basics. I call this “haemorrhage” because we are really losing a lot of resources to the outside unnecessarily.

The crucial basics lacking were electricity, low transport costs and easy transport means. The big deficit of infrastructure could not be tackled through the traditional foreign aid; that effort was small and of little impact.  

That is why, in 2006, the NRM decided to set up the Energy Fund and increase, massively, allocations to the Road Fund. I gave the details of these during the campaign period. I do not have to repeat them here. That far-sighted decision has created the necessary base we needed for take-off.  

We now have 5,200 kilometres of tarmac roads compared to the 1,200 kilometres in 1986 that moreover, needed urgent repair.  We now have 850 megawatts of electricity compared to the 60 megawatts of 1986.  We are in the process of adding an extra 1,000 megawatts in the next five years by working on Karuma, Isimba, the mini-hydro power stations, the geo-thermal in Lake Katwe, the gas-powered stations and those using HFO (Heavy Fuel Oil).

We already have a surplus of 100 megawatts during even the peak hours in the evening (6.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m.). At night, only 350 megawatts is consumed. During the off-peak hours of the day, 500 megawatts are consumed. Therefore, during the night hours after 10.00 p.m., the surplus electricity is 500 megawatts. That is why I would encourage many of the factories to work at night. The only problems we have are the high prices of electricity caused by the huge amount of money the Bujagali developers used. We shall get a solution for it.  

As I have said before, the power from Nalubaale – the power station on the side of Mukono – is at US$1.04 cents per unit. That from Bujagali, on the other hand, is at US$11 cents per unit. However, by a combination of measures which shall be announced in the budget, we shall resolve this handicap in a win-win way. The future electricity stations, especially the big ones, will never be expensive in the same way. Karuma will be at US$4.8cents per unit and Isimba will be at US$5 cents per unit.

With this better base of electricity and the improved roads, we are now, for the first time, in a position to decisively tackle the haemorrhage by attracting and incentivising investors that will save the huge money in dollars that we are currently donating to India, China, UAE, Japan, European Union, USA ─ a total of $5.5 billion per year!  

This huge amount of money goes for textiles ($888 million), leather goods ($22 million), fruit products ($20.2million), second-hand cars ($568 million), carpets, et cetera. Fortunately, the investors are there. They just need a good atmosphere for investing. What is the good atmosphere needed?  First of all, now that the electricity is abundant, we need to ensure that it is cheap for, at least, manufacturing ─ not more than US$5 cents per unit.  We have started implementing this. 

Secondly, the Government institutions, without exception, must buy locally-made products provided they are of good quality and comparable price. (Applause)  That, however, should not be an excuse for continuing to import what can be made here. If the quality is not yet perfect, discuss with the manufacturers how that can be improved.  

All the uniforms for the Army, the Uganda Police Force, the Prisons Service, Uganda Wildlife Authority, the medical services, et cetera must be bought locally and so should the boots, the belts, the head-dress, the jackets of the army, police, prisons and Uganda Wildlife Authority.  

Thirdly, we are discussing with the other East African countries – EAC members – about stopping this haemorrhage of our resources. One sector, for instance, is assembling cars rather than importing the already assembled cars.  

When a car is imported in knockdown state and is assembled here, it is about 25 per cent cheaper because it is cheaper to transport car parts on ships and trains than importing assembled cars.  When a car is already assembled, it occupies more space on the ship and on the train flat-bed wagons.  Hence, it is more costly.

All this is not only about stopping the haemorrhage of our money to the outside and paying more than we should it is also about jobs for our children. By importing so much from outside, we are creating jobs for the children of the Chinese, the Indians, the Japanese, the Europeans, the Americans and the Middle Easterners and forgetting about our own children. (Applause) This must stop.  If all the textiles that are used in Uganda are made here, we shall save $888 million annually and create about 45,000 direct manufacturing jobs. By insisting on only allowing vehicles that are assembled in-country such as lorries, buses, mini-buses, pick-ups and “piki-pikis” to be sold in the Ethiopian market, they have created 160,000 jobs.  You can go there and cross-check this yourself.

I have talked to our importers. These policy changes or evolutions should not take place in one year. I can understand that many of our people are making a living by importing all these second-hand clothes and all those other things. 

Therefore, it will not be good to shock them and just throw them out of business. However, at the same time, this is suicide. You cannot allow haemorrhage to continue because you do not want to adjust. I have already invited these importers to say, please, let us work together and see how we shift. Instead of distributing clothes from people who used and sold them or died or whatever happened to them - (Laughter) - in Europe, America, why don’t we organise for you to distribute the locally made ones because you will still be a distributor. The difference is that this time, you will be distributing clothes from a factory in Uganda where your daughter/son is working. 

We cannot be short-sighted that we commit suicide. This is terrible; this is too much money. Imagine, when we sell all the coffee of Uganda, we get US$ 500 million. Now, we send it back to buy second-hand clothes among others. This is not how a country develops. I did not talk about this thing in the past because I do not talk air, as you know. Otherwise, in the past, I could see that the manufacturers were having a problem coming here because there was no electricity. The electricity was not enough. So, how could I speak so much?  At one time we even had insecurity and the roads were impassable. However, as of now, we have started the serious move. We already have some manufacturers who have come in. Textile people have also come in and more are coming. We shall export to AGOA because we now have the capacity; we have the electricity. 

As I told you, the issue of prices is being talked about. Again on this, we are coordinating with other East African Countries. We are not just going to take a position on Uganda; it will be the position of the whole of East Africa. We have already introduced it in the East African Community as a discussion point. There are more things I would like to say but you know, I do not want to say many things in public.

I have talked to our importers. These policy changes or evolutions should not take one year; we can phase them; but they must be triggered. Otherwise, we shall be slaves. We shall continue to run a supermarket for foreign products and we call it country. I cannot have a country which is a supermarket for foreign products. (Applause)

The NRM has created a base – and on this, when we take up all these measures, our economy will not be growing at high per cent, six per cent. It will be growing in double digits. 

The NRM has created the base for our country to graduate from being a supermarket for foreign products to becoming a manufacturing centre for goods, in which we have got comparative advantage. It is not just the availability of cheap electricity, low transport costs, the availability of the ICT backbone and piped water in the country. Those utilities must be in well-organised industrial parks so that investors do not have to drain swamps, make roads, bring electricity and waste time begging bureaucrats who do not know what building a country means.  Since the idea of industrial parks has been talked about for ages, I have now directed the Engineering Brigade of the UPDF to build these parks –(Applause)– starting with the one in Nakasongola.  Investors should only come to build factories and not to be swamp-drainers and land surveyors.

The fourth factor that is crucial that we must expunge is corruption among the political leaders and the public servants.  I have quite a bit of information – five million transparent assistance –(Applause)– “Nawano Tusobola Okubayamba, bano.” (Laughter) 

During the campaign, I compared these to rats who eat stored millet.  These rats must be exterminated. (Applause) They damage our future.  In the NRM caucus, we shall discuss more about this problem. 

However, in this term, the corrupt are going to see how a Muhekyera looks like - Omuhekyera is a resistance fighter, for those who do not know that branch of our languages. We are going to stamp out corruption as we stamped out indiscipline in the army. It is a shame for a minister or a Government official to ask for favours from, especially, foreigners. “I have failed to finish my hotel or house,” why should you tell a foreigner about your hotel or house? What do you want this foreigner to do and you are telling a foreigner. “I have failed to pay school fees for my child,” among others.
 
If you need help, talk to your political party; talk to your relatives; and talk to your colleagues but not foreigners or business people. That is disgusting corruption. Struggle to live within your means. Corruption should and will be stamped out. You saw the report of the commission of inquiry into mismanagement of UNRA, which pointed out that the Shs 9 trillion, we have spent in the last seven years could have built 5,000kms of roads instead of the 1,000kms we built –(Interjections)– those engineers are not necessarily NRM. (Laughter) That is why I set up that commission of inquiry to expose all that and the thieves should remember a Runyankole saying: “Akabikirwe ekaramu tikajuunda” (Something written down in ink never disappears).

These corrupt people do not remember that all Government money is recorded. Therefore, even if you steal it today, we can come forensically and trace you. I do not know why they are so shallow-minded that they cannot know they can be found out. For instance, I have been dealing in guns for a long time. I know what an AK-47 costs in China, Yugoslavia and Egypt. So, if somebody comes and says he will sell to me an AK-47 at US$ 600, I would not accept because I know what it costs. Even for the roads, you can know how much a kilometre of a tarmac road should cost in our Ugandan condition.

Therefore, the cover up that there was competitive bidding and the lowest bidder quoted five times the price of a kilometre; why should we accept that? The thieves are an endangered species.

When we were fighting Idi Amin, we would condemn the presence of illiterate soldiers in Government. We would blame them for all the mistakes. This was so disappointing because when we were fighting him, we would say it was because he had illiterate people in Government that things were going wrong. To find educated people being corrupt is really a disappointment –(Interjections)- Cadres do not steal –(Laughter)- and you will see what they are doing. It is, therefore, a big disappointment that educated people can be part of the corruption. NRM has never failed to confront any battle. We shall similarly win this one. (Applause)

Fifth, do not delay any project. A request for investment should take not more than two days. Why should it? The investor has already made their calculations. It is their money; why the delay? Even the excuses about the environment are also not valid. Many of the manufacturing processes are well known. Their best practices are known. If it is an abattoir, it needs this and that; if it is a milk factory, it needs such and such; and if it is a stone quarry, it needs this and that. Therefore, there is no reason why any project should be delayed, even for environmental reasons.

There is somebody who licenced a quarry in the midst of the population in Busoga. When they started blasting the stones, the villagers complained. Who was this who gave the licence to blast the stones in the middle of the population? You can see that these are just traitors. The investor’s licence had to be cancelled with compensations. We shall not accept - this game is finished. 

I will simply not tolerate any delay of more than two days. Recently, for instance, we got offers of people who want to start an airline in Uganda to apparently save us the $420 million per annum, which we are losing every year –(Interjections)- we would have restarted the Ugandan Airline, but I had to work on the roads first –(Laughter)- and electricity. However, there are now very good proposals because our travel industry is very profitable. We are giving away $420 million each year to the airlines, which are coming here. This money is a lot and it can support any airline in which Ugandan Government has bought shares. If somebody has no ulterior motives, it is easy to quickly decide on what to do in such matters; no delays in investment decisions.

I have spent a lot of time talking about manufacturing. This is, however, not to forget about services such as tourism, banking, hospitality, education, health, professional services and many others. These have no reason not to move well. The country is peaceful and it will remain so. (Applause) The infrastructure elements required such as roads, the railway, electricity, the ICT backbone and the undersea cable are either in place or are being worked on.

Government, however, will intensify the efforts to capitalise Uganda Development Bank because it is erroneous to think that you can modernise agriculture and industrialise the country using commercial banks. This is a mistake. The Uganda Development Bank will be capitalised so that it gives low interest loans to agriculture and manufacturing.

The service sector is already employing 430,000 people. We shall work with our partners abroad to increase the number of tourists to at least four million per annum, instead of the present 1.3 million tourists per annum. 

Again, on the issue of financing, the NRM had the foresight to leave UDB out of the privatisation. There was a lot of pressure to privatise it. I wanted to see whether the involvement of the private sector in banks would lower the interest rates because of the competition. The argument was that because the banks would be competing, they would lower the interest rates. That is why there was pressure to privatise the Uganda Commercial Bank so that other people come in - because of competition and the efficiency of   private actors. Well, the facts show that it has not worked. Even when the inflation rate is five per cent, the banks lend at 23.5 per cent as of now. 

It is these commercial banks that are fuelling the craze of importing by giving endless loans to importers - abagula. Our language is very rich because there are abagula - those who buy and abatunda. Therefore, Ugandans specialize more in kugula or to buy than to sell or okutunda. They get loans from these commercial banks with high interest rates to kugula. Abakola ebintu or manufacturers and the abatunda or those who sell do not feature much in the lending scheme of these commercial banks. 

Should we say that the commercial banks are part of the haemorrhage? Fortunately, we have the option of Uganda Development Bank that will come to our rescue. There are, however, short-term issues that must also be addressed in addition to capitalizing UDB. There is the problem of Government not paying arrears of private companies that supplied to Government. I have already directed Government to resolve this issue. The Prime Minister has been working on it. In any case, the banks should not use this excuse to grab people’s properties as long as there is evidence that those companies are owed money by the Government. 

Apparently, there is also a racket in the banks trying to steal people’s property – (Applause) - because personally, when I borrow, I pay back. I do not have any debt with anybody; you can check with all the banks. However, I have heard that many of our people are blackmailed. First, they are given difficult loans, many of them have “financial illiteracy” that they do not understand the economics of it then they run into problems. 

Now, instead of the banks being sympathetic as they should be to the borrowers to help them, they instead look for pretext to just grab their property; that is what I have heard and we are going to handle that.

Secondly, there are companies that supplied to the Government of South Sudan but were not paid on account of the crisis that was going on there. I have already directed Government to help these companies. 

In the oil sector, there are companies that borrowed money in order to, for instance, buy drilling rigs. Hence, on account of delays in the oil programmes, these companies’ loans have attracted huge interest and yet they are not yet working as the pumping of oil has not started. These companies will get support from the Government to negotiate with the banks for reasonable treatment.

Fourthly, the Government is going to bring legislation to deal with consumer protection. Some of the commercial banks and money lenders, apparently use unethical methods to steal the property of Ugandans. I have, for instance, heard of money-lenders presenting money-lending as a sale and using any default by the borrower to grab people’s properties. Due to the financial indiscipline of our people, they become desperate for money. Some of it is for politics; can you imagine? You say, oh just give me and then they make an agreement. Instead of making a lending agreement, it is made like a sale agreement; any small delay implies you sold to me. 

However, the law I would like to propose to bring here will empower the Government to inquire whether it was a sale or blackmail. We can surely tell what a sale is and what a lending agreement is. Lending is much less money than selling. I tried to help somebody recently and I asked, how can somebody sell a building of one billion for only Shs 200 million? They said no, with a sale, as long as you agree to sell, you can sell at even one shilling. Now we would like a law which will empower the state to inquire whether this was a sale or a borrowing and used to grab people’s property.

Ugandan companies should also be more careful in dealing with these banks because some of them thrive on their ignorance. The Government is now fully aware; I have got a big report by the Prime Minister. There are so many companies with many problems and we will take all the legal and appropriate counter-measures. 

Islamic banking, which we have legalised, will also bring in a new philosophy, to the chagrin of these sharks. The Islamic banking principles are different and they operate differently. I have heard that some people are resisting this Islamic banking but it is good. I have heard about it and what it does is that if you pay back, that is alright, if you do not, they get shares into the property but you remain with your property. They even have got a certain formula on how they do it.

I think these commercial banks or sharks are going to lose out because I am taking advantage of my Islamic links to bring Islamic banking, and if they are not careful, they may be marginalised if they don’t behave well. They may lose out.

When it comes to agriculture, there will, initially, be two major efforts.  Number one, continue to battle with the 68 per cent of the homesteads that are still in subsistence farming. I have talked about this a lot in the past. This time, however, the difference is that I have given written orders to Operation Wealth Creation to stop trying to be everywhere and end up being nowhere. This is a temptation by many people who have never fought wars; they try to be everywhere and end up being nowhere. You cannot manage; you must concentrate on a few areas. 

I have directed them to, initially, concentrate on three cash crops: coffee, fruits - and when I say fruits, don’t bring manganda and kifenensi. All those are fruits but the fruits I am talking about are three; oranges, mangoes and pineapples. I insist on these because for these, we already have an external market. When you say, fruits, they will go and bring all sorts of fruits in the world; and then tea. The money in the next financial year will be for these three crops.

According to the planned allocation for the coming financial year, the money will be on these three crops. I am sure using one acre of seedlings per homestead will cover about 2 million homesteads in one financial year out of the 7.3 million homesteads that live in the whole of Uganda. That will not be a bad effort when they are added to the 270,000 homesteads already served with perennial cash crops by Operation Wealth Creation in the last two years. That is why I am saying that let us concentrate on the three fruits and not all the fruits in the world. There are fruits called amatunguru. We are talking about the three fruits; oranges, mangoes and pineapples then coffee and tea.

I have told Operation Wealth Creation of Mao Tse-Tung’s exhortation that it is better to cut off completely one finger of the enemy so that he remains with only nine than to injure all the 10. He said it is bad planning when you injure all the 10 fingers of the enemy because when they heal, you will have done nothing. However, if you are careful to just cut off one finger, even if he remains with the nine, at least one finger will be gone forever. That is what Mao Tse-Tung advised his supporters when they were fighting. In fighting, we always strive for the battles of annihilating the enemy rather than merely routing the enemy.

This struggle is about pulling the 68 per cent of the subsistence farmers into the money economy and avoiding any further land fragmentation. There are, however, many Ugandans that are already involved in plantation agriculture, for example sugar and tea estates. There are large scale farmers like myself and there are quite a number of medium and small scale commercial farmers.  All these are part of the 32 per cent of the homesteads that are already part of the money economy.  

Honourable members, please use the statistics of the country. There was a census recently and it showed that only 32 per cent of the homesteads in Uganda are in the money economy. That is where the problem is. All those issues you get involved in such as fundraisings will not help you. What will help you and our people is for the 68 per cent of the homesteads who are just spectators because they don’t produce for the market - the struggle is to make sure that all these homesteads come into the money economy if they have land. If they don’t have land then we shall use other methods to put them into the money economy.

The 32 per cent includes the manufacturers, the traders, the commercial farmers, the plantation owners and they have their own issues. The plantation owners are fully capable of sustaining themselves and developing their businesses. The only support they need from Government is policy support. Take the example of new sugar factories poaching sugarcane of the older ones. This must stop. The policy of not having a new sugar factory in the radius of 50 kilometres must be implemented.  Otherwise, we shall have the phenomenon of “suicidal cannibalism” by these factories. They will eat each other and they will all collapse and we shall be the losers.

The tea growers need fertilizers. The big ranchers need machinery for bush clearing. The ranchers and the country will be well served by the state helping to buy and concentrate young bulls for fattening (okugomora) so as to feed the new abattoirs that have been built in the country. We have been able to attract modern abattoirs - one by the Egyptians, another by the Iranians and another one by the Israelis; so, we shall be able to export beef. 

One abattoir needs 400 cows per day. I am one of the big farmers. However, I currently sell only 1,000 cows per year. That means I will support a factory for two days, what will happen? There is a clear need here to re-organise the agro-industrial sector. By establishing feed lots, I can rear for you 100,000 cattle for slaughter per annum. However, in the short run, the quick solution is for the Government, through its agencies, to buy young bulls from farmers, fatten them and maintain a ready supply to the abattoirs as the farmers are assisted to industrialise their farming and move away from relying only on free-range farming – Ente kusetuka.  Otherwise, with a national herd of 14 million cattle today, it is not a problem supplying a number of abattoirs, each requiring about 146,000 cattle per year. It is simply the organisation. This is where Government actions are required.

Later on, all the farmers will need support for micro-irrigation using solar-powered water pumps. I have told Makerere University to develop these solar-powered water pumps.   We are also working with some investors to see how to tackle the problem of low use of fertilizers in Uganda. In the USA, they use 132 kilogrammes, per hectare, of fertilizers.  In Uganda, we only use 2.5 kilogrammes per hectare.

There is the minerals sector. Minerals, like agriculture, produce raw-materials for industry (for factories). We are, accordingly, moving on that front. The Chinese company in Sukuru Hills, near Tororo, is working on producing phosphate fertilizers, sulphuric acid and steel. That facility, once fully developed, will generate annual income of the magnitude of US $306 million and create 1,800 jobs. Similar operations will be done at Kilembe, Butogota in Kanungu, Muko in Kabale, Namekhera in Bugisu and so forth.  In Moroto we are going to build another cement factory there. (Applause) We must build a gold refinery in the region. The only gold refineries are, apparently, in Dubai and in South Africa.  

Hence, the whole of this area (Uganda, Tanzania, Congo, South Sudan) exports un-purified gold for which we get US$ 970 per ounce. Yet an ounce of purified pure gold goes for US$ 1,212. This is not correct. Therefore, the artisanal mining needs to be monitored and guided so that they do not become part of the haemorrhage. As long as you are only collecting what we call in Luganda “Bukunkumuka”; fragments or particles of gold, in the form of alluvial gold, the state should ignore you.  However, these artisanal miners should be regulated and what they are harvesting should be known and recorded. At the same time, three things should be happening:

One, exploration by licensed people should continue so that we discover where these “bukunkumukira” are coming from – they must be coming from a rock of gold somewhere. So, if you leave only the artisanal miners to collect “bukunkumukira” –(Interjection)– “bukunkumukira” is Runyankole. So these fragments, where are they coming from? The artisanal miners cannot themselves find out where the rock is. So we need people who are scientifically capable to locate where the source of these particles is. Nobody should stop properly equipped scientific exploration to continue. 

Secondly, the minerals department should have a fully-equipped laboratory that should conclusively analyse the samples so as to determine the exact content of the minerals. 

Thirdly, once the rock of the gold or diamonds or whatever from which the “bukunkumukira” are coming is located, capable large-scale investors should come in so that they directly mine and process as well as buying from the regulated and licensed artisanal miners. The two can work together but in an organized and coordinated way. 

Therefore, the four must be coordinated and legalised: artisanal mining, exploration, industrial mining and processing as well as refining. Otherwise, unregulated and illegal artisanal mining will be part of the haemorrhage and will block great opportunities, industrial mining, processing and refining which bring in much more money, transfer of technology and create more jobs. 

What is true of gold and diamonds is also true of other minerals for example coltan (columbite tantalite), tin, wolfram and so forth. All this should be discussed with our artisanal miners like the ones I saw at Kamusenene in Bukuya, Mubende. I do not want high-handed actions by corrupt and selfish officials roughing up our people. All Ugandans are intelligent; they are able to tell what is good and what is bad when you show it to them clearly and patiently. 

Above, I have only talked about gold (alluvial or from the hard rock). I have not talked about jewellery. Our gold must be converted into jewellery so that we get more money from our gold, create more businesses from that gold and create more jobs. You find people wearing golden rings which are made from – I don’t know where – and yet our gold here just goes to where no one knows. And then more intelligent people sort it out and make rings for us to wear at a huge cost. That lack of business knowledge must stop. The artisanal miners should, therefore, get organised so that we can assist them to make jewellery from our gold. However, you cannot make jewellery unless you purify the gold which takes us back to the issue of the gold refinery.

Then there is the shame of illegal fishing. In 1986, there was not a single fish-processing factory on Lake Victoria or anywhere in Uganda. I built the first one with Italian support at Masese, near Jinja -(Interjections)- Tufmac had collapsed long ago. By 1995, about 17 fish factories had sprung up employing over 1.3 million people in the value chain. By 2005, we were exporting 36,615 tonnes valued at US $143.6 million per annum. Once it was realised that there was money in fishing, all parasites descended on our lakes and started fishing out all the young fish. The fish in the lakes is now depleted. The anti-illegal fishing officers became the fish poachers. 

The consequence is that the fish stocks are very low in the lakes. Out of the 21 fish processing factories, 12 have closed. The others are limping on, operating at less than 30 percent capacity and only earning US$96 million per annum. This shame will not be allowed to continue. 

First of all, I am going to cause the registration of all the fishermen on the lakes so that we know who is who. I am bringing this up because you remember I was sworn in the other day, having sorted out the other issues in February- I am telling you all this. I do not have to mention all this. I can go and do it but what I want is mobilisation. I want to mobilise you so that you are all speaking the same language - because this will now be political. We are going to chase people from the lakes. We shall ask them what they are doing there and chase them if they are engaged in illegal fishing. 

Therefore, because of the politics, that is why I want us to be of the same mind. When we start this, people should not say that we are discriminating against them. I am going to cause the registration of all the fishermen on the lakes so that we know who is who. Anybody with a criminal record will not be allowed on those lakes. 

Secondly, I will buy surface radars that can watch the lake surface all the way to the international borders with Tanzania, Kenya and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Using land based radars, we can watch all the boats on the lake. If all the boats have been registered, we can know the whereabouts of each boat. If there is a boat which is not accounted for, we shall go for it.   

Thirdly, we shall encourage the acquisition of ships and steamers that will transport people to and from the islands so that the illegal fishermen will not hide behind the cover of being canoe-transporters. They usually hide and claim that they are canoe-transporters, when in fact they are fish poachers. I have put a number of ministers in that sector to no avail. I am sorry about the ministers - these should be home matters but this is a big shame. No boat will be allowed in the fish breeding areas. These fish have got certain breeding areas where nobody should fish - when my people are sitting in the radar room, they will see which boat is going to pick them and put them in jail. 

If the anti-illegal fishing law is not strong enough, then the ministry must bring a stronger one. Anybody engaged in illegal-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, can you put down your placards? You are going to get tired. We have seen them so put them down. (Applause) 

GEN (RTD) MUSEVENI: Anybody engaged in illegal fishing, transporting young fish, buying or selling them, must go to jail for at least, five years. These are enemies of our future and our prosperity and must be treated as such. We shall also set up an interest-free revolving fund for the fishermen to buy the proper fishnets and burn all the bad fishnets. Those people diverted me from hearing about the revolving fund for buying proper fish nets for the fishermen and we ban the illegal fishnets. 

Therefore, honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, I stand before you today as a proud “Jajja”. “Jajja” means grandfather-(Interjections)- tired? The Bible says, “They have eyes, but they do not see.”  As a proud Jajja (grandfather) that has been engaged continuously for the last 50 years in the struggle for the liberation of our people, the recovery of our economy and its growth and expansion as well as the socio-economic transformation of our country; using that historical vantage point, I am able to confidently say that Uganda is now on the point of take-off for the reasons I have enumerated above and take off with obstacles and problems notwithstanding. (Applause)

I cannot, however, conclude my address without touching on these two points: Petroleum and the East African integration; the 6.5 billion barrels of proven oil reserves. Now that we have solved the issues of the refinery and the pipeline, this will help us to more easily fund the roads, the railway, electricity, irrigation, some aspects of education and health as well as the innovations of our long suppressed scientists. 

Prof. Isharaza died recently without realizing his dream of industrializing the production of the powerful Muhoko (luwoko) products. The scientific name for Muhoko is “phytolacca dodecandra”. 

With our oil money, all the economically viable products of our scientists will be funded ─ the electric car (Kiira EV), the bus (Kayoola), the muhoko and ekiboombo products  of  the late Dr. Isharaza, the banana starch, eshande (banana) juice  and so much more. Therefore, although the price of oil has gone down, once we start hunting our oil, it will be easier for us to fund all these programmes, which have taken long to be funded. 

The final one is the East African integration, leading to a political federation or confederation. In the last 50 years, this has been our aim, following in the footsteps of Mzee Mwalimu Nyerere, that great African leader. Information from Arusha indicates that there is now a good level of convergence on this issue among the East African States.  Economic integration is moving well. Political integration is also a sine qua non of guaranteeing our sovereignty.

I salute the Ugandans for supporting political integration unreservedly. (Applause) The political and economic integration of East Africa is not just for sentimental reasons; it is in order to ensure our prosperity. Our brothers and sisters in Ethiopia, whom I salute, are effectively using their market of 90 million people to attract investment, by giving local investors protection. This market is a resource.

In East Africa, we have got 160 million people now. If we tell somebody that we are not going to allow them to sell their cars here, unless they assemble them here, they will have no alternative. However, if Uganda is alone – okay, we are 38 million, if I stop them; the other country may allow them. It will not have the same effect.

Our brothers and sisters in Ethiopia are using their 90 million people to build their economy. They simply say that you are not allowed to sell in here, unless you build your factory in here; you will not be allowed to sell your products in this market. That is how China has built up very fast; 1.3 billion people. The condition is that if you want to sell in China, you need to establish your factory there. If you do not accept the condition, you will not be allowed to sell anything there.

If in Uganda we continue with the aspect of small things, we are going to miss out on these numbers. These numbers are a resource if they are used correctly, politically. The size in the market is not just for sentiments; the 160 million East African people should be used to pull in investment for the prosperity of our people.

In the coming session of Parliament, the Government will present to you, for consideration the following Bills; they are all listed here. I do not think that I should read all of them. They are 29:
 
1. 	Agriculture Extension Bill,
2.	Amendment of the NAADS Act, 2001
3.	Amendment of the Universities and other Tertiary Institution Act, (2011) 
4.	Fisheries (Amendment) Bill

They are all here and it is a long list. I, therefore, have the pleasure to declare the Tenth Parliament open. (Applause) I salute all of you, may God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, I wish to thank and congratulate you upon fulfilling the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution on the State of the Nation Address. We have noted the achievements registered in the preceding year, the plans and programmes Government intends to undertake; giving participation as well as the 29 Bills you have mentioned for the legislative agenda.

As a tradition, your Excellency, once my office receives the copies of the Bills, they will be distributed to the Members and the same will be reflected on the Order Paper. I would like to invite Members to take note of the areas they may want to address, on the general debate of the State of the Nation Address.

Your Excellency and dear guests, this address does not stand alone but it leads to the provisions of the budget. Parliament is, therefore, looking forward to the presentation of the Government’s budgetary proposals and estimates of revenue and expenditure next week, in the Financial Year 2016/2017, and to compare it with the proposals made in the State of the Nation Address. 

It will also be debated by Parliament in accordance with the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. Your Excellency, this is one of the few times on the Parliamentary Calendar that we have an opportunity to listen to your address and also to interact with you, informally.

Accordingly, we are proceeding to the next stage of the State of the Nation Address. This next stage will take place in the Parliamentary gardens. We invite you, your Excellency and all our guests to join us, at the Serena Gardens for further deliberations, accompanied by friendly activities.

We shall leave the Chamber in reverse order. However, we need to have a record of this historic function and we request you, your Excellency, to join the Members in group photography at the entrance of the Serena Conference Centre. I, therefore, invite the Members, to assemble on the steps in front of the Victoria Hall.

Your Excellency and our dear guests, we thank you for completing this function and thank the guests for honouring us, especially those who have come from far away. I adjourn the House to Wednesday, 8 June 2016, at 14:00 hours, at this venue for the National Budget. Thank you very much.

(The East African Community Anthem)

(The National Anthem)

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 June 2016.)

