

Thursday, 31 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is the 31st of May, the date set apart by the law to be the last day by which we should pass the budget. That is the main business today. However, the Committee on Budget is still trying to harmonise some figures and we will be expecting these to come by about 4.30 p.m. today. We will then proceed with that business.

When that matter comes, it is my hope that all the discussions will have been held in the committees, the chairpersons have made their presentations and all the harmonisations have been done. Therefore, we will not spend a lot of time because we discussed the main principles when we were discussing the ministerial policy statements and the reports from the committees.

When the Committee on Budget comes with its report later today and we go to the Committee of Supply, I expect us to do what we must as of today, and that is to pass the budget. We need to supply and also deal with the Appropriation Bill so that we conclude these matters today. Thank you very much.

2.09
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the invasion of armyworms in Nakaseke District, specifically in the subcounties of Semutto, Kapeeka, Kaasa Ngombe and many others.

The farmers in Nakaseke District have attempted to apply the available pesticides but they are not effective. The most affected crops are maize, cassava and sweet potatoes. This is likely to create adverse effects in the future if we are not assisted on time.

Therefore, I urge the Government to urgently look into this matter and assist us if they want the people of Nakaseke to survive famine. Thank you.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are sorry about the armyworm that has invaded Nakaseke District. We have taken note and we shall pass the information on to the relevant ministry - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I pledge that they will come up with a statement and measures on how to support the farmers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do not need a statement but we need action in the field. 

DR MORIKU: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will try to put in place measures in order to contain the armyworm in Nakaseke District. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.11
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the landslides in lower Bulambuli. 

There were floods in the subcounties of Bwikhonje, Muyembe, Bukhalu and even the road that connects to Nakapiripirit is completely cut off. We have talked about these issues many times but nothing has been done. I kindly request the minister concerned, that is, hon. Ecweru, to come to our rescue. All the subcounties I have mentioned are submerged, crops have been destroyed and people have been displaced. Thank you very much.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on the issue of the breakdown of roads and bridges brought about by floods, we will work with the Ministry of Works and Transport, particularly Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA).

We know that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness has requested for some funds for emergency, but we also have a road fund, which can be used in such emergencies. We shall report to the Minister of Works and Transport after here –(Ms Among rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you start using the microphone before I have allowed you, you confuse the reporting in the Hansard. It is better you do not activate the microphones before you are allowed to speak so that our record is clean. Because you have done that and yet I have communicated this a few times, you will not raise the information. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, UNRA will immediately go to the field to check on the roads and also take some action. 

We are working on the issue of the displaced people. Hon. Ecweru will immediately be informed after here so that we get in touch with the Member to address the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us wait for this feedback, but we want action to be taken when these urgent matters are raised. The kind of report should be a report on action taken not a general statement about the situation. 

2.15
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding birth certificates. 

A birth certificate is very important for the people of Uganda especially for purposes of travel, health and education. Currently, there is a general outcry from the public because for almost four months now, there are no certificates from the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA). To get a certificate, a person has to part with about Shs 50,000 or even Shs 100,000 yet this certificate normally goes for Shs 5,000. 

I request that the processing of these certificates be taken back to Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB), which used to deal with birth certificates. I beg to submit.

MR BAHATI: Minister of Internal Affairs, please respond to this issue.

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, when official documents such as the identity cards and birth certificates get lost, there is a fee that is charged for replacement. It is an official fee and you are supposed to get a receipt indicating the fee charged. If somebody asks you to pay and you do not get a receipt, it is a crime and you should report the matter. 

Secondly, there is a weakness in NIRA; replacement of documents has been taking a long time. We have instructed them to reduce that period to make sure that people get them as soon as possible.

2.17
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On behalf of Mitooma District Council, I would like to express gratitude to the NRM Government for distributing complete road equipment to each district in Uganda. (Applause) However, the districts are concerned that these road units should be accompanied by a commensurate budget allocation, so that they have an operational and maintenance fund. It will be unfortunate to see this equipment lying idle at district headquarters when the roads are going to waste. 

We all know the use that this equipment will be put to if a sufficient budget is allocated. This will facilitate transport of the farmers’ produce and therefore, encourage more production and social-economic growth that will lead us into a middle income status. I beg to submit.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. Jovah Kamateeka is a chairperson of a committee and a member of the Committee on Budget. We expect you to take action on the issue that you have raised. (Laughter) 

More importantly, however, we allocated Shs 10 billion to road maintenance last financial year and we have maintained the figure in this financial year budget. We have also gone ahead to levy Shs 100 on fuel, a measure through which we shall realise Shs 192 billion. This money is ring-fenced for road maintenance - equipping and supporting the districts to maintain roads.

2.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I am raising is of grave national importance and it concerns all of us. It is intended to act as information or a caution to Members of Parliament because of the fraud that is taking place, and the Members of Parliament are a target. 

Since December 2017, there is a gentleman who first used my name to send a message to hon. Munyagwa that I was stuck in Eldoret. He sent a picture of my car purportedly, saying that I needed assistance. If at all there was any person to whom I would have sent a message about my concern, it would have been hon. Odonga Otto. I am not very close to hon. Munyagwa but that is not to say that I am not his friend. (Laughter) He sent the message that I was stuck but hon. Munyagwa first contacted me saying, “I understand that you are stuck; whom do I give the money?” I told him that I was in Parliament and we met here. 

While we were meeting, hon. Ssewungu also came to me saying, “Sorry for what happened. I received a message that you are stuck in Eldoret and I almost sent money.” As if that was not enough, the same message was also sent to hon. Katuntu. I thank those Members for not sending the money to those people. 

This habit has continued. In December last year, many people were cheated under the name of hon. Komakech, claiming that he was stuck. People sent money worth Shs 17 million. Hon. Komakech had to refund these people’s money when they got to know that he was not the one. His number had been de-registered and put under a different name; so, the telecom companies could be part of the racket. Hon. Komakech is still suffering with the repayment of the Shs 17 million to those people who sent money to the fraudsters. This is a big fraudulent gang targeting Members of Parliament. 

Last week, hon. Komakech’s name was again used, claiming he was stuck somewhere. The message was sent to hon. Veronica Babirye asking for Shs 150,000. Fortunately, hon. Komakech had been a victim so he was able to communicate to hon. Babirye that he was not in danger. 

On 11 May, hon. Alioni received a message claiming that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi was stuck and needed money urgently. When hon. Alioni asked him to send his profile picture, he instead sent the picture of hon. Aogon. That is when he got to know that this was fraud. Hon. Okot Ogong says he was part of those who were cheated and a number of other people. Therefore, honourable colleagues, I want us to be very cautious. You saw what happened yesterday; it could have been the same group. The Leader of the Opposition yesterday presented a case here. The police should take this matter seriously. 

These people use a Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) line. I do not know why they have opted to use this line. They use 0716711541 to send messages but they ask you to send money to an Airtel number - 0756117114 - registered in the name of Musolin Ronnie Ngige who keeps claiming he is a driver. I think with the technology that we have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is just giving information. We do not want to details the details. You are warning us about these things, which have happened.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, our police at Parliament should take up this number. I will give them more information so that they are able to track down and get this racket. It is not limited to Members of Parliament but even in our constituencies, they have cheated people. It is very easy to cheat people in the rural areas.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, that is the concern I had which I felt I should inform Members about, such that they do not fall prey to this fraud and conmen who are marauding around and targeting Members of Parliament. At one point, a friend of mine told me that in a Katwe restaurant, they were discussing how to con me. They were saying that they have tried to con me and failed but they said they would get me one day.

If that person had told me at that time, I would have been able to arrest them but he told me after two days. I told him he made a mistake; we would have been able to arrest those people. Therefore, colleagues, be warned that there are fraudsters around. 

In addition, because Parliament is a place for the public, some even enter here and target Members. They use our personal assistants. I think we need to caution our political assistants; they are a target. They should not give away any information or document just because someone says you sent them. 

Mr Speaker, that is the information I wanted to give. Also, the minister in charge of telecommunications should work with Uganda Communications Commission so that they are able to target these people and get them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Before the Minister of Internal Affairs comes up, I would also like to add some more information. I think Ugandans should be aware that Members of Parliament and other high profile people in the country are a target of conning. There are people who create fake Facebook accounts for you; for example, they have been using my name but instead of spelling Bahati with a single “i”, they use “ii”. They then get all these pictures of you speaking in Parliament, in the constituency and they say they are looking for jobs for people and they ask for money from them.

Therefore, I think this is important. I want to thank hon. Okupa for this important information and I want to use this opportunity to caution Ugandans not to fall into these traps. They are conning a lot of people in the country and especially young people who are desperately looking for jobs. Thank you very much for giving this information. I request the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us the steps being taken to get these people.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true there is a lot of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) fraud in this country, which we call cyber fraud and it seems to be growing. All of us should be concerned about this matter.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs and the police are working with UCC and trying to engage service providers to close some of the technical loopholes like the registration of the numbers, individuals’ identities and so forth. However, for investigative purposes, colleagues and the general public, we have quite a lot of police stations in our areas and here in particular at Parliament we have a whole Directorate of Police. My appeal, therefore, is that as soon as you receive such information and particularly if the person has called you, that is an important stage at which to capture that information. This is because it is easier to locate where such a person has been calling from, other than if you wait long and the person goes away.

Therefore, as soon as you get that call, report the number, time and place where you received the call. Immediately, the police wherever you are, including the ones in Parliament, will forward that to our ICT department, which will follow up on the matter so that we are able to capture some of these thugs who are trying to misuse our services. (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The fraud in this country is very much. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to come and make a statement so that we can debate it? Many people have been conned and it will continue until we bring this matter on the Floor of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree. However, honourable members, we have ministers in charge of these departments. If there are things that are growing and they are a threat to the people of this country and people who visit this country, do we need to solicit statements from ministers? Do we need to? 

When the issue is in somebody’s docket, it should be their imperative to come and say, “I need to brief the public about this matter”, just like I see with health issues; when there is a disease outbreak, there are notices which are not solicited by the Members. I think it would be better if we leave these issues for the ministers to take them up themselves and come to the House instead of each time soliciting statements from them.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with your guidance –(Interjections)– The Speaker is saying I do not need to come here. He is saying we do not need to make a statement but we need to take action. I have said here clearly that the police and UCC are taking action on this matter, trying to identify these culprits. At the same time, we are requesting members of the public, including MPs, to report such fraud as soon as it occurs so that we are able to take action.

Mr Speaker, if I was asked to come with a statement, I do not know what else I would come to say here because I would not tell you how that ICT investigation is done. I would not tell it to you here. It is an internal process within the police. Thank you very much.

2.32
MR STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding Kyegegwa District. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, Kyegegwa lies in the cattle corridor of Uganda and part of it - the south constituency - was attacked by Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) last month. A quarantine was instituted immediately to stop the transfer of animals and our cattle markets have now been closed.

Mr Speaker, the District Veterinary Officer (DVO) approached the Ministry of Agriculture for their intervention on two things. One of them was to bring the vaccine to vaccinate the animals so that we can control the spread of the disease. The second thing was to give us usable materials such JIK to disinfect the vehicles and people as they move in and outside that area.

Unfortunately, the answer from one of the commissioners in the ministry was that the country does not have vaccines at the moment for Foot and Mouth Disease. This is highly risk and the disease is likely to spread all across the cattle corridor. As you are aware, Ugandans still transport animals in the night and this puts us at a high risk. 

I pray that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries takes responsive action to get us the vaccines and other usable materials to keep the disease under control. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a response from the Government?

2.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, indeed, Foot and Mouth Disease, if not handled well, can be disastrous. I will make sure that I raise this matter with the Prime Minister because it seems it is beyond the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It may require funds to make sure that we procure the vaccines –(Interjections)– That is why I am taking it to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to see how we can secure funds to handle the situation before it escalates. He has allowed me to respond like –(Interjections)– I know that he is here. (Laughter) I meant the Prime Minister, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you whisper to him since he is here? These are urgent matters, Gen. Moses Ali. Do you want to say something about this? 

2.36
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I would like to avoid duplication. I want to confirm what the Government Chief Whip has said that it will be taken as is already stated. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.37
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the start of this week, the media has been spreading information about the recovery of stolen drugs that belong to the Government of Uganda. The drugs were discovered somewhere in a bar and they were worth about Shs 20 million.

This has attracted the attention of the public. I request the relevant ministry to give us information about this issue because it has caused shame to the Government of Uganda and other organs. Thank you.

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, indeed, it is true we have had that record of drugs being stolen. Today, as I speak, there are issues of drugs being stolen in Sironko District. We are all aware and measures are being put in place first of all, to get the people who are involved in stealing, subject them to the law and then the law will take its course. Thank you.

2.39
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern, and I am glad the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. David Bahati, is listening to me. 

At the Malaba border post, the Kenyan Government has constructed a road and built a bridge and Uganda should connect up to the bridge. However, there is a stretch of 600 metres from the bridge to the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) terminal that has not been constructed for the last two years on the Ugandan side.

Malaba is the single border point that collects Shs 6 trillion per financial year. Everyone has tried and URA has been complaining. To date, the current road they are using, which we saw as a team from Parliament –(Mr Kahonda rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, it is an urgent matter of public importance. He has the information. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, it is an embarrassment to the Ugandan Government that the Kenyan Government can build a road and even a bridge but a section of 600 metres, which cannot even take our mighty Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) three months to tarmac in order to facilitate cross border trade, remains undone. Several committees of Parliament have gone there but the problem is not being solved.

I sit on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget but I do not see any budget line for this. Uganda Revenue Authority has been requesting this institution to do something so that this one-kilometre stretch can be tarmacked to facilitate fast movement of goods.

Mr Speaker, I thought it is very important for us as a country to have something done. They have made several attempts to invite the President to that point but the state operatives have done everything it takes to ensure the President does not reach there to see what is happening. 

I request the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, now that we are at the tail end of the budgeting process, to assure the country whether this one-kilometre stretch at the border can be done so that Uganda can expedite the arrival of goods into the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto, for raising this important issue. Indeed, that stretch of the road is programmed to be worked on in July this year. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we will now go to the Order Paper. However, you will remember the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition on Apaa yesterday. The honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here and he said there would be some communication today. 

I have been advised that there are two sets of communication from the ministers; one from Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the other one from the Minister of Local Government. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate these statements and then we see how to proceed. As I said earlier, the main item today is the Committee of Supply. However, the Committee on Budget is still sitting and they will be here at about 4.30 p.m. 

Therefore, can we cause these alterations in the proper order in the Order Paper, handled sequentially by the rules, and we proceed.

MR ALIONI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a very big threat of the closure of a factory in West Nile area. That is the only factory we have in the entire West Nile. The factory is called Meridian Tobacco Company and it employs over 3,000 people and supports over 15,000 farmers. The company is threatening to close by July this year. 

In January 2018, we raised a matter of concern; British American Tobacco (BAT) brought a court injunction against the Attorney-General of this country, stopping URA from collecting excise duty from BAT. In February 2018, we again raised this matter and the Speaker directed the Attorney-General to immediately act and file a certificate of urgency and appeal against the court order. 

The Attorney-General together with hon. David Bahati, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, told this House that they are busy working on the petition against the court order. In February, when you were the one presiding over the House, Mr Speaker, we raised the same matter, that a court injunction made Government lose Shs 4.4 billion. 

British American Tobacco is not paying excise duty but importing and selling cheaply. This means big competition for our local company down there, which is threatening to close. Before this House, the Attorney-General told us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on procedure. Would you like to raise the procedural point?

MR ALIONI: Yes. Last week, we raised a matter and the Attorney-General claimed that he was going to appear in court in April but he failed to appear. On Thursday last week, the Speaker gave the Attorney-General a directive to present a comprehensive report to this House this week. The Attorney-General has not appeared and today is Thursday. Are we moving well procedurally when the Attorney-General has disrespected the directive of the Speaker to present a comprehensive report to this House this week?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is a procedural matter. This matter came up. How have you handled it? Where are we with this matter?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, when this matter came up last week, the Attorney-General was supposed to make a statement this week to update the House on the process of appealing. Actually, he did make some statement but it was not conclusive and the Speaker directed that we should have a comprehensive statement to include the genesis, the protocols that we have signed and where we are going. 

Unfortunately, the Attorney-General is not available. I have been informed that he has lost his mother and so, today he cannot make a statement in the House. However, this is to confirm to you, honourable colleagues, that the process of appealing is on and the Attorney-General is the only person who can continue with this process.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this procedural point based on the communication you just made about the meeting of the Committee on Budget. I am the chairperson of the Committee on ICT but I have looked for where the Committee on Budget is sitting in vain. I was told they were in the East Wing but the door is locked. I went to the vice-chairperson’s office –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, is that a matter to raise on the Floor here?

MS NYAKECHO: Yes, because Mr Speaker, where do we go? Where do we find them? We are chairpersons –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please, let us respect the dignity of the House. Those are administrative issues. You find out from the Clerk and go directly to where they are sitting. How am I going to be able to locate where they are sitting from my seat here? (Laughter) If you, who is free to move up and down, cannot, how will I find out? (Laughter) Can we proceed with the statement?

Are both ministerial statements uploaded on the iPads? Clerk, can you confirm? The statement from the Minister of Local Government is there. Can we have the one from the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities also uploaded? Clerk, can you ensure that.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.49
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) John Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was instructed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister last night after 10.00 p.m. to prepare and come and make a statement together with the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities today. I am now here for that.

As you might be aware, the Ministry of Local Government’s mandate, as per section 95 of the Local Governments Act, Cap. 243, is to guide, inspect, monitor and coordinate local governments to ensure compliance with existing laws of Uganda. In light of this, the role of the Ministry of Local Government in the border conflicts between Amuru and Adjumani has been purely administrative, guiding the local government administrations in the respective districts to hold dialogue with the relevant authorities and find a peaceful resolution to the matter.

As you may be aware, there had been a long standing dispute between Amuru and Adjumani districts until 23 October 2017 when the Government resolved the issue through communication delivered by the Minister of Local Government, standing before you here today. The area in contention was Apaa Village, which was confirmed to be in Adjumani District by the Department of Surveys and Mapping of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

Besides Apaa having been confirmed to be in Adjumani District, it is also a gazetted national park as well as a national forest reserve. Apaa Village is located close to the East Madi Game Reserve/Zoka Forest and issues pertaining to the management of game reserves and forests are the mandate of the Uganda Wildlife Authority, National Forestry Authority and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

As far as the Ministry of Local Government is concerned, the issues pertaining to the location of Apaa Village were resolved by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. They opened up and demarcated the respective boundaries of Adjumani and Amuru district local governments.

This boundary demarcation exercise was followed by a meeting to disseminate the findings on 23 October 2017. This involved stakeholders from the Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, the district administrations, as well as the area residents. This marked the conclusion to this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is that the statement by the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is not uploaded.

Secondly, the statement from the Minister of Local Government is referring to Kilak North Constituency being in Adjumani District. I do not know whether they have now decided to take over the whole of my constituency and take it to Adjumani District. The heading of the statement reads, “Statement to Parliament by Honourable Minister of Local Government Concerning Apaa Village in Kilak North Constituency in Adjumani District”.

Mr Speaker, this is where you can see the lies coming in. We have been telling you again and again. He was instructed; I do not know whether he was also instructed to take the whole of Kilak North to Adjumani District or are they confirming that they are aware about that place in Kilak North, which is in Amuru but not in Adjumani. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this procedural point is maybe a clarification issue from you. Minister of Local Government, is there Apaa Village, Kilak North County in Adjumani District? Is that the correct position or is there something that you need to correct on the record?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Apaa Village in Adjumani District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not Kilak North?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Not Kilak North. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think it is mainly because the Member for Kilak North County is the one who has been raising this matter. Therefore, the minister could have been drawn to –(Laughter) 

Has the statement from the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities been uploaded? It is being uploaded. Honourable member, you could follow from the copy I have here. Honourable minister, please proceed.

2.56
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to complement the statement made by the Minister of Local Government. I confirm that there has been a long standing land conflict between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), Amuru District Local Government and Adjumani District Local Government concerning land located within East Madi Wildlife Reserve.

Mr Speaker, these conflicts started way back in 2005 when communities from the camps for internally displaced persons at that time occupied parts of the wildlife reserve at Apaa. I would like Members to recall that at that time, it was difficult to patrol the protected areas and consequently, people invaded these areas.

Uganda Wildlife Authority and Adjumani District recognise that East Madi Wildlife Reserve is a dully gazetted wildlife reserve and it is in Adjumani District. Therefore, any occupation of this reserve is regarded as illegal. However, Amuru District Local Government and some local politicians in Acholi subregion still claim that the land that was gazetted is located in Amuru District and they argue that the gazetting was done in error.

Mr Speaker, I have been there personally. The Minister of Internal Affairs has also been there. If you recall, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development then, hon. Migereko, and late Gen. Aronda, went there and their experience is now a matter of history. As a result, the situation has caused ethnic unrests in the area and sometimes it has led to some clashes. 

Consequently, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in 2015 surveyed the area and established the common border between the two districts. It should be noted that even when those surveys were being done, they were done amidst intimidation of the surveyors. Also, demonstrations, mainly from the community, were staged, instigated by some political leaders.

I would like to confirm to you, Mr Speaker, that the disputed East Madi Wildlife Reserve includes Apaa, Punodyang, Ikuru and Gazi areas, which are all part of the wildlife reserve and are wholly located in Adjumani District. Government, through the Ministry of Local Government, made this declaration very clear to the two districts – and the Minister of Local Government has confirmed this – on 23 October 2017. The Ministry of Local Government, under its mandate, declared to that effect and gave a go-ahead to Uganda Wildlife Authority and Adjumani District to take control of the area and they did.

It is very important to note, Mr Speaker, that by October 2017, the reserve had been encroached on by communities that had come from the districts of Adjumani, Gulu and Amuru. There was indiscriminate logging of timber in Zoka Forest and cutting trees and burning them for charcoal. There was also massive destruction of vegetation through bush burning as well as uncontrolled poaching. Government therefore embarked on sensitisation campaigns from October 2017 onwards. The communities that were illegally occupying the reserve were given three months to leave and most of them have complied and left. 

Through collaborated efforts of security forces, Government commenced patrols on 15 March 2018. The forces were comprised of the police, Uganda Wildlife Authority rangers, National Forestry Authority rangers and Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) soldiers. These patrols were done alongside sensitisation exercises and they were done in a peaceful manner. 

I can confirm that these patrols soon discovered that areas, especially near River Nile towards Adjumani and in the central parts of the reserve, had already been vacated. The patrol forces destroyed the huts which were left behind in the vacated areas to discourage encroachers from coming back. 

I would, therefore, like to confirm –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister’s statement claiming that sensitisation of people was done and people are leaving the place peacefully is very annoying. The Uganda Wildlife Authority and UPDF are evicting people forcibly. Right now, they are burning each and every hut they find in that area. People are sleeping outside like dogs. It is very annoying to hear the minister saying everything went on peacefully. Is the minister really in order to mislead and lie to the nation yet we know exactly what is happening on the ground?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think that in order to find a lasting solution to this thing, let us try and listen to each other. Once you have finished listening, you can have interventions; it would be better. (Applause) You are raising a point of order on a factual matter that I do not know about and you would like me to rule on it. How will I rule? I have not been there and I have not seen what is happening. Therefore, I would not be able to rule on that point of order.

In addition, what the minister said was that central parts of the reserve had already been vacated and the huts left behind in the vacated areas were pulled down to avoid encouraging further illegal occupancy. That is what I heard the minister saying. 

As to whether further activities are taking place elsewhere, the minister has not yet reached that part because he was talking about the central part that had been vacated. I do not know whether they were vacated or not. Can we allow the minister to speak then we can have a short debate.

MR KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Mr Speaker, I had not completed the statement. Secondly, when I was addressing the public on this subject, hon. Gilbert Olanya, who was my host, contrary to culture, organised women to come naked and I had to take off. (Laughter) This is true. Mr Speaker, even before I have finished my statement, you can see what is happening. I am talking about some politicians fuelling ethnic conflicts.

I would like to inform the House that Government started sensitisation campaigns and combined with that, there were security forces patrolling the area. I am pleased to report that close to half of the game reserve - 400 square kilometres out of 827 square kilometres which had been occupied - has now been recovered and it is peaceful.

This movement of communities out of the protected areas has been peaceful and voluntary; no person has been harassed or manhandled. For those who are still in the protected areas, peaceful means will continue to be applied to persuade them to leave. Through continued sensitisation exercises, both on the ground and on radio, we hope to achieve the settlement of this conflict peacefully.

However, I also regret to report that it is unfortunate that a group of close to 20 youth, armed with bows and arrows, suspected to have been poaching, attacked a patrol team on 23 March 2018 in Zoka Forest. This led to the death of one person. Prior to this death, the patrol team had tried very hard to avoid confrontations with the hostile youth group and had retreated from the attackers who continued to pursue them. The patrol team had no alternative but respond to scare them. They shot in the air but the youth continued to advance until such a time when one soldier, in self-defence, fired and one person was killed. It is very regrettable. Much as this sent the rest in disarray, as Government we regret that communities instigated violence and want to use force to settle a conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to appeal to Members in this august House and the country as whole; this Government is a Government of laws. No one is above the law and any conflict in society, - and there are bound to be conflicts - must be resolved in accordance with the law of the land. I would like to confirm that Government will continue to exercise and enforce the law through peaceful means. The hallmark of the NRM administration has been peace, law and order, security and stability and we should never depart from these lines. If there are conflicts, we should resolve them.

Mr Speaker, actually among the people, there are no conflicts. Conflicts are instigated by some few leaders who, instead of going to courts of law, would want to instigate violence. I would appeal to Members that we are committed to a peaceful solution to this problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the Member for Kilak North County?

3.10
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that we were not informed that the ministers were coming with this kind of statement. 

I must tell you that we have debated this issue again and again in this House. One of the facts that came out very clearly on the Floor of this House is that there is a court injunction, which I also laid on the Table. That injunction was given in 2012. This would also explain to you that the statement from the minister that we should seek legal options is not working. This is because last year, we were in the High Court of Gulu and nothing has been followed up.

Secondly, the court injunction is still in place and the survey that the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development are talking about was done illegally because no activity was or is allowed to take place in that area. Mr Speaker, even after the illegal survey, when the Ministry of Local Government wanted to go and talk about their declaration that the place belonged to Adjumani, I wrote a letter to the Minister of Local Government and he is aware of that. After the survey, I wrote another letter objecting to that survey because it was illegally done and I laid a copy of that letter on the Floor of this Parliament. 

Even as I talk, I have written a letter to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The minister said on the Floor of Parliament that they are organising a joint team of leaders from Adjumani and Amuru together with the technical team from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to go to the United Kingdom and obtain a document that will be agreed upon by all. This is because hon. Reagan Okumu presented a map, which the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development rejected.

Secondly, the minister is talking about eviction, which is taking place illegally. After the eviction, people are brought from Adjumani to take over people’s homes. They are even sowing seeds in the gardens left behind. I therefore wonder, if the eviction is happening because people are in Uganda Wildlife Authority areas or occupying a forest, why bring other people to occupy their homes? 

Mr Speaker, as we talk about this issue, we should handle it as Ugandans. Uganda has been taking care of refugees in this country and some refugees are even here in this Parliament. We are even using the Uganda Government to go and defend people out of this country. We have the UPDF fighting in other countries –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am really sorry to interrupt my colleague but he has made a statement, which requires substantiation. He said that this House you are chairing, Mr Speaker, has refugees. I wonder whether he is order to make that statement without substantiation, because I know the laws of Uganda regarding elections of Members of Parliament and the technical staff that the Clerk to Parliament admits. For the Member to say that we have refugees in Parliament without substantiating is the reason I am raising a point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, indeed you made that statement. Are you saying there are refugees or there are former refugees? (Laughter)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, allow me to apologise for saying there are refugees. I meant former refugees, who have been hosted and are living peacefully in the country.

Mr Speaker, the final issue I would like to raise, which is very important, is that when the Minister of Local Government started reading his statement, he said he was instructed. You communicated to this House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think you should make a big issue out of that because our instruction yesterday was to the Prime Minister. Hon. Bahati communicated that it was the Prime Minister who was coming to make this statement. Therefore, to say that the Prime Minister instructed him - I do not think you should make it a big issue. Let us focus on the real issues.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, the real issue I am focusing on is, the President communicated through your Chair to this House that the evictions should not continue and that the place will be de-gazetted. He also said that the families that lost their people will be compensated and that he would go and visit the people after Easter.

When the President visited my constituency, I raised the issue to him and he repeated the same thing that you communicated to this House. We have a list of people who have lost their property, those who were killed recently and those who died in the process –(Ms Ababiku rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I wish you could let it flow so that we can solve this matter properly, please. You will speak but if we start raising points of procedure, we are going to have disruptions.

MR AKOL: The issue I would like to understand is: Has any other instruction been given by the President that the evictions must continue? Has any instruction been given to the people who are carrying out the evictions to continue burning people’s huts and destroying people’s property? Has an instruction been given by the President or is there somebody in the country who is bigger than the President? That is the question that I would like answered. Thank you very much.

3.18
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. The last time we were in this House, you communicated to us the decision taken by the President, that he will take time to go to the field. However, in your communication, I did not hear you say that the President had allowed de-gazettement to go on. What I heard was that the President said he would go to the field and if there are technical reasons for de-gazettement, it will be done. That is why I wanted to raise a procedural matter because you did not communicate that. 

Now that you have given me the opportunity –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just confirm that what you have stated is exactly what I communicated to the House.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much. Members, I would like to thank this Government and the office of the Speaker. We have been given a lot of time on this matter. Your office has remained very patient and as Members of Parliament coming from these two districts, we need to learn from that. This patience is not for nothing; we need to handle this with facts.

Mr Speaker, the last time we were here, the issue that was raised, and over which we almost built consensus, was the rights of the people. That was what you guided us on - the rights of the people, especially over their land if something went wrong. There was nothing contentious about the border. We can retrieve the Hansard. If you want to remain faithful and to be helped, there is need to remain consistent. 

Government cannot sit down if there is bloodshed. Government cannot fold its hands if there is bloodshed. I would like to thank the Government because from 2011, we have been handling this issue and we have lost more than one person. If we, the leaders, want Government to fold its hands and we continue shedding blood, then the essence of being leaders will be lost.

Mr Speaker, we have had joint meetings. I would like to give additional information regarding what we went through when we had one of the joint meetings in 2012. Honourable minister, Prof. Kamuntu, almost lost his life. I was there. We were stoned. Mr Speaker, in one of the joint meetings, you were there and you talked to me. That team was led by the honourable minister, Sarah Opendi. I do not want to get into the details. 

During the last meeting, we hosted the people of Amuru as our sisters and brothers. We have co-existed. The first meeting was held in Adjumani and I was with the Woman MP. When the time came for us to go to the site in Apaa, did we even have seats? I almost lost my driver. It was the LC III Chairperson, Christopher Ojera – I do not know whether he is now a former chairperson – who came and calmed the situation, otherwise I would have died on that day.

We have remained calm and there is rule of law in this country. As people of the Madi subregion, we love peace. Where things have reached, diplomacy has been played out. Government has given a report. We are not ready to go to the UK. We have not accepted to go to the UK because we have a Government in place and we have institutions in place. 

As we sit here as Members of Parliament, we are playing our roles and performing our duties on behalf of our people. We have not contested any of the reports given, not only by the ministers but also the committee reports of Parliament. If there are those who are contesting the reports brought here, we are not part of them. This will be recorded. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are ready to co-exist but as we co-exist, we need peace and loyalty. No one can come to my home and say, “Ababiku, set your house on fire”. We are not accepting de-gazettement. In this era, we need to protect our forest reserves. Honestly, if you have a heart and respect for each other, you cannot dictate that somebody should de-gazette. We are not for it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Gulu Municipality. (Interruptions) Can we have order, honourable members! Honourable member, stop throwing those comments. You have had your turn to speak and you have spoken well. Honourable members, I do not want to mention names. Can we deal with this issue in a calm manner. I have picked the honourable member for Gulu Municipality.

3.28
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, we need to be very cautious -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you could solve this matter, it would not be in this Parliament.

MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, I rise to bring other documents that can help us with a way forward. 

Mr Speaker, I should also advise Government, as a conflict specialist, that the use of language is very crucial in solving conflict issues. (Applause) If you begin using language that perpetuates conflict, you cannot solve the problem. That is why you see what you are seeing now.

Secondly, I think Government should also take on more capacity building on conflict sensitive post-conflict development so that when you know you are dealing with communities that are coming from prolonged conflict, you must have a way of dealing with them. It is what we call the “do no harm” approach. The Office of the Prime Minister should take this very seriously.

I have a document here. The Acholi leaders sat in Gulu on 27 May 2018 and they came out with a communiqué, which may be very important for Government to use and see how best to sort out this issue. This document is just one page. If you could allow me to quickly read, I will do so. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

It reads thus: 
“The Joint Acholi Leaders’ Communique on the Apaa Crisis held at Ker Kal Kwaro Acholi, Gulu on 27 May 2018 

We, the people of Acholi subregion assembled at Ker Kal Kwaro Acholi on 27 May 2018, condemn in the strongest terms possible the continued violation of human rights of the people of Apaa, Amuru District, which is being perpetuated by State security agents. 

We assert that historically, the people of Acholi and Madi have lived together harmoniously since time immemorial and the current conflict is not an inter-tribal conflict”. That is what they asserted. They also stated thus: 
“The continued eviction of the Acholi people from their land in Apaa and destruction of lives and property is unacceptable. Conscious that our human rights are inherent and not granted by the State and that the same are protected by both national and international law, we accordingly demand the following:

    1. The Government of Uganda stops these wanton and inhuman attacks by State security agents and the immediate withdrawal of UPDF, the police and game rangers from Apaa;

    2. The President of Uganda is urged to address the people of Acholi and give assurances of the Government’s commitment to resolve this matter peacefully, taking into consideration the rights of the people of Apaa;

    3. The Government should respect the court order stopping further evictions issued on 15 February 2012 by the Gulu High Court and that Government officials who have violated the court order must be held for contempt of court;

    4. The Acholi traditional leaders lead efforts to protect Acholi land;

    5. The legal efforts to enforce and protect rights of the people of Apaa and Acholi should be solidified and a team of competent lawyers be assembled to litigate this matter in the interest of the people of Acholi;

    6. The attention of the international community be drawn to the gross violation of human rights happening in Apaa to enable appropriate international law mechanisms to be actioned against the perpetrators;

    7. An effective compensation scheme be established to compensate the people of this area that have lost lives and property;

    8. A joint meeting, together with the Government of Uganda, where the Government should lead this process, should be held concerning this Apaa crisis and that this meeting should be held at the venue where the crisis is.”

This communique is signed by the Paramount Chief of Acholi, Rwot David Onen Acana II, and co-signed by the religious leader, His Grace Dr John Baptist Odama, the Archbishop of Gulu Archdiocese. It is also signed by hon. Livingstone Okello Okello who is the chairperson of an Acholi organisation called Wang-OO. On behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, it was signed by the Secretary General, hon. Gilbert Olanya. This is the communique and I beg to lay this document on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any comment? What I am insisting on is, if we had any other way of resolving this matter, we would not be having it in this House. It is because you, as leaders, have failed and that is why it keeps coming back here. Therefore, if we abuse this chance that I have given us to try and find solutions to this thing, I will simply adjourn this matter because we will not have taken advantage of the opportunity we have to come to a reasonable conclusion of this matter. 

I will simply adjourn it because I am not going to allow the things I have just witnessed to continue in this House. Let us use this opportunity properly because it is not a very long opportunity. 

3.34
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say one or two things regarding this issue. 

When the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities were giving their reports, I heard them mention issues like peaceful patrols, most of the people have left and surveys were done under intimidation by the locals. However, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that when the boundary survey was being done in 2015, none of the leaders was present. I can tell you that it was a war zone because on that particular day, over 200 people were injured. Out of the 200 who were injured, today we have two whose hands have been amputated. One was a university student who had to take a dead year and now he is continuing after learning how to write with his left hand.

I have just returned from a landing site called Kampala Wadi landing site where I was on Tuesday. Hon. Akol has talked about a court injunction. When I went to that landing site, there were 15 Uganda Wildlife Authority officials. We had the mandate of the Archbishop, Rwot Acana and all the leaders to deliver this communiqué to the people on the ground. I travelled from a place called Punodyang to Kampala Wadi landing site, which is inaccessible by car and I travelled 15 kilometres by boda boda.

During my 15-kilometre ride on a motorbike, I did not see any animals. We then went on another part of the journey by foot, sloping down to the landing site. However, we never saw any animals. When we reached the landing site, we were met with the sight of women carrying their luggage, frightened for their lives. It would take a heartless person not to react. 

People are suffering. As we talk, two children cannot be accounted for because when these people came, they came with a lot of violence. They started threatening people saying, “If you do not leave today, we are burning your huts. We are giving you one hour to collect whatsoever you can and leave.” 

I can report, without any fear, that there is a lot of looting being done by these officials. They get property like foodstuff, goats, and do whatever they want with it. Because people have no guns and fear for their lives, some of them run away. There is an old woman who was 94 years old; when these people came, as she tried to run, she fell and died. To date, the total number of people who have died in Apaa are more than 15. 

I have a list of all the people who registered that their houses have been burnt and their property destroyed. I will lay it on the Table. This list can be verified. The total number, minus the most recent, comes to 737 houses burnt. If we want justice for our people, their names and villages are here for verification. If we want to handle this problem, we need to be very sincere. There are very many people in Apaa.

When I went there on Tuesday, it was a market day in Apaa, if you see the number of people trekking to Apaa Market, it will give you an indication that there are still very many people - not only in the centre - and they are farming. This is the information I wanted to give the House - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I guess the House is wondering what is going on between these two communities that God intended to stay together. The information I would like to give is that when the Ministry of Local Government opened the boundaries, as Acholi leaders we conceded and stated that Apaa was in Adjumani and yet in 1980 and even recently, hon. Betty Aol Ochan was elected there. All the signposts at health centres and other places state so - they state, “Gulu District Education Committee”.

However, the Government, in their own wisdom, altered the 1980 boundaries and said this is Adjumani. They cut off 18,000 Acholi and said they are in Adjumani and we conceded. We only said, let the people stay wherever they are like there are Bakiga in Ankole and elsewhere. Let the people stay anywhere.

The information I would like to give is that the immediate challenge we are having now is that Adjumani District Local Government gave that entire land to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) in a district council meeting. Now UWA is evicting 18,000 families and that is where the problem is. 

There are local militia recruited who come and spear the youth and torch houses saying the people are in a wildlife reserve area. They are doing this because the area Members of Parliament of Adjumani now fear those 18,000 voters. They want them to leave so that the place remains a forest. That is the whole problem. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please try and wind up now.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Yes, I am winding up. As I conclude, I wanted the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to tell us whether the gazetting he is talking about, which was done in 2002, was well done. In 2002, our people were in Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps and their views were never sought as to whether that place should be gazetted or not. This is the question I would like you to answer because our people were in IDP camps and immediately they returned, you told them to leave. Why should they leave? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am highly disappointed. If this is the way we debate here, then those watching us will also get disappointed because it keeps diluting the quality of our debate here. You can imagine somebody getting up and stating clearly that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, why don’t you give your view?

MR DULU: I am giving it by laying a foundation to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are doing exactly what you are saying should not be done. Speak on the issue, please.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, it is true that in Uganda you can stay anywhere you want. However, we are saying you should not stay in the forest because you are not a tree. (Laughter) We are saying you should not stay in a wildlife reserve because you are not a wild animal. 

Saying that we fear 18,000 voters is a total lie. There are no people there. I keep going there on a weekly basis –(Interjection)– I am talking about the 18,000 families you are talking about. That is not correct. We carried out an aerial survey and there were no settlements there. I was the Chairperson, LC V and I know what I am talking about. Those who are speaking here are the ones who are grabbing land there and they want to use those people as a seal to protect their interests, which is completely wrong. 

When the minister went there, I was also disappointed to see leaders coming drunk to attend to him – (Interruption)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I know that everyone is expecting us to be spitting fire but on the contrary, I will not do the same. I rise on a point or order. 

I have been to Apaa several times. We have debated this issue, not only as leaders from Acholi but even some people outside Acholiland contributed to the debate on the Apaa issue. It is very disheartening to hear a statement from a Member of Parliament insinuating that those who are speaking on the issue of Apaa are land grabbers who want to settle people there. Is he in order to insinuate that whoever participates or debates on issues to do with Apaa is a land grabber?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have given guidance. We are trying to find solutions and the way we communicate can lead us toward those solutions or can move us away from the solutions. Why don’t we moderate the language we use and avoid imputing improper motives on colleagues? Let us deal with the issue and see if we can find a solution. Time is limited because I expect the Committee on Budget to be finalising right now. 

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, I know what I am talking about and I can even give you a list of names. I go there on a weekly basis. Ojera, the former LC III chairperson of Pabbo, is one of them –(Interjections)– I am talking about the leaders. Hon. Olanya you are one of them –(Laughter)– I can even show you where you have occupied and that is the truth. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I know that we are not in this Parliament to keep joking time and again. We need not keep cracking jokes and playing around with people’s lives when they are suffering. 

The honourable member mentioned clearly that I have land in that area. However, I would like to state very clearly that I do not have even an inch of land in that particular area. I have never owned any plot of land there. I know that honourable members are laughing, joking and smiling because of the suffering of the people in Acholi sub-region. Is the honourable member in order to crack that fake joke? I think this shows the level of his reasoning capacity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I keep saying time and again that the hallmark of parliamentary debates is courtesy to another Member. I think your statement is crossing the line, hon. Dulu. Let us moderate the kind of language we use. If you have no language to use, please do not rise because the kind of things we say will escalate situations. Why don’t we deal with the issue and see if we can find a solution? That is my plea.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, before I wind up, let me give you one more name of those occupying the land illegally. Hon. Akol is one of them and he has even established an office in the disputed land. Before we come up with something tangible, we should allow facts to come out. If we keep sitting on them, even if we talk here for years, we will never come up with something tangible.

MR OKIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way we are proceeding with this debate shows that we are ping ponging and it is not going to give us a way forward.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to conclude on this matter by requesting the House to agree on an independent select committee that will go down to unearth all these issues that Members have been raising? We cannot now differentiate between the truth and a lie. Let us have a select committee so that we can have a better platform to debate. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Parliament has been involved in these processes. We have had reports by committees of Parliament that have gone there. If I have this kind of this situation in the House, are you going to restrain hon. Dulu or hon. Olanya from reaching there while you are investigating? 

The solution lies with the leaders and the earlier we tone down our language, the better for the communities. Time and again we have stated that these people have lived together; they have inter-married and have never had issues. Where are these issues coming from? Let us talk as leaders. A parliamentary committee can go there at any time; it does not need a directive from the Speaker. However, the spirit has to be that the Members representing those areas are keen on having a solution to this problem. If they are not keen, like it seems to be they are not, then it does not matter what we do. 

They were elected and they are in this House. I would have loved to see them proposing solutions. If they were saying, we want all of us to go and have a meeting with the communities, it would make more sense. However, if you are speaking the way you are speaking, you are not giving us any hope that there is a solution in sight. 

Therefore, as I communicated earlier, and I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to help me with this, when I spoke with the President, he indicated that he is now going to get involved in this matter. He stated it clearly and I asked him if I could report what he told me to the House. He said, “Go and tell Parliament that, that is what I have said. I am going there physically after Easter.” However, Easter passed a long time ago and here we are. I am told the President went there for another function but he did not go to the actual place where these issues are happening. 

The President also said that even if this land is Government land, the way to remove people from Government land should be humane. He said, “If they had consulted me, I would not have done it that way. We have removed people from Government land without disrupting their livelihoods.” Therefore, the President is now involved in this matter. 

The reason why we are having this matter today is because the Leader of the Opposition – I do not know whether Members had been consulting her – raised this matter yesterday. Otherwise, as far as I am concerned, the President had taken over this matter and he should have been able to find a solution to it. That is what I thought should have happened. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to please communicate this to His Excellency the President? Say something and then communicate to H.E the President because he needs to take charge of that area and calm people down and then the other activities can go on. 

3.57
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I did not want to speak this time.  The last time I said in this House that in my home village, when we were campaigning, somebody who was known to be a mad person went and saw someone taking a bath in our village shelters and he went and picked the towel of that person taking a bath and ran away with it. Instead of that man asking for another towel, he just came out of the shelter chasing the mad man for his towel. As a result, the two people were running naked and we failed to distinguish who was actually naked. (Laughter)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, we are handling a very serious matter, which involves the death of people, livelihoods being destroyed and people sleeping in the cold. The Prime Minister’s office is not helping these people with all the required things that go with disaster preparedness. Instead, the Prime Minister comes here and compares all the issues we are raising to a mad man. Who is the mad person he is trying to compare this with? Is he using parliamentary language to express a serious matter that touches the lives of Ugandans? Mr Speaker, I do not think that this in order. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was actually about to ask Gen. Ali whether he is the one who picked the towel. (Laughter) Please, proceed.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I think I should not get back to that issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do not.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I just want to give information that this is not the first time we are talking about this matter in this House - bitterly and so on. Uganda was ruled by the British for over 60 years so when they left after independence, they left us with many things and the Constitution is one of them. In Schedule 6, all the borders of Uganda - inter-district or international - are fixed here. These are coordinates of the land surveyed by the British. When they left at independence, among the documents they left was this Schedule 6. 

Therefore, this border we are talking about was demarcated by the British and that can be confirmed. If it was possible to bring angels from heaven, they would come and talk about this schedule and check the border. This information was given to my brothers and daughters by the President in State House. The President met the Acholi Parliamentary Group in State House - I do not remember the dates – and the same solution was given –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Do you want us to take it that the coordinates, which you are talking about, give Adjumani ownership of Apaa? Is it right for you people to go burning people’s huts and chasing them away? The Minister of Internal Affairs should make a pronouncement on this. 

I was elected by the people of Apaa when I first came to Parliament. We had a school and a health centre there. If it is in Adjumani, why do you want to kill the Acholi who are there? Can you clarify this? I am not disturbed when I am here in Buganda but for Acholi leaders to enter Apaa, I think we need visas from you. Can you clarify whether we need visas to enter Apaa? Must we be stopped from entering Apaa where our people are? 

This is not a laughing matter. If you went there and saw the people, you would have shed tears. I am so hurt that the honourable Member of Parliament from Adjumani talks about this very serious matter while laughing just because the people who are being killed are not your people. I think we are all Ugandans; let us treat everybody as a Ugandan. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aol, you have sought clarification.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give this information to the honourable members also as clarification. The First Deputy Prime Minister talked about the coordinates and other things. In this particular case, the surveyors had three maps to follow - the 1958, 1965 and 1968 maps. They followed those ones in the opening of the boundaries.

They were actually opening boundaries between Acholi District of 1965 and Madi District of 1965. Those were the boundaries they opened. Once those boundaries were clear, the rest followed. You actually do not have to open the boundaries of Adjumani; you open the ones of Madi and those of Acholi. Once those are determined, then you can divide Acholi into the districts of today and you can divide Madi into the districts we have today.

When you become a new district today, you do not acquire new territory. You keep in the territory of that district of 1965 and 1958. I would like to request my colleagues - I was in Napak yesterday and there is another debate going on there between Napak and Katakwi districts - (Interjection)- Let me leave Tororo out. The boundaries which will be opened in this case are those of Teso District of 1965, 1958 and 1952 and Karamoja District of that time, then the new districts can follow but within the old districts as they were. [Ms Aol: “I still want you to clarify. He is not telling us about the people dying”] rose] 

Mr Speaker, I was clarifying. I am not discussing the people dying. The honourable member has just walked in; she does not even know when we started debating this matter. However, Mr Speaker, that is the clarification I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, the issue we raised here is that even the boundary reopening that the minister is talking about was done illegally. Also in the process of doing boundary opening, they did not involve Amuru District and yet in his report, he is saying the local leaders were involved. Is it in order for the minister to talk about illegal issues, which are still in court? The court injunction stopped every process in Apaa. Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have a matter going on in court, it does not matter how many people are in that court, the lawyers are professional people, they will argue the case and then the judges will make the decision based on the law. That is the same with this. I remember during the issue of Mijingo, the President said, “No”. They had said there were elders who knew the boundary but he said no, it is not for the elders, but for people to scientifically determine based on the coordinates that were established.

Now, witnessing can be for ceremonial purposes of participation but does not affect the coordinates as established by law. Why don’t we deal with the issue itself rather than crowding up so many things and we lose sight of what we need to deal with? This is because if it was determined by professional surveyors, it is not one of those things that you can appeal and say that the surveyors did not follow the coordinates. If they have done it professionally, then that would be it. 

That is why what hon. Odonga Otto said earlier is what we could take for now. The question that we should be dealing with is: if these evictions are taking place, are they taking place in the way they are reported to be happening? If there are people being removed forcefully, is it true? If it is true, what is the solution to it? Is it true that there are people who are now displaced and suffering? If it is true, what is the solution to that? I thought that was the issue.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to confirm further that the court injunction referred to in the debate was dismissed in the courts of law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by giving some few clarifications. 

The injunction given on 15 February 2012, where I am one of the plaintiffs, has never been lifted. It is still running up to now. The day before yesterday, the court sat in Gulu High Court. Therefore, the report given by the honourable minister is not true. 

Secondly, when the honourable Minister Kamuntu was submitting, he said I mobilised women to undress for him. That is baseless, and I wanted to clear this. 

Mr Speaker, the way forward is that because of the high number of people we have in that particular area - 18,000 people is not a small number - as a Ugandan, I suggest that the Government should consider de-gazetting that place for human settlement.

Mr Speaker, I am just hearing today that when the place was declared as being in Adjumani, it was immediately turned into Uganda Wildlife Authority land and National Forestry Authority land. I am just hearing today that the National Forestry Authority land is in that particular area.

All that is happening here, honourable members, as I told you last time, is that this land was given to an investor called Bruce Martin from South Africa. All they are doing is just a trick to chase people away from that land and give it to that investor. As Government, we need to get the best way of attracting investors to come into our area –(Interruption)

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, we signed a tripartite agreement between Adjumani District, UWA, and Bruce whom he is talking about. I was the LCV Chairperson then and I appended my signature to the agreement. We were taken and sensitized properly. We were told that whatever comes out of that investment would be shared between those subcounties that surround the Apaa area. The benefits that will accrue will go to Pabbo and Lamogi, and these are from Amuru District.

Therefore, is my colleague, hon. Gilbert Olanya, in order to tell a lie to this House that we are simply pretending because we want the land to be given away? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya said that this was a gimmick to give away land to an investor called Bruce. You have confirmed what he has said and you signed it. Therefore, you are now confirming what the honourable member was saying. 

MR DULU: No; I am talking about management. It was management that was given –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What he said is that they have heard that this land was going to be given to an investor. What you have done is that you got up and said you signed the letter giving the land to the investor. Therefore, how can I rule him out of order? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate your ruling. 

As a way forward, since there have been a lot of killings in that area, and as hon. Jesca Ababiku said, it is true that all those who were killed using spears, bows and arrows by the Government troops are coming from the side of Amuru District –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Is my colleague, hon. Gilbert Olanya, in order to tell this House that I said those who were killed were killed by Government yet what I said can be traced from the Hansard and I never said that? Is he in order to impute statements to me that I never made? What I said was that Government cannot fold its hands when people are dying; they should provide security. Is he in order to say that I said Government killed people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement as reported by hon. Gilbert Olanya was not entirely correct. The records are slightly different also from what you are stating now. You said, “a number of people who have died so far”; you stated that on the record. Therefore, both of you are trading on very dangerous grounds.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, because of the suffering of the people that is happening right now in Apaa Village, our people are taking refuge in camps the same way we did 15 to 20 years ago when we were in IDP camps. People are no longer digging. The food crops that these people were keeping for their survival are being looted and burnt by the Uganda Wildlife Authority. On that matter, allow me to lay on the Table a picture of a lady who took refuge. Right now, she is living in a very tiny house with her seven children. I beg to lay the picture on the Table, Mr Speaker.

The situation is very serious and if the situation continues this way, I do not know how our people are going to survive. Let all the leaders, especially leaders from Adjumani District, stop joking with this kind of suffering –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Gilbert Olanya is that way back in 2012, we were there and the picture he is trying to lay here is not as bad as the pictures we got from there. We even rescued people who were already put in a hut to be killed. They were already undressed.

I would also like to tell the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to treat Ugandans as Ugandans. As people from Acholi Region, sometimes we feel that we should just leave you people with your riches because of the mistreatment –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that information, honourable?

MS AOL: The information is about what happens in Apaa Village.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already finished; why are you adding things that are not part of the information?

MS AOL: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, stop that brutality.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, as we talk now, Bruce Martin is advertising everywhere about this concession, which was given to him by the Government of Uganda for the 42 square kilometres of land including the whole of Apaa. The advert is everywhere and we have it.

Let the Government come out with the best way of giving land to the investor. It is true; we do not want to shed blood, we do not want fighting because we are ever peaceful people. However, let the Government treat us as human beings.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Sir. I was interrupted but I had information to give. All borders in the country, inter district or international, are determined by coordinates which are in Schedule 6. If colleagues can have a look at it and maybe talk to surveyors to explain what these coordinates mean, it would help us.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I think if we are honest to ourselves, we should leave this matter between the President and you because you have already spoken about it to the President. The President has actually given his word. He came to Atiak, he was asked and he said he is still going to Apaa. If there is somebody who has really promised to solve this problem, that person is the President; who else? Why can’t we wait for that? What can we do now? 

That means I have said all I wanted to say because the rest of the issues I have said are just stories. Meeting in State House has yielded nothing. National Forestry Authority and Uganda Wildlife Authority seem not to exist. All these matters will be solved by the President. If the President is going to de-gazette, he would not just do that out of the blue and say, “From today, I have de-gazetted this land”. No, I do not think he can do that. He will have to follow the procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And it will have to come back here.

GEN (RTD) ALI: Exactly! He has to follow the procedure if he is going to de-gazette. He is also going to consult Adjumani because he is in Adjumani. Honestly, I think, Sir, that is why I do not want to actually speak because I do not want to fall in the same trap.

As a way forward, I would like to appeal –(Interjections)– Let me first present the way forward that I am proposing. He has been speaking here and I did not interrupt. That is why I said I did not want to throw my towel. When I was taking a bath, somebody came and took away my towel -(Laughter)- and I did not want that.

Let us all give a chance to the President to solve these problems in the best way he knows how. He is the President of the whole country including Amuru, Apaa and Adjumani. He is the President of all of us; we will wait and see whatever he decides. Otherwise, there are so many documents here and this to me is just –(Interjections)- That is my submission, Sir. Thank you for your patience.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to the statement from the ministers. I have also listened to the intervention from the Right Honourable Leader of Government Business. We also heard from hon. Bahati yesterday that the highest institution in the land has gotten involved in this matter. We should give him a chance. 

I have listened to the report from the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, and in paragraph 9 he says that as we talk today, out of the 827 square kilometres, 400 square kilometres have already been cleared of people. So the balance that they need to clear people from is 427 square kilometres. 

Given that the President is taking the initiative to have a permanent solution to this problem, with all the options open, like I reported on what he said, I am now communicating from the chair to this effect: 

Whatever has already been claimed should stay - the 400 square kilometres. However, for whatever has not yet been cleared, - the 427 kilometres remaining - activities should be ceased until the President gets to the ground and settles this matter. This is to give the President an opportunity to go and solve this matter. All activities on the balance of the 427 square kilometres, which has not yet been handled by the ministry or the department responsible, be it Uganda Wildlife Authority, National Forestry Authority or whichever it is, should cease to give the President a chance to go there. The earlier the President goes there, the better for all of us. 

That should be communication from the President and we will all be briefed on what the President has found. If he chooses to come and speak to this Parliament himself, he has the prerogative under the Constitution to come and address Parliament on these matters. Therefore, honourable minister, please cease operations for now to give the President a chance to settle this matter. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.30
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to present proceedings of the delegation of Uganda to the African, Caribbean and Pacific–European Union (ACP-EU) meeting. The ACP-EU, for your information honourable members – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are laying documents.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I would like to give the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no background. Please lay the papers on the Table.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation from Parliament of Uganda to the 49th Session of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the inter-sessional committee meetings on the Joint Parliamentary Assembly held from 19-22 March, 2018 in Brussels, Belgium. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Next?

MR ANYARACH: He can give a background of the report, it is under our rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is laying of documents, honourable member. I know the rules also. This is laying of papers. You do not speak when you are laying papers.

MR WAMANGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation from Parliament of Uganda to the 15th Regional Meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held from 11 to 13 April 2018 in Nairobi, Kenya. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the rules on reporting and debate of reports of this nature are clear. We will find time, when the schedules allow, to come and have debates on these matters. Some of the recommendations that come from the ACP meetings are critically important. 

The 11th European Development Fund (EDF) funding that we have with the European Union and also the negotiations going on to renew the Cotonou Agreement are important decisions that this House should be briefed about. We will therefore find time and have a proper debate. Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu was part of this meeting for a long time, so we will have a good debate on what we can do to have more benefits from the European Union. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Mulsa High School from Nakaseke District. They are represented by hon. Luttamaguzi Semakula Paulson. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome (Applause).

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I raised a matter of urgent importance about the fate of a 17-year-old boy who was cruelly assaulted by Indians in Lira District. Government committed, through the honourable minister, Bahati, that today we would get a statement updating us on the whereabouts of the Indians. 

This morning, we got information that the file has been mismanaged at the police and also at the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP). The file has been dismissed yet Lira District and the whole subregion are concerned and they want to hear what Government is going to do about this. I would therefore like to be guided on the next steps from Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I saw the Minister of Internal Affairs earlier but I do not see him anymore. Is there a response from Government on this?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The Minister of Internal Affairs is not around. I will ask him to come and make a statement tomorrow -(Interjections)- on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, this came as a very urgent matter and I wish he could come and tell us where the investigations are. It is not a matter that should be postponed. We could find a way of having - 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Okay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2017 is a private Member’s Bill. The mover of the Bill is not here - [Members: “She is there.”]- Oh! I think it is because you are completely shielded by another Member; I could not see you. Are we ready to proceed with this Bill?

4.36
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It has been abrupt but I will do my best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had moved the motion, spoken to it and I thought we are now going to debate. I had already proposed the question that the Bill be read the second time, hadn’t I? The committee even reported but the honourable member said she was not prepared at that time to give a justification to the motion, which she did afterwards. 

Therefore, can we debate the motion for second reading of the Bill? Honourable members, let me propose again for your recollection. I now propose that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time. That is the motion for debate and the debate starts now. Does the minister want to start the debate?

4.37
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you. I have a document from the Attorney-General and the Attorney-General expressed himself on this matter. I do not know whether I can read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not seen the letter, so you might need to tell the House about the letter.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, three weeks ago, this very document was already on the Members’ iPads. When the Attorney-General appeared before the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, he gave his legal position on this Bill. It is that legal position, in written form, which is on the Members’ iPads and I am sure they have read it.

The statement reads as follows: 
“The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2017, a private Member’s Bill, was introduced in Parliament on 22 June 2017 and referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The Bill seeks to amend sections 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187 and 188 of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243. These sections are contained in Part XII of the Act, which deals with interim councils in newly created local governments. 

My views on the Bill are as follows: Honourable members, you are aware that once a new local government is created out of an existing local government under section 180 of the Act, the two local governments are distinct legal entities. The principles contained in Part XII of the Act are based on that understanding. 

The Bill seeks to amend the Local Governments Act by inserting section 189, which provides in section 189(b) that ‘interim council means a council which remains without a chairperson as a result of the decision of the chairperson of the original local government in section 181(1) of the principal Act’. 

The proposed section 181(1) in the Bill provides that, ‘a chairperson elected by universal adult suffrage shall have the option to remain the chairperson of the original local government or of the newly created local government, for the unexpired term of the local government council, without being subjected to another election.’

The definition is subject to two interpretations:
(a) 	The first is that it means that the Bill seeks to declare a council of an existing local government as an interim council on the basis that that council remains without a chairperson after the chairperson of the original local government opts to become the chairperson of the newly created local government.

(b) 	The definition also means that the newly created local government is not considered to have an interim council because the chairperson of the local government from which the new local government was created opts to become its chairperson. 

This is contrary to the intention of the provisions in the Act on interim local governments. Presently, there is no definition in the Local Governments Act of the phrase ‘interim council’ as used in Part XII. However, the phrase ‘interim council’ is used to mean the council of a new local government created out of an existing local government and which has not held elections in accordance with the Act.

The legal effect of the proposed definition of ‘interim council’ seemingly creates two interim councils when a new local government is created out of an existing one; that is to say, an interim council of the original and an interim council of the new local government. This is not in conformity with the idea of interim councils as contained in Part XII of the Act.

Article 180 of the Constitution provides as follows: 
‘180. Local government councils
(1) A local government shall be based on a council which shall be the highest political authority within its area of jurisdiction and which shall have legislative and executive powers to be exercised in accordance with this Constitution.

(2) Parliament shall by law prescribe the composition, qualifications, functions and electoral procedures in respect of local government councils, except that-
(a) the person elected as district chairperson of a local government shall be a member of the council…”

According to Article 180 of the Constitution, a person elected as a chairperson of a local government is a member of the council of the district for which he or she was elected to be chairperson. This is a matter Parliament is not able to change without amending the Constitution. 

This means that the chairperson of a local government is always part of a council of the local government for which he or she was elected, and that chairperson cannot constitutionally opt to be part of a new local government created out of his or her local government since that is not the council for which he or she was elected.

Even if the proposal were not constitutionally problematic, it is our opinion that an existing council cannot be termed as an ‘interim council’ on the basis that its chairperson has opted to join a newly formed local government yet the other persons that form the council are still in office. That is a matter of vacation of office and the Act deals with that situation in section 14 of the Act. 

The above reasoning applies to other members of the executive committee of the council. Once a new local government is created, the members of the executive committee whose electoral areas form part of the new local government cease to hold office. 

Therefore, the proposals contained in the proposed Bill may be legally challenged. 

The Bill proposes to insert section 189(a) in the Act, providing a definition of ‘interim chairperson’ as follows: ‘Interim chairperson means a chairperson elected by the councillors from members of a local government which remains without a chairperson as result of the decision of the chairperson of the original local government in section 181(1) of the principal Act.’

This proposal is related to the proposal on interim councils which I have dealt with earlier. 

The proposal is unconstitutional to the extent that it seeks to render it possible for a chairperson of an existing local government to become the interim chairperson of a newly created local government by operation of law, that is to say, by simply opting to become the interim chairperson of a newly created local government. As we said earlier, this offends Article 180 of the Constitution.

A chairperson of a local government is elected by the electorate of that local government in accordance with the Constitution and the Local Governments Act. The chairperson is part of the council he or she was elected in respect of. 

Once a new local government is created out of an existing local government, the chairperson of the original local government may become the chairperson of the new local government, but only after vacating the office of the chairperson in accordance with the law. 

In our opinion, it would be unconstitutional, as a matter of law as proposed in the Bill, to make the chairperson of an original local government an interim chairperson of the new local government. This applies to other electoral officials in the local government. 

Conclusion
 
I appreciate that the proposals contained in the Bill are intended to limit the financial burden on Government in respect of holding elections in the newly created local governments. This cannot be achieved, however, without amendment of the Constitution.” 

That is the position of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Local Government. I thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the statement from the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The honourable minister was reading the opinion of the Attorney-General and he seeks the advice of the Speaker in this situation, where we have an opinion authored by the Attorney-General, regarding this particular Bill. The Attorney-General says if we proceed with this Bill, we would proceed in futility unless a constitutional amendment is done first, which will accommodate this Bill.

Secondly, the report of the committee has also stated the same. If the opinion of the Attorney-General had not been here and we were only left with the recommendations from the committee, the burden would have shifted to the mover of the Bill to tell the House why the committee is wrong. It would have been the burden of the mover of the Bill to say that the committee is not advising the House properly based on the following reasons; she would have stated that opinion to the House and the House would have had a debate.

However, we now have an opinion from the Attorney-General to the effect that proceeding with this Bill would be improper because it has no constitutional allowance for its enactment. That is the opinion of the Attorney-General and it is in black and white.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence and guidance.

The opinion of the Attorney-General is binding on Government and if anyone dissents with the opinion of the Attorney-General, they know what to do. However, the question I am asking relates to parliamentary and Government procedures: Who could have given the honourable member the Certificate of Financial Implication?  

Mr Speaker, the committee sat, consultations were made and the Government of Uganda spent money. We need to be told whether people who come here with those certificates of financial implication do not seek the opinion of the Attorney-General. We could have saved resources, energy and time instead of doing work that would end up in futility. 

I am therefore seeking for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, if someone from Cabinet could tell us whether certificates of financial implication have become pieces of paper, where one can just photocopy and write a title and name on top, just like the arrest warrants during the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) days. In the UPC days, they used to move to bars with empty arrest warrants and once you annoy them, they just fill your name and say you are under arrest. (Laughter) Can we be told how the Member was given a Certificate of Financial Implication without considering the opinion of the Attorney-General? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rule 120(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament reads, “The Member moving a Private Members’ Bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the Department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the Bill.”

I believe when the Member brought this Private Member’s Bill, the Ministry of Local Government must have been aware that they are affected by the Bill. I do not think it was a new thing to them and that we would have moved to this point without having sought the advice of the Attorney-General. 

Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether sufficient assistance is given to private Members as is dictated in the Rules of Procedure, where departments of Government are supposed to assist and help the Members who bring private Members’ Bills. Did you perform your role as Ministry of Local Government according to our Rules of Procedure? Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Further to the point of procedure raised by my colleague, rule 120(3) reads thus: “The Department of Legislative and Legal Service of Parliament shall, where necessary, afford the Member moving the Private Member’s Bill professional assistance in the drafting of the Bill.”

I am also wondering whether the Department of Legislative and Legal Services of Parliament anticipated that there would be a contrary opinion from the Attorney-General. Did they guide the movers of the motion professionally? 

Mr Speaker, we go through a rigorous process to consult and a lot of human resource is used. Wasn’t the Department of Legislative and Legal Services able to give this guidance to the movers of the motion, so that at the end of the day when the motion is presented, it does not clash with the opinion of the Attorney-General? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, probably if those opinions had been sought and there had been concurrence, we would not be having this debate. 

The Constitution is very clear about the rights of Members of Parliament in regards to raising Private Members’ Bills in this House. The Constitution is also clear on the limitations; they must conform to the provisions of the Constitution. That right is in the Constitution. Our Rules of Procedure then provide the procedure for ventilating, to see that while you have a right, we need to grant you leave. The process of granting leave is a vetting process to ascertain that the proposed piece of legislation would fit within the requirements of the Constitution.

The challenge we have in terms of how we proceed is that by the time a private Member is seeking leave of this House, the Bill is in a form that is not fully developed. Therefore, you cannot, in the course of debating to allow the Member leave, see the full implication of the proposed Bill. You cannot assess it in constitutional terms, except where they obviously have financial implications, which would be a bit obvious.

We granted leave to the Member and I am told the debate was quite supportive. It was thought that this is something that needs to be done and should have been done yesterday, according to the report that I got. Leave was granted to the honourable member and when she was granted leave, the Constitution also said she should be accorded sufficient legal support to develop the Bill and bring it here. A further rule, which has been cited by the Member, also charges our Department of Legal and Legislative Services to support the Member. I am sure that all this support was given.

The question before us is not about those anymore. The challenge before us now is that we are where we are. All those processes took place. We do not want to pass judgement about what happened where. However, they all took place and we have a Bill that has gone to the committee and has come back for second reading. We are now confronted by two things: a committee report that says the Bill would not be supported by the Constitution and an opinion of the Attorney-General that seems to confirm the position of the committee. That is where we are.

An opinion was sought from the Speaker’s Chair. The report of the committee would be debatable if it was the report of the committee. The opinion of the Attorney-General is one of those that are provided for in the Constitution, and I have not found any basis for disagreeing with the opinion of the Attorney-General from this chair. I have not seen the basis. If I had a constitutional basis to have another opinion, I would have said, “Well, this matter is neither here nor there”, but I am unable to see that this matter falls either way.

Therefore, my advice is this Bill would not be entertained by this House in the form in which it is. Honourable members, my advice then would be that I either put the question and we take a decision on it, or the Member can choose the other option of taking out the Bill, regrouping and then coming back in a way that is sufficiently advised and then we see how to proceed with the matter.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In spite of the fact that you have suggested that the opinion of the Attorney-General looks final, I would like to inform this House that I have letters I wrote to the Attorney-General and reminders to him at that time but there was no response. 

I have letters written to Ministry of Local Government. At the initial stage, I consulted the Minister of State for Local Government and I put forward this case. I told her that there is a problem in my place and other areas of Uganda in regard to the affairs of the chairpersons of local councils. However, she told me at the beginning that she was going to give the case to the technocrats. Later on when I met her, she said she had handed over the matter. Later on, she told me, “Why don’t you leave it?” 

I then tried to consult the Minister of Local Government, and the minister here can bear witness. I called him and I even sent him messages, which we read together outside in the lobby, and he blamed his personal assistant for not having drawn it to his attention. We agreed outside here that when I come up, we shall agree that we put the Bill together. Unfortunately, when he reached here, he said he had not heard anything about it.

Right from the initial stages, the Ministry of Local Government has been dragging its feet yet they know the problem on the ground. In this case now, the Attorney-General - Even as the mover, I should also have had a copy of the letter he is talking about, but I do not have it. I am just being told today that it can be accessed on the iPads. This item has been on the Order Paper, then it went off and it was placed in business to follow. All of a sudden, it came up today and I am told that the letter of the Attorney-General can be accessed on the iPad. 

Mr Speaker, there has been a problem. The Ministry of Local Government has never wanted this Bill because they did not take any steps, right from the beginning when I told them that if they did not want this Bill, we should sit together and then we agree on a position. 

To date, there are problems in the countryside and in local governments. Mr Speaker, what does the Ministry of Local Government say? When they talk about going against the Constitution, even the chairperson of LC V staying in the district or the chairperson of LCIII staying in the district is also going against the Constitution. If it is found out that he is not a resident there, what are they doing about it? Isn’t that unconstitutional? 

Therefore, this whole issue has been jumbled up –(Interjections)- I got a Certificate of Financial Implication –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have the Floor. I am not opening debate on this.

MS MUTONYI: Mr Speaker, just taking the opinion of the Attorney-General and killing this Bill is causing suffering in the countryside. However – (Interruption) 

MS BINTU: Thank you, hon. Mutonyi. The information which I would like to give arises out of the Speaker’s observation and the honourable member’s observation that this Bill was supported overwhelmingly. Indeed, there is a problem outside there. 

Mr Speaker, you have advised, and the Attorney-General advises that there is need to have a constitutional amendment. I would like to give my honourable sister information, and possibly we shall even seek guidance from you, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it be right and advisable for the honourable member to inform this House that at an appropriate time, she will bring a constitutional to that effect?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would not be procedurally right for me to do that. We have guided that for this Bill to succeed, there is need for a constitutional amendment. It is up to the person who feels this should be moved forward to take the appropriate steps to do that. 

That is the recommendation; you need to change the provisions of the Constitution to be able to accommodate this kind of amendment. Therefore, it is up to the individual members to proceed and the procedure is clear; you do need to be advised on what to do. You have already been advised that you need a constitutional amendment. 

Honourable members, we will therefore pause this matter here. I have asked the Member to either withdraw the motion and we take it up another day or I put the question based on what has been said and then we take a decision.

MS MUTONYI: Mr Speaker, I would like to take your advice and leave the motion here. We will see what we can do about it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not leave it there; you withdraw it. 

MS MUTONYI: I withdraw it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just like we granted you leave to bring this Bill, you also need our authority to withdraw this Bill. Therefore, you have to ask this House for permission to withdraw the Bill.

MS MUTONYI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, but painfully, I seek permission to withdraw this Bill from the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that we are debating was that the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the second time. In the course of debating this motion, issues came up and now the Member who moved this motion is seeking the authority of this House to withdraw the Bill so that another opportunity is accorded, at a proper time and with proper procedure, for us to proceed with this Bill. I therefore put the question directly that the Member be authorised to withdraw this Bill from the House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 (ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINION)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received this report, I proposed the question and we debated it. The Auditor-General also addressed us on this from the bar and we had a debate. Can I put a question and we conclude this matter? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for financial year 2014/2015 (entities with unqualified opinion) be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION REGARDING THE DEPLORABLE STAFFING LEVELS AT BUGUNGU SECONDARY SCHOOL IN BULIISA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the committee ready with the report? Can a member of this committee present this report? While the honourable members of the committee are getting organised, there was a statement we were awaiting from the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs on an issue in Erute and Lira. Honourable minister, I am sure you are abreast with the facts of this matter. Please, proceed.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, when this matter was raised in the House yesterday, I had another assignment and I was not in the House. Unfortunately, the minister who stood in for me did not inform me. This afternoon when I had gone for another assignment, the honourable member briefed me on the matter, and it is an extremely serious matter. 

I do recognise that there were a lot of omissions. First of all, a matter of that nature should not have been covered, if at all, by the district police force. Secondly, it is a matter which needed immediate attention. Therefore, I would like to undertake that at the next sitting on Tuesday, I will ask for space and make a full statement on the investigations, which we shall deal with over the weekend; and secondly, on the action we are going to take beginning now. We will inform this House on Tuesday. 

Let me also kindly make a request to colleagues. The country is very large; when issues of this nature, which some people are trying to cover, come to your knowledge, try to make an effort to let us know at this political level or administrative level at the headquarters, so that we can take action immediately. Some of these matters really need not delay up to the time when we come to make a statement in Parliament.

I must sincerely apologise. If it is true the facts are as they were described in the House, it is very appalling. I undertake to make a statement on Tuesday on what happened and the actions that we shall have taken. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. You will make that statement at the next sitting of Parliament and the next sitting of Parliament might be tomorrow. Will you be ready tomorrow?

MR OBIGA: I was looking at the routine programme. All I can say is, let me get to my people and see how much work I can do. If I am ready with the statement, I will make it tomorrow. If not, I will explain. It is now late and I may not be able to get it but I will try my best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would like to see that at the next sitting of Parliament, you are ready to proceed with this matter. Thank you.

Honourable members, there being no other business to handle, we are left with the only matter that we had to finish today, but I do not see the minister responsible for this motion and the chairperson of the committee who should report. I will need advice. Clerk, would you seek some advice on how we proceed with this matter and then we proceed.

Honourable members, for now I will use my prerogative to allow you ask ministers some questions directly –(Laughter)- Policy issues and not factual issues that might not be within the knowledge of the minister. We some need questions on policy issues and please direct your questions to the ministers here and not to the ones who are absent. Can I have the Member for Masindi District. Honourable ministers, please pull out your notebooks because they are going to ask you questions now.

5.16
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The country is facing a lot of tragic scenarios; people are losing lives and are being hacked and abducted in taxis. Can we get to know what the Government is doing in order to allay the fears of Ugandans?

Parents cannot sleep now. We are worried when you child goes to school because you are not sure whether your child will come back. Even we, when you are walking along the streets, we are not sure whether we will reach where we are going. Can we get the assurance of the Government that we are secure, and can they tell us what is happening in the country? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it looks like it is your brief.

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, it is true that for quite some time - between four to six months – certain types of crime have suddenly engulfed the nation. I am on record as wanting to make a statement in the House on this. I did not book today’s date because of the budgetary process. However, I have a ready statement and immediately after the budget process, I will make that statement.

In brief, what I can assure you about is that these are criminal elements that are disturbing our peace. The security forces are doing their best, first to understand the motive of these people who are kidnapping, and we are already getting on top of the situation. If you can see from the records, now the kind of kidnaps we have are what we describe as self-kidnaps. The cases involving those criminals who were kidnapping to kill are going down. 

We assure you as a country that with your support and that of the population, we shall be able to overcome this situation very shortly. Thank you. 

5.18
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, woman representative Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tomorrow is 1st June and we are so worried about people who are living around Holy Rosary. They call it Gulu Central Forest land. They have been given up to 1st June to leave that place.

We know that if we look at seasonality analysis, it is unfair to try to evict people, even if it is from forest land, during the rainy season and middle of the year. I know that we have debated the issue of forests, the forests is in the middle of-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the responsible minister here?

MS BETTY AOL: The minister responsible for lands is –(Laughter)– Mr Speaker, maybe the Minister of Local Government can also answer-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We agreed that we will deal with ministers who are here. We do not want to postpone these matters.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, tomorrow my people are going to be evicted. We will go and face the teargas. I also agree to be there together with them. If they are going to be chased, we will be chased together. Thank you. Forest land; who told you it is forest land?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have just said so. (Laughter) Hon. Betty Aol, you have just said that it is forest land. 

5.20
MR JOSEPH SSEKABIITO (NRM, Mawogola County, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The point I am rising goes to the Minister of Lands, Housing And Urban Development. 

Government has constructed so many dams in Ssembabule and they went ahead to reserve 300 acres per valley tank/per dam. There were good reasons as to why the 300 acres were reserved, for example for accessibility, animal mating, animal resting and other developments. As I talk now, the 300 acres that were reserved are being sold off by a few individuals. Allow me to ask the minister whether she is aware of that mess.

Secondly, how best can Government protect this land so that the poor farmer in Ssembabule and other districts can access this utility? Thank you so much.

5.22
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member. This matter was addressed to me some time ago by the Woman Representative for Ssembabule. 

I had requested for information in respect to, one, whether the people who had been sold this land had processed titles or not. If they had processed titles, we would then be able to cancel. Two, in respect to the valley dams, it is under agriculture ministry and we would liaise with them to see how to title the land in probably the name of the district local government. 

I have not yet got that information from the woman representative but now that you have risen, it will be important that I get the information in respect to individuals who are selling and those who have bought. If they do not have the titles, then we are going to be able to issue titles in the names of the district local government. Thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to give information to support what the lands minister has said. 

These dams were constructed by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and they deliberately left that piece of land for accessibility and future expansion. However, over a period, many fraudulent people started getting titles for this land. 

The cure for this situation is that you go to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and they normally refer you to the district or subcounty that is involved or where this dam is located. That is the only way you can secure it. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will give you the necessary papers and you process a title so that you preserve those pieces of land.

5.24
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the minister of state in charge of energy, my good friend hon. D’ujanga. 

Right now, West Nile is going through a series of power blackouts. The only power station supplying energy is Nyagak. We used to understand clearly that during the dry season when the water levels are low, there would be no power generation. Now the rainy season is on, what is causing these blackouts that are affecting businesses and many centres of business? Could the minister explain to us what is being done so that power is restored? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the minister speak first. If there are gaps, then he will deal with them.

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. West Nile is supplied by Nyagak. It is a 3.5 megawatt station, which is now not enough for the region because consumption has increased ever since the power station was built.

We are doing two things. The first one is building another power station downstream called Nyagak III. What we have now is Nyagak I. Nyagak III will be a 6 megawatt power station. Adding that to the 3.5 megawatts, we shall have 9.5 megawatts altogether, which will suffice for some time. 

However, you will recall that this House passed a loan request for US$ 100 million to extend the main grid from Lira through Gulu, Olwiyo to Packwach, Nebbi and Arua. We have started on this programme. The portion from Lira to Gulu is in advanced stages; we have to pick the power generated on River Aswa and this is the same line. We have started on route survey and land acquisition for the portion from Gulu through Olwiyo to Packwach, Nebbi and Arua. 

I therefore request our people of West Nile to bear with us for a while. For the time being, we are sharing the little power there but there will be reliable power as elsewhere in the country as soon as we finish these two programmes. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first finish with the issue of power. Are all of you rising on the same issue of power? If so, let us leave that now. It will not help with the spirit of these particular proceedings.

MS LUCY AKELLO: I just have an additional question, Mr Speaker. The question is in regards to a policy that 33 megawatts is serving the greater Gulu, Kitgum and Adjumani for domestic use. What policy is now in place especially with the coming up of the station at Karuma Dam. I now see that instead of the lines going towards Gulu side, they are going towards Kampala. What is the plan for the greater north?

MR D’UJANGA: I think you meant 33kV. Mr Speaker, Gulu was supplied from Lira for a very long time on 33 kilovolts (kV) with a substation near Layibi. It is true that now the load in the area of Gulu has in the last two years gone beyond the station capacity at Layibi. However, the good news is that we are constructing a 132kV line from Lira to this old substation. This substation will get power from Lira, Karuma and Aswa; there will be three sources of power to this substation. We are now going to connect this substation to Olwiyo and then we will follow what I described before. 

The works are ongoing. Mr Speaker, permit me to explain that the towers are in the last phase of line construction. All the programmes for lines from Lira to Karuma, Karuma to Olwiyo, Lira to Gulu, and Gulu to Aswa are ongoing, except that they have not reached the tower stage. Two weeks ago, the designs for Karuma-Olwiyo were approved. There are already men and women there doing the foundations and in a short while, you will see the towers. As we speak, the towers for Karuma-Lira should be coming up and also those for Lira-Gulu will be coming up. 

These works are ongoing. The programme for the towers to Kampala is slightly ahead. However, all the other lines are being constructed at the same time. I assure you that in the near future, you will have more reliable power supply in the region. Thank you. 

Sorry, Mr Speaker, I forgot Kitgum. Kitgum will have a 132kV power substation strategically to cater for Lamwo, Kotido and the surrounding areas. This line will come from Aswa. Thank you. 

5.33
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the ministers that have a connection with the UPDF who work at landing sites. 

The President assigned these soldiers the role to clean the lake of people that were involved in bad fishing. However, I would like to clearly understand their mandate. I would like to know if their mandate goes beyond cleaning the bad fishing practices to mistreating the human beings at the landing sites. When they arrived, the first people that were victims of bad fishing practices with time became informers and became friends to the UPDF. Now if there is any misunderstanding in business, the informers invite the UPDF to come and arrest the person they have had an issue with. They do not arrest the people with the small fish but they just arrest this other person and tell them that they have been involved in bad fishing-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question, please.

MS SSENTONGO: Is their mandate supposed to reach to the extent of telling a man, before his wife and children, to lie down and be caned because they denied that they are involved in bad fishing? They make them kneel on stones and walk for several metres so that they accept that they have been involved in a crime. Is that the discipline that they were brought up with in the army?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Defence.

5.35
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Mr Speaker, the matter being raised is serious regarding how to deal with bad fishermen. I can say that that treatment has been light but it is going to be serious. In the interests of the nation -  

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unconstitutional to treat any human being in Uganda inhumanely in a manner that degrades such as torturing. Is the Minister of Security in order to condone acts that contravene the provisions of our Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would not want to even imagine that Gen. Elly Tumwine would be meaning what you are saying. Please tell us what you mean. (Laughter)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, in my words, I have not mentioned torture nor do I talk about inhuman treatment. I talked about very serious punishment of the offenders and I know that the Minister of Defence has a statement to this effect and Government is taking very serious decisions in regard to people who destroy our economy for their short term benefits. 

Therefore, I do not condone –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, in the wake of massive economic harvest of fish on our lakes, the Government that the honourable minister serves over licensed factories processing fish without taking stock of what the capacity of our lakes was. Between the Government and the people who do fishing for subsistence, who is the destroyer of our aquatic life? 

Is the minister therefore in order to allude to the fact that it is the people destroying the fish when Government was involved actively in over licensing factories that depleted our fish resources from the lakes?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again, the reference is to illegal fishing. I do not know whether licensed fishing is also illegal fishing. If that is not the case, then the honourable minister is proceeding properly but if licensed fishing is also illegal, then he is wrong.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that protection and clarification. I was saying that there is no way we can condone torture but there is no way we can support illegal fishing and for the interest of our country, a message should go from this Parliament that anybody involved in illegal fishing will be handled firmly. That is what I wanted to say according to the law. (Laughter)

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS)(Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, 25 percent of Uganda’s surface is full of water resources. We have a resource that has to be regulated. You are aware that we used to get a lot of export earnings from fish but because of illegal fishing, the fish was getting depleted. Government intervened by supporting ministry of agriculture with military personnel and police. The good news is that fish is getting back and our stocks are going up and factories, which had closed have re-opened. 

Mr Speaker, regulation is not something that is very popular. Unfortunately we leaders, in most cases, get entangled in protecting wrongdoers sometimes because we have a responsibility to balance our politics. The truth of the matter is that we have prepared a statement to this effect and also gathered pictures of some of the people who have been culprits. 

I would ask Members of Parliament to be partners with Government to make sure that this resource is appropriately exploited. We do not condone officers molesting and mistreating wanainchi (the local people). If we ever know, we deal with these officers firmly –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you for giving me way. I am very happy with the manner in which the minister is progressing with his submission but I have some issues for clarification from you. 

The people, who have been engaged in fishing for such a long time, are now driven away from the lakes and they have been entirely depending on the waters for their livelihood. What alternative action have you given to help these people to survive in the meantime as the fish recovers from the water? 

Secondly, today we are supposed to be doing appropriation; now that you are talking on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, how much money have you put in the budget towards helping the restocking of the water bodies that we have? For example, Lake Bisina in Kumi has no fish. What is the Government doing to support this product sectors other than beating up people?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, you cannot eat your cake and have it. What the Government is doing is to make sure that these people get money. They were getting money when they were selling appropriate fish size. As we talk, if you are from fishing communities, there is life at the landing site because they are catching mature fish.

As for restocking, there are two ways for restocking the lake. First, is to stay fishing and secondly is to do direct stock. However this time around, study showed that if we can only insist on regulation, fish will multiply and it is happening.

Mr Speaker, licensing companies is based on feasibility study. There is no company that is allowed to catch immature fish. If you do not get enough supply of mature fish you close down –(Interjection) No, there is no overfishing. Overfishing is due to catching immature fish. If people do not supply mature fish and companies do not get enough stock, you do not need to give them warning orders, they wind up themselves. However, as far as we know, companies have reopened now and out of 13, I think nine have now opened. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we must know that in this Government, we are partners and whatever Government is doing is in the interest of the fishing community and the interest of the fishing industry. Thank you very much. We shall bring a statement next week and those who have asked questions in different areas, we have put up a committee to investigate and we shall report to Parliament appropriately. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee of Education is ready to report but it looks as if this is a good engagement we should find how to accommodate it in a more structured way. I think it works. 

However, for now, we should pause it there because the committee on education- but the matter raised by the member for Gulu District on the issue of evictions going to take place in the Gulu central forest reserve- maybe one of the people from Cabinet can help us with this. You see we have this item as number 11 on business to follow, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament on the decision taken by Cabinet to de-gazette and gazette forests.”

Now, this motion has been pending for a while. If a decision has been taken and in my recollection, places like Gulu and others are in this motion the way it was first presented to Parliament. If this motion is still pending, why are we going ahead to implement these other things when we know that there is a process that is before this Parliament only waiting activation?

Why don’t we synchronise the way we do things so that by the time Parliament is taking the decision on item 11, which we are waiting for Cabinet to come and do because they are the ones who brought it here. Why the delay and why are your agencies taking decisions to do what they want to do when these matters are still pending? You may want to harmonise these things.  Is there somebody who can speak on this matter from Cabinet?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, we interacted with the committee and agreed. I am also surprised that it is coming in this way. I have tried to raise my colleague he is not on air but as far as we are concerned we know we are obliged by law to conclude this matter today. Unfortunately, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister has also moved away. Maybe you give me time to go and check. Otherwise, we are ready, we agreed with the members and I do not know why. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see; now there are pending evictions. In the same issues affected by the resolution that is already before Parliament, how do you handle this in this way? Those are the issues we need to have clarifications on. Were you also in Cabinet, hon. Betty? (Laughter)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, my worry is while I am here, my heart is in Gulu. There are very many people-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I have already stated that. I said that there are evictions that are pending tomorrow. How do we harmonise these operations? Okay. We will leave this matter here; we now want to go to another item on the Order Paper. Procedure?

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the looming evictions, which are scheduled to take place tomorrow -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are waiting for the minister please. Let us leave that. We are waiting for the minister to give us guidance on how we are going to proceed with this matter.

MR OYET: Most obliged.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION
REGARDING THE DEPLORABLE STAFFING LEVEL AT BUGUNGU SECONDARY
SCHOOL IN BULIISA DISTRICT

5.52
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee of Education and Sports is here ready to present a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on a petition regarding the deplorable staffing level at Bugungu Secondary School in Buliisa District. 

Mr Speaker before I proceed, I want to lay at the Table, the minutes of the proceeding of the committee and a report by the board of governors on the status of staffing of the school.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, this report comes because of the petition that was tabled in this House by hon. Norah Bigirwa, MP Buliisa District on behalf of the stakeholders from Bugungu Sub County in Buliisa District and they were expressing their concerns on the deplorable state of the school.

The petition highlighted bad working conditions, high rate of staff turnover and poor infrastructure, making it impossible for the school to operate effectively. 

The committee considered the petition in accordance with Rule 30 and appendix E of the Rules of Procedure and hereby presents its findings, observations and recommendations for consideration. 

Mr Speaker, the petitioner had the following prayers:

    i. Affirmative action be extended to Bugungu Secondary School in appointments and posting of teachers.

    ii.  Bugungu Secondary School be classified as a hard-to-reach and hard-to stay school just like those in Kalangala and Karamoja. 

    ii. Bugungu Secondary School gets teachers recruited for the school with specific considerations to those who are already teaching at the school, who are qualified, but not on the Government payroll. 

    iii. Government should construct at least three more blocks for staff houses to replace those which were condemned.

    iv. Support supervision and monitoring by the Ministry of Education and Sports be improved so as to continuously assess the challenges faced by the school and address them in time in time.

Mr Speaker, in handling this petition, the committee -
    i. carried out a field trip to Buliisa District and visited Bugungu Secondary School to assess the physical state of the school infrastructure; 
    ii. held meetings with the district education department, the school management committee and the school teachers at the school;
    iii. held a meeting with the area Members of Parliament (hon. Norah Bigirwa and hon. Stephen Biraahwa) and other district leaders.

I will briefly say something about Buliisa District. This is a district curved out of Masindi District alongside several other new administrative units by a parliamentary resolution of 2006. 

Buliisa is a remote district partly located in the Eastern Rift Valley, with poor road infrastructure and a steeping landscape. Most of it is located at the shores of Lake Albert. A huge proportion of the population is composed of a large fishing community and because of this, the area is a multicultural locality bringing together a number of people from neighbouring districts for the purpose of fishing.

State Of Access to Social Services in the District

According to available statistics from the Uganda Bureau of statistics, only nine per cent of the population in Buliisa has access to a public primary school within five kilometres of reach. However, for secondary schools, 44.3 per cent of the households have access to a secondary school within five kilometres (both public and private).

Findings and Observations of the Committee 

    a) About Bugungu Secondary School 

Bugungu secondary school is a mixed day school located in Buliisa town council, Buliisa District. The school was founded as a community school in l970 on land that was donated by Church of Uganda. It was taken up by Government for grant aiding in 1983, making it the only Government aided secondary school in lower Buliisa (areas at the shores of Lake Albert). It is as well, the oldest secondary school in Buliisa District, with a total enrolment of 351 students, of whom 213 are males and 138 are females.

    b) Physical Infrastructure at the School 

When the committee visited the school, some classroom blocks had collapsed while others were heavily cracked beyond use. The few available ones were not properly maintained.
The school has seven of its teachers on the Government payroll. The current head teacher is in acting position and the majority of the teachers depended on parents’ contributions which is very little given the level of poverty in the district.

Despite Government financing of the rehabilitation of two staff housing blocks at the school, three others which were initially built by the community to house five teachers were condemned by the Buliisa District engineer, leaving the school with only two blocks of staff quarters. Subsequently, the acute lack of accommodation has inhibited the retention of teachers at the school thereby adversely affecting the teaching and learning at the school.

    c) The Teaching Staff 

While Government had supplied science equipment and chemicals, they had been stored for more than a year as the school had neither laboratory assistant nor qualified science teachers to set them up for use.

    d) Peculiar Location of the School 

With a relatively poor catchment area, the parents can hardly afford to consistently meet fees expenses, thereby limiting their contribution to the development of the school.

Much as Government has invested in the physical development of the school in form of some buildings and laboratory equipment, the access of the requisite staffing levels has greatly hampered the delivery of teaching in the schools. The physical location of this secondary school in the rift valley poses a challenge of accessibility due to harsh climatic conditions yet the area is not classified as “hard-to-reach”. As such, staff are not beneficiaries of additional incentives such as the allowances that are paid in some of similar areas.

Absence of Science Teachers 

In a meeting with the school management committee at the school, it was revealed that there were no science teachers in place. It came to the attention of the committee that all science subjects were taught by A’level leavers who were paid by PTA contributions. Further, the committee learnt that the entire district had no physics teacher by the time the committee visited.

General Quality Issues 

The committee observes that from its findings, Buliisa District still has immense challenges with regard to access to quality education. Cognisant of the World Declaration on Education for All, adopted in Jomtien, Thailand (1990), the expected outcome of our national commitment sets out an overall vision for the universalisation of access to education for all children, youth adults and the promotion of equity.
In the interest of time, I would like to skip that and move to recommendations.

The committee recommends that:

a) 	Government should as a matter of urgency appoint and post teachers to the school with special attention to science subjects. Further, the teachers who are qualified and already teaching at the school on voluntary basis should be recruited and retained at the school.

b) 	Buliisa District should be included among the hard to reach districts to ensure affirmative action is taken to promote education in the area. These measures would include, among others, the provision of special hard to reach allowance to attract and retain teachers and other grants for schools in the district.

c) 	The ministry should become more proactive in identifying the barriers that the people of Bugungu encounter in accessing educational opportunities and identifying the resources needed to overcome them. More so, there is a need for the Ministry of Education and Sports to step up the inspectorate and supervisory function in district education offices.

d) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should take deliberate effort in strengthening the capacity of the education system in the district, to enable it reach out to other learners who have abandoned schooling in favour of fishing and other economic activities. As an overall principle and as anticipated in Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it should be part of the ministry's priorities to look at education as a right for everybody and the foundation for a more just and equitable society.

e) 	Government should review the entire infrastructure at the school with a view of constructing new classroom blocks and teachers’ houses. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, as already indicated above, the petitioners’ case was genuine and urgent. The main interest of the petitioners is not in conflict with the national education policy priorities and our international commitments to education for all. One of those commitments is contained in the Salamanca Conference of June 1994 in Salamanca, Spain, where more than 300 participants, representing 92 governments and 25 international organisations, considered the fundamental policy shifts required to promote the approach of inclusive education. This approach, which was integrated in our education policy required government to enable schools to serve all children particularly those with special educational needs in poor regions and communities. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was a petition on a specific institution and the committee did a good job to come back to this House. This restores confidence of the public that when they bring their matters, we are able to deal with them. 

In this particular case, I think it would be proper for the minister responsible for the sector to speak to the recommendations from the committee because this is not a matter for big debate; there are specific recommendations arising from this petition. Could the minister speak to it? If they confirm that that is what is going to happen, then we may just have to adopt the recommendations of the committee. Could the education minister or the one responsible for public service speak to this? Can you come and address issues of salaries and related matters?

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, I thank the Committee on Education and Sports who visited Bugungu Secondary School. It is a fact that the school has very low staffing levels. 

My constituency neighbours Buliisa District and by nature of the area, the district qualifies to be hard-to-reach. However, it is a policy by the ministry that any administrative unit - and I think it came here on the Floor of Parliament - be it a school, health centre III or IV, which is within the urban set up does not qualify to be a hard-to-reach or hard-to-stay area. 

The school indeed has very few teachers. I can say that it is the same issue I am faced with in my constituency. What we can say as a ministry is that in the budget for financial year 2018/2019, we have provided for enough funds for recruitment, which is going to cover all the seed schools and more schools that have been having gaps. Therefore, on that issue, effective from 01 July 2018, is going to be handled. 

On the issue of infrastructure, indeed the infrastructure is in a very sorry state. I have been there several times since that is my neighbouring district. I think the Minister of Education and Sports will have to make a statement on this because I know they are also planning to add or equip schools, which are lacking in infrastructure but the senior minister will handle that. 

As a ministry, we get feedback from the Minister of Education and Sports, in terms of staffing gaps. Teachers of secondary schools are recruited from the centre through the Education Service Commission and if there is wage, automatically the local governments are given teachers.

What I have realised with these hard-to-reach areas is that the teachers who are posted to those areas end up running away because conditions are quite hard but we hope that after the completion of the road from Hoima to Buliisa, that issue will go away. 

What I can assure my sister and my colleague, hon. Biraahwa is that in this coming budget, we are going to provide adequate funds for the recruitment of teachers for the schools because the provision is in the budget. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of this particular – I now need to formally propose the motion for adoption and the motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the committee on Education and Sports, on a petition regarding the deplorable staffing level at Bugungu Secondary School in Buliisa District, be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate should start now. 

Can we briefly have this interaction and conclude because the recommendations are clear and the minister responsible for public service has made commitment that this is something that should be done to help this institution function properly.

6.12
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I would like to thank the committee for their report presented. Mr Speaker, yesterday you gave us some guide. You said that whenever something happens, it should trigger us as a nation to think broad and to take bold steps to move forward. 

The report is clear and those of us who have been to Buliisa and have seen Bugungu can say what they have reported is true. However, I would like to think a little broader. The minister has told us that most of the teachers run away because the conditions are hard.

Buliisa and generally the Albertine Region is the region we expect to get oil. However, for those of us who have been there, the level of social services in that area is unbelievable. When you look, not only at the roads but also the health centres, the access to water and agriculture, you realise that yes, while that region is naturally endowed below the surface, it is actually one of the poor areas above the surface. 

Therefore, the findings of the committee should trigger us and awaken us to say that we need a comprehensive programme for the development of the Albertine Region. (Applause) We cannot have a region attracting people from everywhere, we put airfields and so on yet when you go to the homesteads, people are faced with abject poverty. 

There is a minister for Bunyoro region, if the minister could help so that we get to see something in the pipeline, even if it requires a loan. Surely colleagues, that is something that we would seriously support. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not think that we can focus on just teachers. Even if we decide to have science teachers recruited in this school, there is still a problem. In the whole of Buliisa District, there is only one science teacher. And that there is no laboratory and the lab equipment, which were supplied, are still in the store because they cannot be used. 

I think the Minister of Education and Sports should wake up. Our recommendations cannot just stop at recruitment of teachers. We must be looking at the total package to improve education in this school and others as well. We must look at the laboratories, the extra-curricular activities, the library facilities, hygiene and special needs training for the students.

I would like us to broaden the recommendations and what we are going to approve as a resolution, to have a comprehensive package to uplift education standards in Buliisa. Otherwise, this is why we get a situation where you go to the whole district and find very few P.7 and S.4 candidates passing in first grade. It is not just because of the teachers but the whole framework for education requires our attention. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the colleague for bringing this in the petition.

6.16
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for having made an effort to travel all the way to Buliisa. I have ever been there. The place is hard-to-reach. I thought I was going to Congo but I was told I was still in Buliisa District and in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the day when we are debating this particular matter, 31 May 2018. I am saying this because next financial year when we get to debate the policy statements, I will carry this very notebook of mine to crosscheck and see whether Government will have lived up to the assurances it is offering now. 

This is because, Mr Speaker, we can say as Parliament we are supporting these recommendations but how sure are we that they will be got off the shelves and actually implemented? That is the biggest challenge. I have issues. In this petition, if you look at the recommendations, there is an issue of urgency. How urgently are we going to address these challenges? First of all, the attendance at the school has dwindled to 300 students. The girl children are affected – we have only 138 girls attending school. This is very serious, Mr Speaker.

The other issue is that this is the only public school that the rest of the poor children can go to. You know how much the private schools are charging these days for anybody to attain education. Therefore, this school needs urgent attention from Government. 

The issue of the classrooms is very important. It is even worse for the girl child. I do not know how they are coping in this situation where the classrooms are only two and the teachers also do not have where to go. You did not make a report about the pit latrines. How can we be sure of the pit latrines if the classrooms are just two?

Mr Speaker, the money that we debated about here – the one on the golden handshake –came from the oil sector. I wish part of that money had been taken out to settle that school in Buliisa, it would have done us a great thing. How could money go for handshakes yet such a school from where the oil is, is about to squat? This is very disturbing.

I would like to thank the committee and the Members of Parliament from Buliisa. Thank you for speaking for your people. Everything is on the record and we shall wait to see whether Government will act on this. I have this notebook and I have noted the date. While we debate the policy statement on education for next financial year, I shall raise this matter and if they do not appear there, budget for the education sector will not be passed by this Parliament. I will be the one to lead the way. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

6.20
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When it was mentioned that there is only one teacher of physics in the whole of Buliisa, I felt a lot of pain. As we move, we emphasise science. From S.6, to go to higher institutions of learning such as universities, it is usually the science students who are given loans. That means we are actually side-lining a big community. 

It is not only in Buliisa because we also have bigger schools in other areas, including Sir Samuel Baker in Gulu District. You will find that Sir Samuel Baker, which was very popular, very big and with a lot of facilities and teachers, has gone down. 

Therefore, I would like to thank the Committee on Education and Sports and also appeal to minister in charge of higher education to really take this one seriously and make sure that we try and encourage our teachers to also go back to rural areas. Let us not leave this oil region to suffer. Our teachers should go back to rural areas and help our people. We should not just think about schools in municipalities and the city. We should think about schools which are out there in the rural settings. 

If we talk about labs, just visit schools and see if there is any lab in the schools we boast of. I think we need to really do something about laboratories. Even the Bunsen burner, which during our time you would have already been exposed to while in S.1, is no longer there. These apparatuses are no longer there, leave alone the reagents. Our children do not see them now. 

Even when they go to universities – for those who take science courses – it is sometimes news to them to start being exposed to those reagents and apparatuses. Therefore, I think the best we can say is that the minister in charge of higher education should take it –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for allowing the information. The minister said that schools in urban centres cannot be considered to be in hard-to-reach areas. I would like to give the information that the minister is not accurate because the Constitution tells us that the state shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas of the country – National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XII. 

Therefore, for the minister to suggest that this school is in an urban area – moreover where people do not want to go – and therefore cannot qualify to be hard-to-reach, is not consistent with the Constitution of this country.

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: I would like to thank you very much, my colleague. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my sister regarding what the minister said. He talked about the hard-to-reach areas only. Kobwin Seed Secondary School in Ngora is actually accessible but we have only one teacher of physics like it is the case in Buliisa. There are only six teachers on the Government payroll and we have over 600 students in that school and the school is as old as 26 years. That is the information I wanted to give you such that the minister knows that what he is telling us is inaccurate.

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable, for giving that information. It is to all of us and so we must know that the bigger population is really in the rural areas. Therefore, we must take up this seriously to make sure that we equip our schools with all the necessary teachers such that when we emphasise science, we also exploit the potential of our children who are in the rural areas. Sometimes, we think that the population is only in urban areas forgetting the rural population. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.25
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support both the petitioner and the committee. We have the education policy for all and when you talk about the rights of people to education - I think waiting for the next budget is like we are dreaming. We have students who are going to sit exams but without a physics teacher in that school. We are actually killing a Ugandan population of more than 300 people. These students go to school yet they do not even get anything, which is very unfortunate.

Mr Speaker, we have passed supplementary budgets for urgent issues and I think this Buliisa matter is in urgent need. The Government said every sub county will have a secondary school yet the only school in the entire district is as lame as I am. 

Honestly speaking, are we going to look at this school and say it should wait for the future until a road is constructed? No. This Parliament should stand up and take a decision. We talk of equitable distribution of resources yet the district, which is supposed to make us rich being actually poor is not a good thing.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament must pronounce itself and the Minister of Education and Sports should come up with a plan on how they want to ensure these schools are constructed. This is not a very expensive venture. I see it as a very simple thing; it only involves building a classroom block and then getting teachers on board. I would like to thank the Speaker. I will now allow my Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to make a comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now taking over my role, after you have finished your submission? (Laughter)

6.26
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of schools, which are not equipped, is a bigger picture and it is almost all over the country. I appreciate the situation in Buliisa because I have gone there - it is really sad.

However, as we address this issue of Buliisa, I would like to call upon Government, especially the Minister of Education and Sports to comprehensively address this inequality across the country once and for all. (Applause)

I have been to Nwoya, Amuru and Karamoja - I have also seen on TV where students are transported on boats and canoes and they are taking risks to access schools. My plea to the Government is that it should learn from this scenario and the Minister of Education and Sports should comprehensively get all these schools and we address it as Parliament once and for all. (Applause) I beg to submit.

6.30
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate you very much, for the opportunity you have given me, to speak about this matter. I also take the pleasure to appreciate the Committee on Education and Sports and all colleagues, for their contributions towards this motion.

The motion we are speaking to this afternoon was brought last year and the committee went to Buliisa last year, around July–August. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the situation of this school is not any better; it has actually worsened. The qualified head teacher who was there that time retired in December and the acting head teacher is an ordinary teacher. As a result, there has been a high rate of school dropout in that school. The children there cannot even afford to go to next private schools because the parents cannot afford to pay school fees in those private schools.

Mr Speaker, the girl child in Buliisa is suffering. That time we were talking of 138 girl children in that school but as of now, they are less than 100. The teachers that are normally posted there can stay for one or two days and leave. They only come to appear on the payroll and take off for other greener pastures.

Mr Speaker, we have children that hail from Buliisa who are qualified as teachers but they have not got the opportunity of being trained and teach in such schools. 

The structures in that school, both in terms of classrooms and accommodation, are in a very terrible state. No one would wish to associate him or herself with those structures. I am glad that as Members of Parliament, we have come up with a voice to rescue those Ugandans. I know it could be elsewhere in the rest of the country but I think it is high time the Ministry of Education and Sports took a very fast action in restoring this school by building the structures required and making sure that the qualified teachers are in that school.

Mr Speaker, you cannot believe that since this school has been in action – it was long time ago, when a Minister of Education and Sports visited that school and that honourable – (Interjections) – not even that one - I forget the name but the name of the minister is mentioned in the petition. I am, therefore, requesting through this House that issues of education should never be compromised. 

Further, if we are to provide quality education, it must cut across the entire country through the equitable appropriation of resources, which are affordable to all of us. 

Furthermore, as they indicated, those who have come and left complain that this place is hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay. Can we, therefore, as a Government, employ those people who are maybe born in Buliisa or near Buliisa, who can afford the conditions of living in Buliisa to be able to provide a service to this section of Ugandans?

I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, because when this motion was brought on the Floor, you were there and I am glad you have been there. My prayer is that this should not just remain on the shelves. It will be a shame to us as Ugandans for not being accountable and mindful of our own. I thank you very much and pray that we move forward as a nation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. The recommendations from the committee are clear. Can I put the question for adoption of the report?

Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion that the Report of the Committee on Education and Sports on petition regarding the deplorable staffing level of Bugungu Secondary School in Buliisa District be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have advised that the Budget Committee is ready. So, we are going to have a long halt. I ask all Members who are within the precincts of Parliament and those who can come back to come inside, so that we can move to the next level of dealing with the budget and finish it.

Honourable members, I will suspend proceedings for 15 minutes and then come back so that we can finalise this issue of the budget. Thank you.

 (The House was suspended at 6.35 p.m.)

(On resumption at 7.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE HARMONISED FIGURES FOR THE SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister? (Laughter) Honourable minister, where is the motion?

MR KYEYUNE: Mr Speaker, I beg that we wait for the chairperson of the committee because I cannot move a motion when the chairperson is not here. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are moving your motion. You will speak to it and then we proceed. (Laughter)

7.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I have just spoken to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who told me that he is on the steps coming. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, please speak to the House. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is on the way coming with the report, together with hon. Amos Lugoloobi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. May I use this opportunity to clarify on the matter?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Meanwhile, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, would you like to clarify on some matter? I see the minister is here.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, there was an important issue, which has been appearing on the Order Paper as business to follow, regarding a motion which was passed by Cabinet to de-gazette and gazette forest reserves. Those who were in the House would appreciate your comment on this issue but it has been here for a long time. What hon. Betty Aol raised is that National Forestry Authority has given notice to evict people from Gulu; that the eviction will be carried out tomorrow.

I want to say, Mr Speaker, that the motion that was passed by Cabinet to de-gazette was that some forest reserves have failed to practically be forest reserves, especially in the municipalities. Therefore, districts petitioned Government and passed resolutions in their councils for de-gazettement of such forest reserves, which are in the municipalities.

However, the law requires that when you de-gazette a forest reserve, you allocate another area. That is why the motion was to de-gazette and gazette. Therefore, what I am going to do is to find out whether Gulu District Council passed a resolution to de-gazette that forest reserve but gazetted another area. I have to find that out. I talked to National Forestry Authority not to scare the people of Gulu because I think they petitioned that the place now deserves de-gazettement because it is a municipality; it is an urban area. It does not make sense to continue calling it a national forest reserve.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us move on to the next item.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE HARMONISED FIGURES FOR THE SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have the Floor.

7.10
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into the Committee of Supply. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To do what and for what purpose? (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: To consider the budget for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by hon. Veronica Bichetero, hon. Helen Asamo, hon. Anita Among and hon. Betty Aol. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as per our Constitution, we must get the budget passed by this House before the end of May. We need authority from this House. We have worked out the budget, both the revenues and the expenditures, which we presented duly to the Committee of the Whole House. We cannot spend money in the new financial year until Parliament has pronounced itself and it does that through the Appropriation Bill.

Therefore, I am appealing to this House, through you, Mr Speaker, to consider the estimates of revenue and expenditure and give us your authority to start spending when the new financial year opens on July 1st.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when these matters were brought to the House on the 1st - I think it was not the 1st. I do not remember the date in the month of March - I remember it was before April 1st - both the budget proposal and the Appropriation Bill, were submitted to our Committee on Budget, which has been examining them. 

The motion that I now propose for your debate is that this House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the harmonised figures for supply to votes for financial year 2018/2018. To start on this issue, I will ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to report. How much time do you need for the report?

7.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I have got a long report that could take two hours but I could do it in ten minutes. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ten minutes, proceed, Chair.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am presenting the report of the Committee on Budget on the annual budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019. 

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 13 (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended and rules 147 and 170(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Budget Committee is mandated among others to examine, discuss and review the budget estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament and to consider sectoral committee reports on the budget estimates referred to the committee by Parliament for reconciliation and harmonisation.

On the 29 March 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament, the proposed annual budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019, which was referred to the Committee on Budget. 

In addition, Parliament referred the sectoral committee reports on the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2018/2019 for reconciliation and harmonisation. The Committee on Budget has consulted, discussed and reviewed the proposed annual budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019 and now wishes to report to the House.

Mr Speaker, I will summarise - I had thought I would read that one to indicate where I derive my authority from. 

The scope and the methodology that we applied are there in the report. The report is in two parts. The first part is on the macro level observations and recommendations. So, we have presented the proposed annual budget for 2018/2019, which initially was Shs 30,905.5 trillion out of which Shs 20,745.83 trillion was for appropriation and Shs 10,159.67 trillion was for statutory expenditure.

On 9 May 2018, the finance minister submitted corrigenda to the draft estimates and an addendum to the corrigenda, which revised the total proposed annual budget for the financial year 2018/2019 to Shs 32,367.43 trillion of which Shs 22,258.796 trillion is for appropriation and Shs 10,108.633 trillion is for statutory expenditure.

The committee notes that the annual budget is growing at 11.6 per cent and this is higher than the projected growth in the entire economy of at 5.5 per cent. This implies that growth of other economic agents’ activities such as private consumption and investment will be constrained and the current account deficit will widen. The budget strategy is on page 3. 

We have also looked at the consistency of the annual budget with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. We have noted that the overall fiscal deficit is projected to rise to 6.7 per cent of GDP in financial year 2018/2019, from 6.2 per cent projected for the financial year 2017/2018.

The public debt in net present value terms is projected to increase to 36 per cent of GDP in financial year 2018/2019, from 29.5 per cent projected for the financial year 2017/2018.

Mr Speaker, we have also assessed the compliancy of the annual budget to the NDP and there are interesting details worth reading. On page 7, we have also looked at the compliancy of the annual budget to the gender and equity responsiveness and this information is available on pages 7 and 8. On page 8, we have also discussed the compliancy of the ministerial policy statements to gender and equity requirements. 

On page 9, we have looked at the multi-year commitments of Government for the financial year 2018/2019. There is a very interesting discussion at pages 9 and 10.

We have further looked at the budget of public corporations and state enterprises for the financial year 2018/2019 and we would like to make the following recommendations:

The first is that the committee recommends that all public corporations and state enterprises should have their budgets presented and appropriated as stipulated by law and two, the committee recommends that all the heads of public corporations and state enterprises who did not comply with the laws should be given warning letters by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

At page 11, we also discussed the sectoral allocations between the approved Budget Framework Paper for 2018/2019 to 2022/2023 and the annual budget for the financial year of 2018/2019. We have also discussed the sectoral budget allocations for the same financial year. 

At page 14, we discuss the resource envelopes, which are already alluded to by mentioning a figure of Shs 32,367,400,000,000 trillion. 

We have also discussed the revenue policy measures on page 15 and the tax proposals as were presented in the various Bills at pages 16 and 17.

Mr Speaker, we have discussed the government discretionary resources and noted that they have increased from Shs 12.8 trillion, in 2017/2018, to Shs 14.3 trillion, in 2018/2019.

We have also further discussed issues relating to public debt accumulation on pages 18 and 19 and a fiscal decentralisation. At page 20, Mr Speaker, we discuss the output gap and inflation projections for the financial year 2018/2019. Uganda’s output gap has been presented graphically on page 21. 

Now, we have also further made general sectoral policy observations and recommendations. I beg to read the one on the enhancement of salaries for all post-primary teachers: Following the ministry’s proposed policy on enhancing salaries of science teachers in secondary schools, Parliament disagreed with this policy as it would create disparities among the teachers, demotivate the arts teachers and also found it unconstitutional as per Article 40 (1) (b). Under this Article, it is stipulated that Parliament will enact laws to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination. 

Therefore, in order to avoid these disparities and un-constitutionalism, Parliament adopted the following recommendations as per the Committee on Education and Sports’ report from the allocation of Shs 98,514,047,919 that was meant for the increment. 

The committee recommends as follows:

    1. Government halts the discriminatory salary increment for the science teachers and adopts the following changes in the financial year 2018/2019.

    2. Shs 18 billion should be used to recruit 2,000 science teachers in order to reduce on the shortage of science teachers – (Applause)- and to ably address the science subjects in schools given that sciences are compulsory and in support of Government’s policy of enhancing sciences in the development of the economy.

    3. That Shs 9,360,000,000 should be used to recruit l2OO English and Literature teachers to curb the shortage of such teachers in secondary schools. 

    4. Shs 71,154,047,919 should be equally allocated - that is the remaining amount - to all teachers for science and arts, head teachers and deputy head teachers for enhancement at a uniform rate. You need to ignore the rates indicated there because they were put there in error.

    5. The committee is recommending that a task force be formed to work out a final position on the (4) above comprising of representatives of the ministries of education, public service and Parliament and report to this House by 30 June 2018. We have further recommended that this task force shall be constituted by the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.

We have made further recommendations on technology transfer and the Operation Wealth Creation and NAADS, the coffee production road map and service coverage acceleration project in water, Cap 100, the Petroleum Authority of Uganda and so on.

Mr Speaker, we have part two of this report. This part of two is about the sectoral committee observations and recommendations largely derived from the various sectoral committee reports that were referred to the Committee on Budget. This information is all available from pages 27 to 82. We have presented annexes to this report that include a schedule on budget reallocations as per the identified priorities for the financial year 2018/2019.

You recall that during the various presentations from the sectoral committees, recommendations were made on the movement of funds. We have executed those decisions in this schedule and made the relevant reallocations in schedule one. I don’t know whether you are privy to that information but it is very vital information. I don’t know whether I should go in the details of that schedule - (Interjection) - no. Thank you very much.

Now there is also a schedule, which is a summary of the budget for supply. That schedule, when you get on the Table, I believe that these figures will be clearly read out. The figures for supply are all available on this schedule.

Then we have the Appropriation Bill 2018 that presents the recurrent as well as the development expenditures.  We also have a schedule on statutory expenditure for financial year 2018/2019 in form of statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund for 2018/2019. All these figures are available.

Mr Speaker, I beg to conclude. The Committee on Budget recommends that the House approves the proposed budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019 with amendments as have been presented in schedule one, which I just mentioned -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Parliament is requested to approve a sum of Shs 32,367,430,054,000 as the total budget for the financial year 2018/2019 as per the Appropriation Bill 2018. The total recurrent budget, out of this money, is Shs 9,315,541,500,000. The total development budget is Shs 12,943,254,742,000. The total amount for appropriation, therefore, is Shs 22,258,796,243,000 and the amount for statutory expenditure is Shs 10,108,633,811,000, giving a grand total of Shs 32,367,430,054,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, there is a minority report signed by the hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, hon. Muhammad Muwanga, hon. Robert Centenary and hon. Joy Atim Ongom. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for having this report out today and now that there is a minority report, can I ask the presenter to the minority report to summarize the report as  well.

7.33
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of many of us fasting, I will try my best to be extremely brief. I need every minute to make my presentation but if I am being harassed by Members laughing around me - Mr Speaker in accordance with rule 202 of our Rules of Procedure I, on behalf of the Members who have signed this minority report, wish to dissent in the following areas:

i) 	Misalignment with the approved National Budget Framework Paper of FY2018/19 and 2022/23; and 

ii) 	Implementation of key recommendations in Certificate of Compliance of the annual Budget Framework Paper of FY2017/18.

Section 13 (6) of the Public Finance Management Act stipulates that the annual budget shall be consistent with the Budget Framework Paper. It has, however, been noted that the annual budget for FY2018/19 is not aligned to the approved National Budget Framework Paper and that is in breach of the law.

It is also important to note that the resource envelope has not also been aligned as required by law. However, I would like to draw the attention of the members to page 3 which shows the huge variance.

The National Budget Framework Paper provides Shs 29,275,020,000,000 but the variance is Shs 3 trillion plus. Based on the above and knowing that all this is being done against the law which we ourselves passed, I stand here to demand that Parliament is made aware of the fact that the variance is worrying for the economy of this country. 

Parliament deserves to know that the approved domestic financing of Shs 5.77 trillion has far surpassed the statutory threshold of Shs 1.554 trillion that is stipulated in Section 36 (5) (b) of the Public Finance Management Act, as amended. 

Parliament deserves to know that from Shs 29.29 trillion as approved in the Budget Framework Paper, it ought to have received a document from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to approve by motion the variance that has been shown on page 3.   

I am saying this because Parliament has always been pushed to pass a budget in this House against the very law that we ourselves passed. It is important that we know that we are being pushed into an illegality. If we know, then we can know how to rectify it.

Mr Speaker, you remember that when we were recently passing the supplementary budget; if you had not put pressure on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, anybody would have nullified the decision that we took in this House. I thank God that you were able to save the face of this institution. 

I beg to also highlight two other critical areas: first of all this Parliament is very concerned about the gap in the agricultural sector as shown on page 4.      

However, as you have observed, the agricultural sector has now received less resources than it got last year. There is a resolution that this Parliament passed when we were discussing, debating and resolving sectoral committees. 

Allow me to summarise for the benefit of the sectors that made presentations here because sometimes they think that the Budget Committee is unfair. It is important that you ought to know that for:

    1. Agriculture

Parliament resolved that Shs 54 billion be allocated in the FY20l8/19 to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to fight pests and diseases that are a huge threat to Uganda’s agricultural production and food security. However, only Shs 11.5 billion has been made available.

    2. Public Service

This House recently resolved that all categories of civil servants should have their salaries enhanced during the Financial Year 2O18/2019 to avoid the piece meal approach of increasing salaries, which is the major cause of industrial strikes in the recent past. 

To the contrary, Government is to undertake selective salary enhancements of selected cadres, medical workers, scientists, teachers of science, Police, Prisons, UPDF and others in the report. There are details.

    3. Treasury Operations

This is the third area of concern which you resolved to be cured. Parliament resolved that Government complies with Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act and provide for the necessary funds required to meet emergency situations in the country without suppression of departments.

However, the proposed budget allocation is only Shs 77 billion instead of Shs l45 billion, hence a continued contravention of the law. 

The additional Shs 40 billion proposed by the majority of the committee members would also fall short of the required threshold of Shs 145 billion.

    4. Trade and Industry 

This is a major concern. I have mentioned it before but I think that Members also need to know that Government was urged by Parliament to provide Shs 45 billion to clear debts owed to cooperative unions so that they save their assets but no funds have been allocated.

    5. Gender

In order to ensure effective implementation of SAGE, the release of Shs 39.09 billion as counterpart funding for the FY2018/19 was agreed upon but Government has, however, provided only Shs 32.888 billion in the FY2018/2019. 

Recommendations

In light of Section l3(6) and Section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, approval of the report on the annual budget estimates of the FY20l8/2019 should be withheld but it is up to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: High interest payment is crowding our budget allocation to key sectors and priority infrastructure projects that are key in driving growth and improving competitiveness.

Recently, very many Members of Parliament expressed concern over the road accidents all over the country claiming lives. I have not seen any provision in this budget to address the issue of road accidents. We can talk about it but unless we translate what we have resolved into the budget, it remains just empty talk. There is no politics in what I have said but purely to open the eyes of Members to know where every year the ministry has forced us to take certain decisions against the law.

Honourable members, if anything, we are the ones to be blamed because we are the final decision makers and that is why I have the right to protect the image of Parliament because I am a member. Therefore, I would like to urge the Executive through you, Mr Speaker, to respect the institution of Parliament. They are the ones who bring the law and we pass it to make their work easy but they are the first ones to break the law and they also want us to help them to break the law. 

I beg to move that the minority report be adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think we have now received the report of the committee, which also have the minority report. Have I proposed the question already? Honourable members, if I have not, let me do it now. The motion that I propose for your debate is that the House dissolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the harmonised figures for supply to votes for the Financial Year 2018/2019. That is the second time I am proposing this motion.

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Each Member shall take two minutes. The reason I am saying two minutes is that the issues that have culminated into this debate on this motion have been with you since the Budget Framework Paper was presented. 

We have debated in this House many times. It came and we debated it in the reports of the committees and now it is coming at the final stage where we have to deal with those issues of principle at this stage before going to supply. Can we agree on two minutes? More than one minute? One and a half minutes? Okay, two minutes. 

7.47
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee because when I peruse through the committee report, it is well considered nationally. 

The committee considered pertinent issues. You heard about the issue of teachers of science and even the other teachers have been considered. So I think we are moving well. I would like to request that we approve this report and we take off, because some of us are fasting. 

However, Mr Speaker, you are aware that yours is a very big office with all of us as your children - the Chairperson of the Budget Committee should in the other financial year at least include a helicopter for the Speaker – (Laughter) – why am I saying this? Do you remember that one of our own is sick? 

Mr Speaker, if you want to attend a function in Butaleja and another in Amolatar, and then also another in Kasilo, you cannot move by road. Therefore, I would like to request that we take the major report but for the minority report, which they have done in good faith, we shall handle it in the Financial Year 2020/2022. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us debate the issues that have been presented. Two minutes for each member.

7.49
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sectoral committees met the entities and we agreed upon the priorities that should be catered for. On Page 82 the budget for the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs and that of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, among others on programme (1) in regard to food, Shs 10 billion was deducted and was allocated to Uganda Air Cargo. The budget for uniforms and beddings among others was also reduced and money allocated to Uganda Air Cargo. 

The issue of security should be given priority. When they appeared before the committee, these are the areas we addressed and harmonised when we were allocating it as a committee. Their budget has been attached –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you remember the rule of using the microphone before you have been picked? When you do that, you do not speak. Proceed. 

MR KAHONDA: Mr Speaker, the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory that addresses issues of DNA has case backlog. We met the prisons authorities and they told us that they have 57 prisoners and 27 of them are on remand because their cases are pending in the Government laboratories. We allocated Shs 10 billion as a committee and they have only been given about Shs 3 billion.  

Mr Speaker, some of these issues affect the performance and service delivery of the entities. I beg to submit.

7.52
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of the other members to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and the other members who have presented a minority report. 

My interest goes straight to SAGE. Mr Speaker, you know well that as Members of Parliament we have been struggling with this issue for a quite a long time. Every Member is concerned about the issue of the elderly people. I am sure they are also watching us presenting this budget and they want to hear exactly what we are saying as Members of Parliament. 

When you look at the allocation in the main budget of Shs 39 billion which was reduced to Shs 32 billion, it perturbs my understanding as to what coverage it will cater for. Will it be enough for the whole country or there is a selection of districts that will be covered? I will need a clarification from the chairperson of the committee in regard to that matter. However, we need to say something about it because you know how it is going to backfire on us as Members of Parliament. Thank you. 

7.53
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, I had really wanted to draw the attention on SAGE. I thank the committee for the main and minority reports.

As one of my committee members submitted, we thank the committee for providing at least the Shs 32 billion. We had requested for Shs 39 billion and we even spoken with the finance minister. I would like encourage the committee that after this budget, we can quickly get some supplementary so that the SAGE commitment rolls out to the whole country. If we do not get the total of Shs 39 billion, which constituency is going to be left out? It is for the common good of our senior citizens and we indeed need this money.

For now, I appreciate that we are able to get the Shs 32 billion. We encourage the committee to look for the remaining balance so that we roll it out. We do not want to discourage where effort has already been made. 

As the committee’s vice chairperson, I appreciate that and when time comes, we can get a supplementary to top it up so that it rolls out to the whole country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a specific mention has been made about the uniform and gear for the UPDF and the UPDF is represented. Can I hear from the UPDF on that particular allocation? On the reallocation of what should be for their forces. Please honourable members, the UPDF is represented in this House.

7.56
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I represent UPDF in the House but I am not on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. We were given committees to represent and it was specific because we represent more than just defence. 

I am much more concerned with the Committee on Education and Sports because I have reasons why. We have a whole Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, it comes to Parliament and meets the committee, which is composed of other people. We do not ask for jobs - I did not ask to be put there.
    
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason as to why I was giving the UPDF MPs the opportunity is that they represent the UPDF officers and men. Now the proposal is to reallocate money to Uganda Air Cargo and that is why I am asking. However, if they have no opportunity to speak, no problem.

7.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, if you look at the report of the committee on page 52 on the corrigenda – my instruction is that we should pass the corrigenda as presented.

I am not comfortable with cutting money from the soldiers’ ration. The committee equally has recommended because of outstanding claims on land compensation, they have even gone further to tell us who to pay. My considered view is that you cannot recommend us to do a, b and c and also take away the money to do the job. Therefore, I am not comfortable with the reallocation. Thank you.

7.59
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for both reports. My concern is on the agricultural sector. I have seen the recommendations but I have not seen the committee recommending on irrigation because even if we supply seedlings, they keep on drying up if we do not provide sources of water for production.

I would like to propose and request Government that we should look for money to provide sources of water for production and other uses.

The other concern is in regard to the water ministry. The committee mentioned the districts that are water stressed. I request that Bukomansimbi be considered and in particular the sub counties of Kitanda and Bigasa. Thank you.

8.00
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to comment on the report of the committee especially the minority report. This House is under obligation to adhere to its own rules and policies that we have made. Time and again, we always gloss over very important rules and laws that we have set.

Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that we must align the annual budget to the Budget Framework Paper and this is a very important matter. The implication that we can pick from this is that immediately we move away from the Shs 29 trillion and go to Shs 30 trillion, we are also increasing external borrowing. Mr Speaker, you are aware that external borrowing has risen very fast and is putting a lot of burden on Ugandans. Therefore, if we have set our own laws, why don’t we adhere to them?

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee for the main report specifically for addressing the issue of roads maintenance and the reallocation of money for DURCAR roads. Most Members of Parliament go to their constituencies and spend their money to maintain roads yet we have money that has been lying in other sectors and yet every time we come to Parliament, we do not allocate enough money. 

I would like to thank the committee and say that we should maintain and we should not be putting money in sectors that are not taking off like the Standard Gauge Railway that has not been doing its work and yet we are giving them money and yet we cannot maintain our roads. Thank you.

8.02
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank, you, Mr Speaker. Allow me add my voice to that of my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the committee for both the majority and the minority reports.

As far as I am concerned, agriculture contributes a greater percentage to the GDP of this country. As the presenter of the minority report brought forward, there has been a reduction in terms of the allocation of the budget to the agricultural sector. 

I would like to marry that with the majority report especially on page 24 on NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation. The committee appreciates the fact that NAADS procures inputs. However, Operation Wealth Creation, which according to the committee has little knowledge, does the distribution of these inputs to our farmers.

Therefore, at the end of the day, our farmers are provided with inputs sometimes out of season. According to them, there are limited advisory services that have been provided by Operation Wealth Creation. At the end of the day, we have realised a number of losses and practically, this is happening in our communities. Sometimes the inputs are brought when the season is off and they end up drying.
 
Mr Speaker, at the district, the extension workers have not been put to good use. We are continuing to even waste the little resources that we are providing for agriculture using the system - (Member timed out.)

8.04
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to appreciate and thank the committee for the majority report. However, I also wish to thank and appreciate the minority group for their very clear and important report.

My concern is in the agricultural sector. We are well aware that the backbone of this country is agriculture. We are also aware that over 70 per cent of Ugandans are employed in this sector; the youth, women and men. It is this sector that is now trying to promote small scale industries in the country.

However, this House discussed and approved at least a budget of Shs 54 billion. The majority report has only allocated Shs 11.5 billion. Yesterday, our colleague raised a concern in Nakaseke about worms attacking the crops. Several times, we have distributed seeds from the National Agricultural Advisory Services distributed to the people in the subcounties and at the end of the day, we are the ones blamed for bringing poor quality seeds.

My prayer is that let us adopt and approve this budget but with an amendment that at least 50 per cent of the money that –(Member timed out.) 

8.06
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two points. However, the first one about the external loans was ably handled. 

I need clarification from the chairperson. He keeps referring to English teachers. I do not know whether we have English teachers because my understanding of an English teacher is that teacher who is born in United Kingdom and can teach any other subject.

I think we are talking about teachers of English and Literature. If I am right, that should be corrected. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

8.07
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two points and the first is that I would like to appreciate the Budget Committee for the provision of Shs 5 billion start-up funds for the new town councils. 

This had been left out and it was like the statutory instrument to establish the new town councils was not going to be effected. It is small but I think it gives us somewhere to start.

Secondly, in terms of agriculture, I also appreciate the provision of Shs 25 billion for recruitment of extension workers. We needed this even yesterday. 

However, there is a crop which we seem to be underfunded and that is tea. Whereas, I appreciate the Shs 54 billion for coffee development, you find that the tea sector is being left out yet this is a key crop that brings in cash, foreign exchange and employs several people in the country.

We have the same problems of nursery beds operators who are not paid. There is need for research into new tea clones. I would like to request the ministry to look into this. We had proposed a Bill for the tea development authority or commission or board. When you look at the other crops like coffee and cotton among others that have a certain commission or board or authority which looks into the development of that crop but tea is ignored. Colleagues, I hope as we go by, we can look into ways to strengthen the tea sector.

8.09
MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. My issue is about education and more especially the salary for teachers of science. I would like to thank the committee for the equitable distribution of the money to teachers. 

However, Members should be aware that all teachers of science have been waiting for an increment and they have been expecting something. I would like to request that at least a small additional allowance to make a top up be earmarked and given to the teachers of science. I beg to submit. 

This is my own submission but it is up to this august House to either take it or not. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

8.11
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the work that the Budget Committee has done by coming up with this report. I have two issues to note:
	
    1. The issue of questionability and operation of this Parliament, especially on Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 which talks about contingency fund being respected by the finance minister. Why are I am saying this? 0.5 per cent which is almost Shs 30 billion is supposed to be left for contingency. 

You are aware this country has suffered many times over issues of contingency and disaster. It should be very paramount for Parliament, to make sure that we provide for this to avoid firefighting as a nation.

    2. Fishing community in this country has not been catered for, especially when we talk about Operation Wealth Creation. Just as we provide for the crop and livestock farmers, could it be important for us as Parliament to at least provide inputs to the fishing community well knowing the foreign exchange contribution of the fishing industry in this country?

Therefore, I would like to pray that as Parliament, we take this into consideration and provide for this community. I beg to submit. Thank you.

8.13
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committees for their reports. I would also like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for her report in which she revealed that there was a variance of Shs 3 trillion which was not declared by the main report. 

Secondly, the African countries met in Maputo and declared that they are going to put 0.7 percent of their Gross National Product to the health sector. However, when you look at the budget which has been presented to us, you do not see this amount which was declared in an international meeting to be put in the health sector. We go to international conferences and we tell them we are going to do this and that. When we come back home, we do not fulfil the pledges we made in the international meetings.

Thirdly, agriculture is our main backbone in this country. As a member of the ACP–EU, we are busy negotiating on our exports to the European market. However, when you look at agriculture, the committee had proposed Shs 54 billion to be allocated to the agricultural sector to fight the armyworm. You have just allocated only Shs 11 billion to fight the armyworm. How are you going to do that and how are we going to export our goods to European Union when we are not even able to fight the armyworm?

This will cause a problem in this country because it is going to cause hunger. We know that the armyworm has been a problem –(Member timed out.)

8.14
MR ONESMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is on page 61 of this report in regard to the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). This financial year, we allocated Shs 18 billion to help in the revamping exercise of the UBC. However, only Shs 6.4 billion was released. We are seeing that the Shs 11.2 billion which is regarded as the arrears is the amount being allocated to finish up the revamping exercise at UBC. This is still little money to help in revamping the national broadcaster.

Mr Speaker, in the whole of the African continent, there isn’t a single country that does not fully fund the national broadcaster. In Uganda, we have been allocating Shs 1 billion to UBC every financial year since 2005. This cannot help a lot in trying to streamline activities with the national broadcaster. 

Therefore, I would like to beg that Government takes this up. Government should always fully fund the national broadcaster because there is no a single country that does not fully fund the national broadcaster. The Shs 1 billion that we always allocate UBC does nothing; it cannot cover salaries and pay for utilities.

I pray that when we are working on the supply, we should supply more money to UBC because this is the Government mouthpiece. I wondered, sometime back when the Pope visited – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope it is a procedural matter?

MS AMODING: It is, Mr Speaker. Thank you for your indulgence. Mr Speaker, you are the custodian of the law in this House and when I read the Public Finance Act, Section 13 (11) says, “The minister shall present with the annual budget….” 

I have been itching to hear from the minister to the effect that he lays a Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance, together with the Compliance on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility that I think the minority report raises. 

Mr Speaker, I am at pains to raise this but I am wondering if we are procedurally proceeding well in terms of those very important statutory requirements that the budget must have fulfilled from the onset. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which section are you referring to?

MS AMODING: Section 13 (11) (e) but before you go there, 13 (11) reads, “The minister shall present with the annual budget” and then the other requirements are down there. 

The committee has clearly noted that this was not laid, with a capital “NOT”. I am wondering if we are going to abridge the law or work within the parameters of the law as we perform this very important function that we are doing today. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

8.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we laid this certificate on the Floor of the House. If the chairperson of the Budget Committee has captured that as not being laid, I think he needs to correct that error. However, we did –(Interjections) - actually, Mr Speaker, there is no requirement of the law to pass this budget that we have not fulfilled in terms of laying on the Floor of the House - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that there was an instance; I however do not remember whether it was on the Budget Framework Paper where we had the shortest sitting of this Parliament which took less than five minutes. It was for us to receive the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. I presided over the shortest sitting of Parliament to receive that. I do not remember whether it was during the Budget Framework Paper debate or it was actually at the time of the budget. I recall it was a Friday.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, we actually received the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. We in fact discussed it in the committee along with the commissioners from the Equal Opportunities Commission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have stood on a procedural point on Section 13 (11) (d) that requires that the annual budget must be laid before Parliament and passed together with the list of accounting officers appointed or designated for each financial year. 

The document, for Financial Year 2018/2019 as at 28 March, 2018, which I have in my hand and originated by Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, has an attachment “A” of a list of persons who have complied with set criteria and shall be considered for appointment as accounting officers for Financial Year 2018/2019 in line with the law.

Attachment “2” is list of persons who have not complied with the set criteria and shall be considered for appointment. I have not qualified, “and shall still be considered for appointment” The point here is that these are potential people who are likely to be appointed. The law says in Section 13 (11) (d), that there must be a list of accounting officers appointed or designated already.

Mr Speaker, the potentiality of who can be appointed as accounting officer is based on the accountability of Financial Year 2016/2017. It is hurting that it is not even for Financial Year 2017/2018. We are now here passing a budget for Financial Year 2018/2019 and we do not have a list of the accounting officers as required by the law.

Are we proceeding right to entrust people whom we are not even aware of, to be the accounting officers of this money? Remember in our recommendation, there is a moment when Parliament said some accounting officers should not be accounting officers. I am not going to mention names here. If we do not have the designate or people who are appointed, it is likely that they are going to import people we have refused to be accounting officers to handle our monies illegally. 

Mr Speaker, we need your guidance whether we are proceeding rightly without accounting officers being designated and the list provided. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this budget was laid just before 1 April, 2018 with the accompanying documents. I need to confirm from the minister and the Chairperson of the Budget Committee whether one of the documents that were laid was the list of accounting officers.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I can lay evidence that accounting officers are not designated and this is a document from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury. 

MR OKUPA: Further clarification as they consult –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from who?

MR OKUPA: From hon. Bahati –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not holding the Floor, yet.

MR DAVID BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we laid the list of accounting officers then and said that some of them were being considered because it is a process. Sometimes one of the things we look at is the queries raised by the Auditor-General. If they are corrected, an accounting officer is appointed. 

Mr Speaker, not to waste the valuable time of Parliament, I beg to lay a proper list of accounting officers for all the Votes here and now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I brought an issue of procedure and it was very specific on Section 13(11)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act which requires a list of designated accounting officers, not those who are supposed to be designated because it is based on the last year’s financial accountability. 

The minister is saying there is a list of those who are supposed to be appointed and that list, to the best of our knowledge, is not even in the hands of anybody in Parliament here. Mr Speaker, is the minister in order to make a submission as if Parliament is proceeding rightly when we have actually been pushed to the corner to proceed illegally against the Public Finance Management Act? Is he in order to make that kind of submission when there is no list provided and there is nothing like designated accounting officers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a requirement of the law that at the time of presenting the budget such a list should be provided. The minister is saying they provided the list and that for the avoidance of doubt and to save time, he wants to lay it again. That is what I have heard. 

The minister said he laid it with the budget before the 1st of April but for the avoidance of doubt, he can lay it again so that we can proceed. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the list, again, of the Central Government Accounting Officers and Local Government Accounting Officers for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. (Applause)

8.25
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report presented today. However, there are two things that have been omitted from the report.

One of the things that have been omitted is the issue of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). I remember we recommended in this very House the construction of one office per region for RDCs but it is nowhere to be seen in the report. 

We also recommended money for cars for RDCs but it is not there in the report. We recommended money for motorcycles for Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) and District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) and it is also not there in the report.

Mr Speaker, out of the Shs 5.3 billion requested for effective monitoring only Shs 1.5 billion has been provided. You will agree with me that the office of the RDC is created under Article 203, which reads as follows: 

“Resident District Commissioner
    (1) There shall be for each district a resident district commissioner who shall be appointed by the President.
    (2) For a person to be appointed as resident district commissioner he or she shall be a citizen of Uganda and qualify to be a Member of Parliament.
    (3) The functions of a resident district commissioner are-
    (a) to monitor the implementation of central and local government services in the district;
    (b) to act as chairperson of the district security committee of the district; and
    (c) to carry out such other functions as may…”  -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the Member for Kasilo before the Leader of the Opposition.

8.28
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, first, we recommended and we have been recommending – and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed this House – that in the next financial year, Shs 50 billion will be provided for Uganda Development Bank. Why have you provided nil?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, today Members raised the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease as well as armyworms but the budget has been cut for the pests and diseases by over 70 per cent. I would like to plead with the House that when we reach that level, we provide money because we get foreign exchange through the milk and beef products to enable this country move forward. I plead with colleagues that when we reach that level we do the needful.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on page 65 of the majority report, “The committee, therefore, recommends that the sum of Shs 11.2 billion be re-allocated from arrears to non-wage recurrent for the revamp and restructuring process of UBC….”

Mr Speaker, there was a report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises in this House and you know very well that in the custody of Parliament, we were able to recover the land title for UBC and directed that, that company be refunded its money – the Shs 11.2 billion. This is because that land alone is over Shs 50 billion. 

I see here that despite even what we heard last time when the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology was presenting a report – in the policy statement the minister in charge of ICT said this money be provided “such that we are able to continue holding our title and recover our land and this company be refunded its Shs 11.2 billion”. 

However, here we are again seeing the Budget Committee saying this money be reallocated for the revamp of UBC yet we were even told by the Managing Director of UBC that the money they got was used to acquire equipment for UBC. We are again seeing this situation here. 

I do not want a situation where we are going to be taken to court and asked to pay a lot of money. After all, we are going to pay this money back, less the interest rate –(Interruption)-

MR LUGOLOOBI: I think that statement is in error. We have actually not moved the money.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the majority report says we must relocate some money to Operation Wealth Creation (OWC). However, we handled this matter in the Committee on Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises and we had a meeting with the President, where we raised the matter of legality of OWC. We also directed that before we pass any money, we should have a law to legalise OWC. 

Mr Speaker, in that regard therefore we cannot move money to a body that does not have a legal basis. I do not support that recommendation and I would like to invite members to join me so that we do things legally.

Finally, hon. Bahati said he followed everything according to the law. However, the report says that the funds borrowed for treasury operations should be held in a special fund as provided under Section 36(6) of the Public Finance Management Act. Unfortunately, –(Member timed out.)

8.34
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of OWC, as COSASE, we gave the ministry one month to bring a paper here for us to legalise it. How I wish that when we are making this budget, we legalise the operation of OWC because they have a conflict with National Agricultural Advisory Services, which we must resolve. It is good that OWC is there but it must be legalised.

Mr Speaker, like what hon. Okupa said, I wish to lay on the Table a report of COSASE, where we agreed the money for Uganda Broadcasting Corporation land should be refunded. 

I also wish to lay on the Table the Hansard of that day, where the Rt Hon. Speaker, ruled and said that she was tired of keeping the land title of UBC. She said we could not have both the money and land title at the same time - it was enriching ourselves at the expense of the citizens out there. I, therefore, beg to lay on the Table the Hansard of that day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Hansard is a record of this Parliament and so you do not have to lay it on the Table. However, honourable chairperson, is that the money you were talking about that was not removed?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, that is the same money that I am talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it has not been removed? 

HON. MEMBERS: Motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had this debate for a long time and after this, we have to go to Committee of Supply and come to the Appropriation Bill and then handle both two readings of the Bill and 4.00 a.m. will be the next day. I only have up to midnight. Can I deal with this stage and we move to the next issue? There is a correction to be made.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, since I did not read the minority report word by word, on page 5, under Treasury Operation, the correction I would like to make is that it is Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act. This is for the purpose of record. Thank you.

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I am not doing this for my personal interest but in the interest of Ugandans.  

I would like to invite the House to the report of the committee on page 9 and specifically on recommendation 34 and I beg to read it verbatim. It says, “In the previous year, Parliament recommended that the accounting officer for a vote that fails to submit its MPS (Ministerial Policy Statements) to the EOC for Gender and Equity Assessment and for a Vote, whose score is below 50 per cent, should be tasked to make a detailed explanation to the House and their appropriation withheld until necessary scores are attained. 

The committee recommends that appropriation be withheld for Votes that did not pass the assessment and Votes that did not submit their policy statements for assessment.”

I would like to also invite you to recommendation 29 on page 12, of the report. It says, “The assessment indicates that out of the 138 MDAs, 85 MDAs achieved the required pass mark of 50 per cent, 21 MDAs of the total, performed below the pass mark and 32 MDAs did not submit their ministerial policy statements and were not assessed.”

Mr Speaker, we are the custodians of this law and what we are doing is not merely a cosmetic exercise. It is in the interest of Ugandans and issues of equity require that the most marginalised Ugandans are brought on the fore of budgeting and their issues are addressed. 

I am at pain and I would like to request you to guide the House before we go to appropriation. This is an issue of national importance. Otherwise, if we do not deal with it here and guide the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development they will continue – (Member timed out.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the minister or the chairperson respond to this issue?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think it is the minister to respond on this issue because there was lack of compliance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was there compliance or not? Otherwise, if there was non-compliance, what is the implication?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, at times, we make a slippage. However, as far as I know, that certificate was laid on the Table here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is no longer about the certificate, honourable minister, but about institutions that did not comply. Were they there and if they did not comply, what is the implication? That is why I was asking the chairperson to respond because he examined the documents.

MR KASAIJA: Can I ask the chairperson to answer? Please help.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I wish the minister could listen because he will again fail to answer the question. 

The chairperson of the committee has been very clear and it is even in the report. Is the minister who has failed to understand the question in order to refer the matter back to the chairperson, who has told him that he did not do his part?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes we are so disappointed and as a result, we do not even know how to raise these issues. The honourable member wanted to reprimand the honourable minister but he rose on order and I think that there is no basis for what he said that I can rule on. You have survived that order. (Laughter) However, what you did was not right because you are supposed to respond to the issue. You got up, set your own question and failed it - (Laughter) – yes, honourable minister.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act requires that every spending agency is assessed by the Equal Opportunities Commission and a certificate given. A certificate was given on the performance of these ministries and spending agencies. Some performed well, others did not perform well.

There are reasons that I advanced for those who did not perform well. Some of them said they are going to improve. I would like to suggest that while not every institution got 100 per cent or zero per cent, we cannot penalise the operations of these institutions. We would rather make some recommendations on the accounting officers who are implementing to ensure that they comply with the certificate of gender and equity compliance. (Applause) 

However, to say that we do not approve the budget would be taking the issue beyond. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. We are in this situation because we have pushed everything to the end and we have not left room for making people deal with issues before we deal with the Budget. That is the problem that we have now.

We are all responsible for this. The Government is responsible by bringing ministerial policy statements and withdrawing them. Also, as members of committees, we are responsible for the delays we also caused. We are all contributory to this kind of situation that we now find ourselves in.

On the way forward on how we need to proceed; the sanctions for now cannot be that we withhold the Budget. The sanctions per now can be that we put these recommendations clearly that they have to. If they do not, by the time we are dealing with the Budget Framework Paper for the next financial year, this issue should be considered comprehensively. 

Secondly, these particular matters came when they supplied the Budget Framework Paper. A Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance was laid and submitted in committees and they handled. The Committee on Budget reported on those things and recommendations were made. If up to the time – because it is mainly about recruitment – we have a standing directive from the President that you cannot recruit midway the financial year if it was not in your recruitment plan. Therefore, there is no way these agencies could have recruited midway the financial year. 

That is why the balance could not come by the time we are dealing with this Budget. I recommend a reprimand to that particular accounting officer and the vote holder but we cannot say today, which is the day we are passing the budget, that we do not pass the Budget. When do we do it? The record is clear that these issues have been captured. Can we now move on with these matters, please? Leader of the Opposition.

8.47
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I like the spirit. We will definitely go through the process, sooner or later. However, for the record, this is the list of appointed accounting officers who will handle these trillions of shillings, presented by the minister right now, for the Financial Year 2018/2019. The same individuals who the Secretary to Treasury recommended that they should not handle public funds have reappeared on this list. 

For example, the first person on the list is Ms Deborah Katuramu of the Office of the President. The Secretary to Treasury, Keith Muhakanizi, recommended that she has failed to account for diversion of Shs 562,856,000. 

Now, if an officer of Government is recommending to Parliament – this letter was written to the Clerk to Parliament - that the following people have issues to answer. This letter was written on 28th March, that please, pass the money but these following people have issues. They are over 200, including all our districts.

The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is: we will pass the Budget well but what are we going to do about these individuals who the Secretary to Treasury is crying foul about that they should not touch public money? What do we do? We need to be advised. You cannot send a leper to sell meat; so, we need to be helped here otherwise there is nothing that will stop this Budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this letter was written in March. In my office, I have been receiving responses from the accounting officers who have been mentioned. They have been submitting. Some of them were mentioned in error and some had issues that had to be addressed. They all submitted responses and I received copies of them. Probably that is why after clearing those issues, their names have come back because it has been a process. [HON. MEMBER: “Lay them on the Table.”]- No, I do not have to lay this on the Table; if you do not trust the Speaker, then you cannot even trust yourself. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and we represent people. We would like to be privy to that list because this is public money. If there is any correction, we thank your office for receiving those corrections. However, we would like to be privy to that list as a conditional precedent to passing this Budget. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can the Clerk provide those letters that were submitted in response to the letter that has been issued by the Secretary to Treasury? Can the letters be brought? If not all of them, at least bring what is there because I received quite a few of them.

8.51
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to thank the committee and the minister for the job well done. I think we need to be careful in a sense that we should not work so hard to be remembered as a Parliament that focused more on the product and focused less on the process; to be remembered as Parliament that focused more on the destination and focused less on the journey.

Mr Speaker, the role of the Opposition, especially in the Commonwealth setting is to provide alternatives. The role of the Opposition Government globally is to provide alternatives in terms of policy directions and interventions. I am not saying that because this is a constitutional mandate, this Budget has got to be passed in the specified time. However, I still feel that we still have some room to accommodate these very important and critical views in this minority report. I would like to make it clear that I fully support and associate myself with this minority report. 

This minority report is in the interests of our country and Mr Minister and honourable Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, I would like us to give Ugandans an opportunity to make this budget relevant to our national and local needs. Colleagues have been clear that the budget, the way it is, offends our rules and laws. Mr Speaker, the fact is that our budget the way it is contradicts our laws. Before passing this budget, I ask you to look into and consider the following:

We have two forms of borrowing. You will realise that we have domestic and external borrowing. As I speak, we are in a country that is overwhelmed by debt. Honourable minister, the budget report does not mention anywhere our level of indebtedness, which stands right now at Shs 13 trillion. This debt originates from domestic and external borrowings.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about domestic borrowing, we are focusing on borrowing that comes from commercial banks and provident funds. However, we also need to recognise, as a country, that we have the private sector that is naturally supposed to look at the commercial banks - (Interruption) - Commercial borrowing from commercial banks and also provident funds. 

Like any other country, we have the obligation to ensure that the private sector grows. There is no way the private sector is going to grow, honourable minister, as long as Government is competing for the same breasts. It is like a man in a home; you have twins who are struggling with you to suck from the same breasts. That is where we are. We are not growing the private sector because of domestic borrowing.

Honourable minister, we need to give our fellow citizens an opportunity to smile and survive. Basically, I will focus on the teachers, the health workers and officers and men in uniform. This budget has no place for them and yet we are struggling to understand why we have multiple murders around the country. Partly, some of the suspects are known to be demotivated military or security forces but this budget does not cater for them.

SAGE

Honourable minister, when you presented your statement, I also had the opportunity to sit in as the Leader of the Opposition. My request was very clear that this budget should give the Ugandans an opportunity by rolling out SAGE in the entire country in this budget. I encourage the minister of finance that before we pass this budget, he should try to assemble his resource capability and find the other balance that will enable SAGE to be rolled out in the entire country as a gift.

In the health sector, Shs 6 billion is to focus on seminars, workshops and meetings. Mr Speaker, I ask that this money should be reallocated to cater for utilities in hospitals - (Member timed out.)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure states that anything that is not provided for, the Speaker may prevail and provide an alternative. The rate at which we are moving, we need to get an interpreter for my boss, the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

We are debating a national budget and people are following. Unfortunately, even Members in this House are not following because they do not understand the Leader of the Opposition. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance whether it is possible to get an interpreter in order for us to understand the Leader of the Opposition? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution allows this Parliament to use two languages; English and Swahili. The honourable member who is standing in for the Leader of the Opposition was speaking English. (Laughter) English is the official language of this Parliament. Therefore, if you have challenges, that would not be within the rules to cover you. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I request that this budget also gives Ugandans the opportunity to have, for the first time, safe drinking water countrywide. We are in a situation where we have communities that have enough water for animals but there are communities where the people do not have clean drinking water. I ask that this budget caters, for the first time, for clean and safe water covering the entire country.

The policy statement from the Ministry of Education and Sports asked for Shs 5 billion to help the procurement of lightening arresters for lightening prone communities. 

Mr Speaker, you may have noticed that this was not reflected in the budget and yet this country continues to lose school-going children and Ugandans under something that we can check. Therefore, I would ask that the Shs 5 billion needed by the Ministry of Education and Sports for the procurement of lightening arresters or conductors in lightening prone communities be reinstated and be found.

We have brothers and sisters that live around conservation communities; they borrowed money from banks to undertake large scale agriculture and what happens is that the wild animals come and destroy all the crops. Prof. Ephraim Kamutu, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities presented to this particular committee Shs 50 billion to cover the entire country for the electric wire fence. I am sad to observe that the budget again has not considered it.

In other words, Ugandans are going to continue suffering in debts because of wild animals that destroy the plants. I request, Mr Speaker, if it pleases you, that the Shs 50 billion needed by the tourism ministry be found and included in this budget so that we have an electric wire fence to cover the conservation communities. I can see the minister nodding. Thank you.

Lastly, the reason we can’t breakthrough as a country is because we target after failing. You cannot solve a problem when you have no idea. The universities are known – Mr Speaker, as a law professor, you are aware more than anybody in this House that innovation and research and development are like twin sisters. For you to be able to get development, you need to have made a significant investment in research and innovation.

Mr Speaker, your fellow professors and scientist at Makerere and other universities have the knowledge, skill, resolve and determination to generate knowledge for us as Government to use for -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to conclude.

MR KATUSABE: Yes, I am concluding, Mr Speaker, by saying that this Budget should have a specific research and innovation fund that will be utilised by scientists in different universities in our country to generate knowledge, which will guide interventions to that effect. 

Lastly, I propose the reallocation of the following: The Shs 7 billion allocated to the Uganda Human Rights Commission to build a home should be reallocated to health and education. I also propose that the institute of technology and communication in Uganda as proposed is not a priority right now. We should move that money and reallocate it to agriculture.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity and I would like to ask the minister that please, you are aware that the money that was supposed to help the municipality roads was moved for the reason that does not justify those that need them. This is a House where we have colleagues that represent municipalities. They need the roads network for them to have progress in their communities and I ask that money should be reinstated for the municipality roads.

Classified expenditure: It is a pity that every time we are confronted with the challenge of classified expenditure, - classified in the sense that we are not even supposed to ask where it is going - all we have to do is to make sure we say, “here is the money”. However, we are also aware that it is the primary mandate of this Parliament to make sure that we monitor expenditure of all Government monies. Why should we continue supporting or funding classified expenditures when we cannot monitor it? 

Therefore, I want to appreciate you for the opportunity and I ask that before passing this budget, this minority report should be realigned and relayed to fit into the main report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS NABAKOOBA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson or the honourable minister regarding the wage of the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA). During the presentation of the policy statement, we made a recommendation that the NIRA wage should be enhanced up to Shs 20 billion. However as we speak, the wage has been reduced by Shs 12 billion.

We all know that wage is statutory and they have created a deficit. These are Ugandans who are already working and have appointment letters. I would like the honourable chairperson to explain what happened to the decisions of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was an issue raised about the accounting officers.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Your office availed us with an additional list of over 25 accounting officers that had complied with the query raised by the Secretary to Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi. 

We want to be on record to thank the Secretary to Treasury; he has of course had his rough share of this Parliament but in this particular case, it is good to give credit where it is due and thank him for taking the initiative to write to the Clerk to Parliament asking Parliament not to give money to certain accounting officers.

We have inspected the list; however, those that are pending,  we request the minister in the course of next week after the budget process is done, to keep replenishing Parliament with the list because they were over 200 accounting officers. It is in our interest that they should account for all those queries. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, we are more than ready to proceed. 

May I now therefore move formally that you put the question and we go to committee stage? I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will deal with the other issues at another stage. I now put the question that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the harmonised figures for votes for the Financial Year 2018/2019. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will suspend the House for 20 minutes. There are figures that are not properly harmonized. We will come back in 20 minutes. Please bear with us. House is suspended for 20 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 9.12 p.m.)

(On resumption at 9.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed. The chairperson and the minister are not yet - Hon. Ssekikubo had something to say.

9.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was closely following the deliberations in this House. I commend your resilience and steadfastness as well as that of the Members of Parliament.

It is not always easy when we have deadlines to beat like it is today but I am glad to report that I see Members in high spirits and ready to supply the budget. I thank you.      

9.39
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that we have made some progress as a country but I will not be very quick to cheer. 

There are some glaring issues which I feel we may need to address more comprehensively. The process has been so condensed that there are many issues which are going to slip through the cracks. Some of the concerns which have been raised are matters which, as a nation, we must take extremely seriously. 

Matters on education have been highlighted and have been captured but at the end of the day, some of them may not please the Government in the sense that the priorities that Government has put did not fall in line with what many Members felt on matters of equity.

Furthermore, the focus on education is something which we must take extremely seriously. In my opinion, the greatest resource we have as a nation are our citizens. If we do not invest in providing our young people with the necessary knowledge and skills, we will be left behind.

I was recently involved in a training programme in Lira Town College and what was on offer was a computer course. In the four days within which the course was supposed to take place, there was no power. Furthermore, the school only had four computers two of which were functional but without power, there was nothing for the students to get a hands-on experience. As a nation, we should really look at touching on the technology to be able to enhance our potential.

My prayer to the Government is that in future, matters of education must be handled to ensure equity. We should also prioritise agriculture in the next budget rather than cut it.  Otherwise, we may not be able to meet our deadline and complete the budget process. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

9.43
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in congratulating you for leading us thus far. I am very confident that we will complete the budget process in time.

Generally speaking, human endeavours are never perfect and so, although our budget is not perfect, I think it is good and I am glad that we are moving forward to dissolve this House into a Committee of Supply so that we beat the deadline.

I thank you for your leadership and I thank all the Members who are here for hanging in there and making sure that we do live to our obligation. I thank you.

9.44
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I hope I have no interpretation to be made. I rise to share a few ideas around budgeting and micro-economics strategy thinking. 

When you listen to the debate on the budget, one thing that comes out very clear is that our domestic debt increases every year. This year, we are proceeding to Shs 14 trillion in terms of domestic debt. We are on perpetual debt redemption, our interests are increasing.

Honourable minister, we cannot have a development agenda in this economy based on deficit financing every year. We need to ask when the Government of Uganda can begin to have bigger ideas in terms of balancing our budget. The budget report paints a very painful picture looking at how the interest is increasing in trillions. The operations of the Treasury are very dangerous. 

What strategies do you have that in future we shall begin to reduce domestic debt to allow the economy to grow in a normal way? That is what the ministry should engage in. If you look at the recurrent expenditure which is Shs 16 trillion, the interest payment is Shs 14 trillion. If you look at the balance, only Shs 2 trillion is left for service delivery. At the end of the day, the package looks good but the haemorrhage is too high and that is my biggest worry. On the other hand the balance of payment is in a mess.

Honourable minister, this is a take home assignment in terms of bigger strategic thinking on how the micro-economic agenda for this country should be reframed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are faced with this situation because we have not respected the provisions of the law. This applies to the ministers responsible for finance and the sector ministers who should have interfaced with the committees to deliver this output in time.

We have been running over all issues. The Budget Framework Paper was brought in time, on 21 December 2017. It should have been brought on 31st December so this was a bonus that was given to us. However, when it was also brought, it did not have the certificates that were required to accompany it. We lost time also on that because I had to convene this House on a Friday for two minutes to allow the minister to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance, which is a requirement by the law. These requirements are actually listed in the law.

Therefore, there is absolutely no reason why you cannot, over the time, develop a checklist of what must accompany which document at what time. The law was generated by the ministry of finance and it was hardly amended by Parliament in any substantial manner. This is the third year we are implementing this law so we should have shown signs of being more resilient in terms of complying with the law. 

When we came to the ministerial policy statements whose date of submission is known, we waited up to the last day of the law before we started bringing documents that looked like research papers for senior six students; spiral-bound documents being brought to Parliament. Then you eventually withdrew them. The date is known and even as I speak, the date is known for when the next set of ministerial policy statements should come. Why should we wait for timelines to pass? 

The budget is supposed to come to Parliament with the Appropriation Bill with all those things listed under the law. The sections and the lists are there; so, why should we make these mistakes? That is why we are running into this kind of problems. We delayed the committees, which also have their own processes. 

I also have no kind words for our committees that could adjourn because the ministers have not come. If the ministers do not show up, come and report to Parliament that they did not show up by attaching your recommendation of the document that you already have such that we proceed. This is what is making us come to where we are. 

I could not even begin to imagine how today we are still talking about documents that should have accompanied the budget and the list of accounting officers, and all these other documents that are supposed to have been attached. Honourable minister, you are the ones who listed them. 

Then there is a new animal called “Corrigenda” – No, the supplementary is different – this is the biggest problem because after you have submitted your budget with the Appropriation Bill on 1st April, it means that you have told Parliament what to deal with. Two weeks after the committees have started handling it, you come with Corrigenda 1; that sets back the entire committee because they have to look at the figures in relation to their sectors and see how to fit it in. Then corrigenda 2, 3, 4 – I do not know how many came this time. They are combined with addendums and others; we are running out of the words to describe the kind of things you do. 

The last one came last week. How do you expect the Committee on Budget to go back on what it has already done from the time of the Budget Framework Paper? You are presenting corrigenda in the last week of the month in which we should pass the budget to be considered by the Committee on Budget and the sector committees. It has affected the Ministry of Health because some of the adjustments you made in the corrigenda, the committee had already finished and submitted its recommendations to the Budget committee. It was not even brought to their attention that such corrigenda would affect the budget of the health sector. The same thing applies to the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs. 

Why do we do this, honourable minister? I wanted to say this immediately we finish with the budget but looking ahead, the issue of corrigenda, addenda and others after you have already submitted the budget to Parliament should not be entertained. It jeopardises the procedure and messes up the figures. 

The reason they are running around to balance figures is because even as of today, some figures were still being brought from the Ministry of Public Service – today! Honourable minister, please help this House and the people of this country so that we deal with issues that we can predict and be certain about what is going to happen. 

If you did your bit to at least a week before, the committee on budget would be ready. In the past, they would come and report, we would tell them to go and see if they could still find money for this sector. Those time allowances were there but now, everything is like this. Sadly as I speak, the figures are not ready for supply. Honourable minister, the figures are not ready for supply and you are responsible.

9.54
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I apologise. It is not my tradition to do things shoddily but this time round, we got so many activities that caused some distractions to some of us and we did not pay attention to the way the job was being done. I am being very sincere and for that matter, I would like to apologise to you, Mr Speaker, and to the House. I would like to promise that next year, we shall do much better than we have done this year. 

I would like to also take this opportunity to say that those accounting officers that have been found wanting will be deleted from the list. I am sorry that we have not been able to do our things as we should have but I hope you understand. Next time, we shall do better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember one time President Museveni was talking about some actions of politicians and he said that he does not understand why we do even the bad things so badly –(Laughter)– this was to emphasise how bad it is. 

Honourable members, we are unable to proceed to the Committee of Supply, unfortunately. Can we agree to meet tomorrow at 10 o’clock to supply and finish with the Appropriation Bill? 

Honourable members, section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act states, “Parliament shall, by the 31st of May of each year, consider and approve the annual budget and work plan of Government for the next financial year, the Appropriation Bill and any other Bills that may be necessary to implement the annual budget.” That is the command of the law - by 31st May. That means we can pass it even earlier than 31st.

Now you are forcing me, against my will, to resort to subsection (2), which provides, “The Speaker may extend any period for consideration and approval of the annual budget by Parliament for a reasonable period.” This reasonable period must be based on a reasonable reason –(Laughter)– not just any reason. However, the reason I have is that I am not ready with figures to supply and therefore, we will not be able to do the appropriation. 

Therefore, by the prerogative provided to me under section 14 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act, I am extending the period provided for 31st by an additional 24 hours to enable us finish with these processes tomorrow. It will not exceed tomorrow. We meet tomorrow at 10 o’clock. House is adjourned until tomorrow, 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 9.59 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 1 June 2018 at 10.00 a.m.) 
