Wednesday, 31 May 2006

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I want to take this opportunity to thank the two committees, which we set up, for finalising what they have been doing that has enabled us to convene again. I thank you for the diligence you have exhibited in attending. However, let me note that one of the sides has exhibited some bit of comfort. I think we shall have some time to share it. 

2.32
CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri, FDC): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we are in this institution of Parliament, our well-being and our security is entirely your responsibility as its head. The relevant institutions like the Sergeant-at-Arms are assisting you. But of late, we have noted that Parliament no longer enjoys that prestigious position, even including in this Chamber. Strangers keep coming from time to time, checking every part in these Chambers and the corridors of Parliament. We wonder whether the office of the Sergeant-at-Arms has failed in its duty or found himself incompetent. Has he sought external support and aid? 

If it is the latter, we as a Parliament would wish to be informed so that when we see strangers in the Chambers and in the corridors of Parliament we then know that these are people rightfully deployed and doing their work under your administration.  Mr Speaker, I would wish to be clarified on this matter because many of us now move with a lot of fear. We do not know who is who and that does not put us in a settled mind, in order to execute our duties

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is the first time I have heard about this. I will investigate and take necessary action.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE

2.35
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Omwony Ojwok ): Mr Speaker, on Thursday, 18 May 2006, this House considered a motion moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige, Member of Parliament, Bunyangabu County, in relation to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in the following terms:

“WHEREAS Parliament has resolved that Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be suspended to enable the Rules of Procedure to be amended; 

AND WHEREAS it is necessary for the President to appoint ministers to be approved by the Appointments Committee of Parliament; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient having regard interalia to the fact that Uganda has adopted the multiparty system of government to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament relating to the composition and functions of Standing Committees of Parliament; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That Rules 126, 127, 129, 131, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143 and 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be amended.”  

The House having debated the motion agreed that the committee be set up to review the amendments to the Rules of Procedure authored and provided by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.  Subsequently, the political parties concerned nominated members to this committee –(Whereupon Mr Frank Tumwebaze entered the Chamber through the main entry_) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am very conscious that Parliament has not conducted induction for the new Members of Parliament.  I am reliably informed that maybe some members were not there during the small induction we had and we appreciate the challenge that we all face when we are in new places.  There are some ethics and code of conduct that must be observed wherever you go, be it Europe, South Africa or even Middle East. One of these is the use of the Chambers.  

Mr Speaker is it in order for a Member of Parliament, hon. Tumwebaze, to access this Chamber through the main entry, which is a preserve of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Definitely, it must not have been intentional.  He did not know but now he knows. Let us give him that benefit of doubt. I think he and others have learnt.  

MR OJWOK OMWONY: Mr Speaker, this might have provided us a slight minute of light entertainment. Let us get to more serious business now. I was interrupted at the point when I was explaining that during the debate the House agreed to set up a committee to review the amendments to the Rules of Procedure.

Subsequent to that, the political parties concerned nominated members to this committee. I am happy to report that hon. Ben Wacha, who was the Chairperson of the Committee during the Seventh Parliament, was designated by the Speaker as a member of the Committee. 

During the committee meeting, which first took place on 22 May 2006, hon. Omwony Ojwok and hon. Ben Wacha were elected as Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson respectively.  Honourable Okulo Epak, James Kakooza, Prof. Ogenga Latigo, and Kassiano Wadri appeared before the committee and made presentations, which we duly considered.  

Mr Speaker, during its deliberations, the Committee referred to a number of important documents. For the benefit of new members, it is important that we make clear what these documents are. First of all, we had the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in the red book, which was used during the Seventh Parliament. There were also the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure and those are contained in the blue spiral bound book, which was availed to all of us during the swearing in ceremony. This is essentially going to be our bible in the sense that it is these Rules that we shall be amending. From time to time, we shall be making reference to the previous book. We also considered amendments proposed by the various sides notably the NRM side, the FDC and a few individuals who made written presentations.

The Committee took note of the contents of the Rules that we are making reference to because they appear to have been included in the package that we received. The committee took note of the contents of the Rules of Procedure provided in these, as well as the proposals that the committee have looked at.  The result was that it reviewed every Rule and adopted proposed amendments wherever they were justified.  

The deliberations of the committee were generally very cordial and decisions were arrived at by consensus. I think colleagues from all shades of opinion who were in the committee will recognise the very amicable atmosphere that characterised the deliberations of the committee.  

I would like to come to some general observation on the most salient issues that the committee considered important. To a very great extent, the committee adopted the draft Rules of Procedure proposed by the Seventh Parliament and part of the reason was that these were a result of very extensive consultations including workshops, seminars and meetings.  

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the committee that prepared this draft document.  As I said before this committee was chaired by hon. Ben Wacha. The committee appreciated that these Rules were drafted to facilitate the transition from the Movement political system to a multiparty system.  

The committee took further cognizance of the constitutional amendments, which were effected last year. I am happy to remind you that these constitutional amendments are contained in the Constitution that was given to Members during the swearing in ceremony.  

The following were the main issues that the committee recognised:

1. 	Swahili as a second official language: It had been proposed that Swahili be used as a second official language during the proceedings of Parliament.  The committee considered the proposal very carefully and noted that Swahili could only be used as a second official language in Uganda in circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe.  Under those circumstances, therefore, that Parliament has not yet prescribed such a law; the Committee felt that English should continue to be used in Parliament. 

2. 	Creation of the office of Assistant Speakers: Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure proposed that the Speaker be mandated to appoint 2 Assistant Speakers from the Members who shall preside over sittings of Parliament.  Whereas the committee noted the justification for this office, it was noted that the constitutionality of this office could be questioned.  The committee did not feel it appropriate to go along the path that would generate constitutional debates at this time when we have so many things to do.  Therefore, it was suggested that this matter be revisited in future as part of the constitutional amendment exercise.

3. Sitting days of Parliament: The committee upheld the proposal that the House sits on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. The committee felt this proposal commendable in a Multi-Party Parliament where time must be set aside both for government business and for private members business. More sitting days will enable us to transact both tides of business effectively.

4. Sitting arrangement in the House: The committee observed that ordinarily - I underline the word “ordinarily” - the Leader of Government Business and members of the party in government shall sit on the right hand of the Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition and members of the opposition will occupy seats to the left hand of the Speaker. It was agreed that Independent Members of Parliament have a free choice of either side of the House to sit after notifying the Speaker accordingly. The phrase “after notification” is very important. We want an orderly House where debates will be conducted in a peaceful environment. 

	In that regard, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that today, there was a newspaper report, which claimed that the committee had taken a position about one member of this House. This may have been reference to discussions that were going on, but the authoritative decision of the committee is the one reflected here, namely that the two sides will be taken by the respective positions, and means will be made to practically ensure that people occupy the right seats in the right places.

5. 	Weekly Order Paper and Statement of Business by the Leader of Government Business: Here, Mr Speaker, there is a slight innovation. The committee observed that hitherto, business of the House has been conducted in an adhoc manner, sometimes leading to inefficiency. A remedial strategy to address this problem is the institution of a weekly order paper. This will enable members to be aware in advance of the incoming business and prepare accordingly. It will also assist the public; it will assist the media and enable a more effective method of managing our time. 

	This strategy is further augmented by the fact that the Leader of Government Business will be required to make a statement in the House on the last sitting day of the week regarding the Government Business of the succeeding week. Under this new arrangement therefore, the Clerk of Parliament shall now be required to avail members with the daily order paper at least three hours before a sitting. Moreover, distribution of documents will be through pigeonholes and not being put on the table where sometimes members miss very important documents and therefore fail to contribute effectively. So, documents will be put in the pigeonholes and all the accompanying documents related to the business of the paper will be included in this arrangement. 

	The committee further suggested that in future electronic means of distributing documents be explored urgently in order to reduce costs. We are in the electronic age. Websites must be opened up, the Internet must be utilized; too much paper shuffling is totally unnecessary and totally costly for nothing. This will also encourage members to jump into the electronic age.

6. 	Types of committees. In addition to select and adhoc committees, the committee approved the establishment of standing and sectoral committees. The sectoral committee is a new innovation, which we shall explore later. The standing committees mandates are already outlined in the Rules of Procedure, the sectoral committees will monitor and evaluate policies and programmes of government sectors, departments, portfolios and the term of standing committees as proposed by the Rules Committee is that it be reduced from five years to two and a half years. We shall go into the details later. Whereas the term of sectoral committees will be for each Parliamentary Session, which means, therefore, it will be annual subject to a member being appointed; but that is a separate issue.

7. 	Composition of committees: The committee adopted the following general principles to govern the operation of all   committees. This is the meat of the committee’s work. 

(i)	That as far as possible, the overall membership to Parliamentary committees shall reflect proportional representation according to the numerical strength of the parties in the House. 

(ii)	As far as possible, representation in any committee will take into consideration the interests of Independent Members of Parliament; they are elected, they represent constituencies and are recognized in the Constitution. It is the case that except where law prohibits it or where the relevant law or treaty predetermines the composition, the interest of Independent Members of Parliament should always be taken into account. We want to involve all of us.

(iii)	Apart from the business and appointment to committees which are chaired by the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, all other committees shall elect their chairpersons and deputy chairpersons amongst their members. But in the case of certain committees there are provisions, which we shall come to later.

(iv)	Membership to committees will be through designation by the parties through their respective whips. 

(v)	Parties shall have power to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees. We are in a party system now, therefore parties must have the power to designate and withdraw.

vi) Apart from the Budget and Business committees, Standing and Sectoral Committees will have 20 members each.
vii) A member can only belong to one sectoral and one Standing Committee.  This is from the previous Rules of Procedure.
viii) No member will chair or deputise more than one committee.  Give room to others also.
ix) Any member is free to attend the proceedings of any committee but will not have a right to vote where he or she is not a member of that committee.  So the door is not locked, you can still attend the proceedings of any committee that you wish, the only thing is, you will not have a right to vote.  You can speak with the permission of course of the Chair and the members of the committee.

In addition, it was agreed that in order to enhance the system of accountability, four committees shall be chaired and deputised by members not aligned to the party in government. The four committees are:

a)	Public Accounts Committee
b) 	Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises
c) 	Local Government Accounts Committee and finally,
d) 	The Committee on Government Assurances

Mr Speaker, we proceeded to look at the establishment of three new committees.  Recommendation was made to the committee that given the magnitude of the workload of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Social Services during the seventh Parliament, it is necessary that these committees be broken up in order to enhance efficiency and effectiveness.  It is therefore proposed under these rules that there shall be a committee specifically to handle Presidential Affairs.  

Similarly, another committee will handle Foreign Affairs, details of what is contained in each of these committees; their mandates will be discussed later.  In addition, there will be a committee on social services and another on Labour, Gender and Social Development.  

It is further proposed that a new committee to be known as Information, Communication and Technology be created to cater for the new ministry that is due to be established by the Executive.  Here Mr Speaker, we must say that we shall be significantly guided by the exact title that will be given to us by the Appointing Authority.

The committee strongly recommends that Parliament through the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline conducts a review of all the committees.  It was actually found that the previous experience and the current situation are not the same.  There maybe a need to review these committees; the numbers, the exact names, their terms of reference and mandate and so forth; but this could not be accomplished by the committee at this stage.  So we recommended that the coming committee looks into this matter further.  

After the completion of the review exercise, the committee on rules should be able to recommend to Parliament the optimal number of committees specifying the types, having looked at the areas in which they overlap and harmonise their roles with a view of saving costs, because these things have costs.  We must be always conscious of this.  

The committee received a proposal for the establishment of two new committees: One, to deal with Millennium Development Goals and conflict management and resolution.  In the course of discussions however, attention was drawn to the apparent gap in parliamentary supervision through committees of international treaties, protocols and so forth, which have direct economic significance such as NEPAD and others.

However, these proposals came too late and the committee therefore, brings them to the attention of the honourable House with a recommendation that during the review exercise, these proposals could also be considered. 

I come to issue number nine, the Appointments Committee.  While deliberating on the Appointments Committee, it was agreed that it be chaired by the Speaker or Deputy Speaker as the case maybe at any given moment as has been the practice in the previous Parliaments.  It was further also agreed that its sittings should be closed.  It was further agreed that the only ground for disqualification, please take note of this; the only ground for disqualification of a nominee maybe evidence to satisfy the committee that the nominee does not possess legal qualifications, not academic alone; but all the legal qualifications relating to the situation for the holding of that office.

The committee also looked at the role and functions of the whips, which is of course an innovation in the new Parliament.  The committee in fulfillment of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act of 2006 provided in the Rules of Procedure for the roles and functions of the various whips in Parliament and this is referred to in subsequent items; item 12 of pages 9 and 10 of the proposed amendments.  

The removal of the President and censure of the Vice President:  The committee while deliberating on the removal of the President and the censure of the Vice President observed that some provisions were inconsistent with the Constitution and accordingly these were deleted.  We shall give you the evidence or the information further in items 31 and 32 on page 13.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee carefully reviewed the proposed rules and enriched them. We hope we enriched them with various amendments to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of Parliament to suit a multiparty system. I beg to move, therefore, that the House adopts this report together with the proposed amendments. I thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I want to thank you, chairperson and members of this committee for this report. There is a minority report honourable chairperson.

MR OMWONY OJOK: Mr Speaker, indeed in the documents that we have circulated there is an attachment of a minority report and that attachment speaks for itself. I commend the minority report for the consideration of this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is authored by hon. Ekanya. Can hon. Ekanya present the minority report, please?

3.07
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my chairman, hon. Omwony Ojok. I will present the minority report and will highlight some few inconsistencies to what we agreed. I hope the members have realised that maybe during editing there were some inconsistencies.

THE SPEAKER: You just read your minority report and then we shall –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. This is a minority report on the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by opposition Members of Parliament to the report.  

Whereas we as Members of the committee largely agree with the committee’s report and the recommendations, we propose some amendments as outlined in this minority report:

Leadership:

It is a fact that provision of the leadership of the oversight committees has been assigned to the opposition. If that be the case, it is only natural that the general rule related to the election of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of the committees be allowed to apply here. The mandate to provide leadership should be given solely to the opposition without government MPs being in any way involved in that choice.
  
Mr Speaker, honourable members, we insist that a provision be made thus the proposed amendment is our position. “The opposition parties shall through the opposition chief whip appoint chairpersons and deputy chairpersons to the four oversight committees.”  

Mr Speaker the Commonwealth multiparty parliamentary practice and the law related to parties place the parliamentary oversight functions squarely in the hands of the opposition. Parliament must give them the freedom to play their role in the best interest of the country. In this regard, our parties have noted an attempt now being made to give anybody not aligned to the government party. This undermines the rights of the parties in Parliament and we strongly disagree with it. The responsibility for the opposition in Parliament must be left in the hands of the opposition as recognised by the law. 

We are now operating in a multiparty Parliament and the basis for multiparty system is sponsorship of candidates; the fact that candidates hold seats in Parliament on behalf of their parties. The law recognises only two sides in Parliament, the party in government and the parties in the opposition. The issue of independents must only be addressed through these two sides and we are committed to that, Mr Speaker. 

The responsibility of what the opposition must do in Parliament must be left in the hands of the opposition as recognised by the law. As responsible and patriotic people, the opposition will handle the matter through dialogue and in the best interest of Ugandans and all concerned parties including independent Members of Parliament.  

Secondly, in the Ugandan first post independence Parliament, control of Public Accounts Committee was fully ceded to the opposition. Thus in the Standing Order of the Legislative Council, it was provided on page 24, under Rule 76 as follows: “There shall be a Sessional Committee designate, the Committee of Public Accounts whose duty shall be to examine the accounts showing the appropriation of the sum granted by the assembly to meet public expenditure and to report thereon to the Assembly.”

Mr Speaker, the committee shall consist of 13 members appointed by the Assembly on the substantive motion at the commencement of every session of whom not more than five shall be nominated from the government of the Assembly. Thus we propose the opposition party shall have the minority members on all the four oversight committees.

Mr Speaker, during the first multiparty system in this country, in the 1960s, we only had PAC as the oversight committee and UPC by then had a minority representation. This minority report is signed by Geoffrey Ekanya, MP, Tororo County, FDC member and hon. Obua Ogwal Benson, MP Moroto County, UPC.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have received these reports: a report of the committee and a minority report. Of course there is an attachment of the amendments that are proposed to be effected in our rules. The motion was to adopt a report and therefore, you are free to make comments if you have any and then we see how we proceed. [Mr Ekanya rose_] Is that how you intend to proceed? But you are a member of the committee; you have presented a report. Why don’t you leave others to –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the committee, I signed this report but there are fundamental inconsistencies and I want to know whether really we all did agree. For example, if you permit me, there are about five - if you look at page 5, paragraph 1, we added we added a committee to be known as Information, Communication Science and Technology so that science is given a home; I think this is what we agreed upon; we did agree that science be added here.

If you look at paragraph three, on the same page, we did agree that international treaties protocol has now a home under foreign affairs. So it is not that it will be considered, but we said this would now go under the new committee of foreign affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So chairman, are you suggesting that we accordingly amend the report to insert these omissions?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, there were definite omissions. I am fully in line with what my colleague is saying. The only issue we were talking about with regard to the international treaties and protocols are those of economic nature like NEPAD and COMESA. There was an idea that they should be put under the supervision of a committee in Parliament that has got economic muscle in terms of economic theory in knowledge experience. Otherwise, I fully agree. 

3.16
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for an excellent report. I just have a few observations for purposes of clarity. One is on page two of the report. I notice that on page one, the paragraph reading, “Now therefore be it resolved by Parliament as follows: That rules 126, 127, 129, 131, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143 -” and on my page there is 135, do I assume that you meant 145 or is it 135? Because when I looked back on the page, it seemed like the sequencing of numbering would suggest 145. That is for clarification.

Second, Mr Speaker, on page 3, the creation of the “Office of Assistant Speakers,” I want to hear from the chairman whether the notion that the Speaker of the National Assembly, when elected should not seek re-election to emphasis the neutrality of your position and impartiality of being a referee to be subjected to the same kind of things that we go through would weaken – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No that is really constitutional; it cannot be catered for by the rules.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you for the clarification.  The second clarification I am seeking is in paragraph 3.3: “sitting days of Parliament.” would it not have been clearer if the chairman mentioned the times or is that not important?

THE SPEAKER: I think he will come to the details; this is a report. When you come to the details, these are the amendments, which you are going to effect. The report is just showing you the principle behind the suggested amendments. So now the kind of debate would be on the principle itself. We will come to the details when we have got the details. 

I think for your first inquiry, it was history; he was referring to what we did before we set up the committee. There was a motion, which was brought here to suspend those provisions, to enable us set up the committee, which has produced this work. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for that substantive clarification. Another point is the reference to the word, “opposition.” The word “opposition,” in English language means “obstruction, hostility, adversary, conflict or quarrelsome.” May I therefore suggest for purposes –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this will have to go in the law. There are laws, which we passed, which are not the rules that gave this nomenclature. So should we want to change, then we have to revisit the law; but now we are dealing with the rules.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Well, I go by your guidance but I thought referring them as “minority parties” or “parties not in Government” would have been more decent than – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But we have the law. The law is superior to the rules; we might have made a mistake, but “opposition” is now the term we use.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you once again Mr Speaker. On page four, now I notice that the chairman has made two categories of committees, one is a standing committee and the second one is a sectoral committee. The standing committees by previous meaning meant that it was standing throughout the life of Parliament and every session - when you change to sector, even standing committees cover sectors because a sector is a branch, a sector is a yield, there is an overlap between standing and sector, unless we get another word that would distinguish - that would make categorization. 

If the previous meaning, “standing,” meant all the way, and “sessional” meant just every year, you are sitting as a Parliament, but the substitution of sector does not really bring out the fact that even a standing is covering a sector of the subject. So I wanted a clarification from the chairman on that point.  

Two more points Mr Speaker then I will resume my seat. One is on the proportional representation. The mathematical calculations of proportional representation would be more meaningful if we brought in at least a sentence to say: “any party whose numerical strength is less than 0.5 percent of the total shall not have membership on the committee.” In other words, you should at least have 0.5 for you to round up. If it is not 0.5, to round up you might say, we have a proportion, which must be recognized in the composition of the committee and for avoidance of doubt, we should put a sentence to ensure that for you to have membership, you must have numerical strength that comes to 0.5 percent of the total sum.

Lastly, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Again, honourable member, that will come up when we deal with the details of rules. I think you have made a point, but it will come up when we are dealing with the rules; what we are discussing now is the report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for the very good report produced. I have one area of concern, which I would wish to draw to the attention of the chairman, that is on page 5, last paragraph, where the committee says that it received a report about the need to establish yet a separate committee to take care of the Millennium Development Goals.

Mr Speaker, my own understanding is that, the Millennium Development Goals are sectoral in nature. When you are talking about HIV/AIDS, it is sectoral, when you talk about improvement of life, it falls under health, when you talk about education, we already have a sector for that. So, is it really necessary for this committee to bring again an obvious thing to us for further deliberation when actually they could have rightly apportioned the relevant development goal areas under the respective sectoral areas? I wish to be clarified on that Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on bullet 3.9: Appointments Committee. There is where the deliberating on the Appointments Committee was agreed that it be chaired by the Speaker/Deputy Speaker as has been the practice in the previous Parliaments. 

It was also agreed that its sittings should be closed. But it is on the last sentence that I need some clarification, because when we recently passed the Access to Information Act - I need a clarification from you- don’t you think this undermines Article 41 on the rights of access to information in our Constitution? Because in 41(2) it provides that: “Parliament shall make laws prescribed in the class of information referred to in clause 1 of this article and a procedure for obtaining access to that information.” Do you mean that this is part of the information prescribed under that act? I need clarification from you chairperson.

3.27
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, Mr speaker.  I wish to thank the committee for doing such a good job in a very short time, and I strongly want to recommend and support the proposal the committee has made or the introduction of the Committee of Conflict Management and Resolution.  

Mr Speaker, you recall that in the Seventh Parliament, Parliament has been grappling and struggling to make a contribution towards conflict resolution. But not much was achieved until you used your good Office to send a delegation of Members of Parliament to go to Kitgum to see for themselves the plight of the people in the North and to make deliberations that would make a difference and make a contribution. 

You also remember that, when we were paying the last respects of the former Head of State, Dr Milton Apollo Obote and His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni stood on the Floor of this House and made a commitment, which I feel we would put-up a committee that would monitor and engage into constructive engagement with the public in ensuring that we minimize conflicts in this country. I strongly support the creation of this committee.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there has been a big gap like it was noted on the issue of inter-face, between Parliament and the monitoring of international treaties. 

Mr Speaker, last week I had an opportunity to represent you in Cape town, in a AU seminar and one of the draft resolutions that was coming up is that, it was recognized that there has been an apparent laxity of many national Parliaments in monitoring international treaties through, which a lot of commitment of funds and relations are done; and one of the draft resolutions that was adopted in Cape town was that, there must be increased participation of the Parliament of Uganda.  

While I was there, the representative from the European Parliament - from the Danish Government, volunteered to send to Parliament of Uganda, through me, all the protocols that have been entered into for effective monitoring and supervision as a Parliament. 

But under what respective committee of Parliament would this be monitored? When we talked about NEPAD, the contact person of NEPAD was the honourable minister for information. When minister for information was appointed, his deputy hon. Kabakumba took over as assistant. She has now been appointed as minister and their needs to be a contact person. All these are good arrangements, but they have been adhoc. It is important that we actualise it through a responsive committee that would make a constant follow up so that Parliament can be appraised and informed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the members of the committee for the work well done, and in the same spirit I want to support the position by hon. Dombo. 

Our country has signed many of these treaties but they have remained at the level of the ministries. They are even very obscure at the level of Parliament. The Rt. Hon. Speaker and Members of the Seventh Parliament can recall that the only time we get to discuss the details of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and NEPAD is when the Minister of Finance organizes workshops; a two days workshop with so many documents that we are supposed to look at and then make recommendations.

So, Mr Speaker, I believe that a substantive committee on (MDGs) and NEPAD and all those other treaties, will help us in many areas, one of which is to popularise these initiatives. 

Secondly, Parliament plays a representative role and in that way, it will help us to advocate, mobilize and provide leadership at Parliamentary level. 

Thirdly, for the role of legislation, when we are equipped with information, it will help us to make sound legislations that will be directed to the concerns of the people, and in this particular area where MDGS are focused. The oversight role will help us to monitor and evaluate how far government has gone or how far we have gone as a country in as far as implementing these programmes is concerned.

In any case, it is Parliament that controls the budget process. It will also help us when we get the necessary information, to get the feed back because when I get the information in MDGs, I will go back to Nakaseke and put it in that language, the people of Nakaseke understand and it will help me as a legislator to get feed back from the people that these programmes are intended to benefit. 

So, I strongly believe that we need a committee; it will help us to understand the intricacies of these initiatives and it will boost the present capacities that we have.

Lastly, it will ensure sustainability of these programmes. I, therefore, call upon you honourable members to consider putting in place a committee that will monitor and further equip this House on such issues. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I just want to agree with my colleagues, hon. Namayanja and hon. Dombo that the new partnership for Africa’s development is of particular importance and is really going to change the political, economic and social face of Africa. It is so fundamental and I recall that when I was still on the Backbench I did make efforts to introduce and seek the support of Members so that we put our teeth into this matter of the new partnership of Africa’s development and there was not very much that was forthcoming. 

Mr Speaker, I just want to urge Members to accept that of all the initiatives we have now, NEPAD is number one because its potential to change the entire face of Uganda is enormous. I, therefore, do want to suggest that honourable members accept to have a special committee on this subject.

Can I also say, Sir, that when you look at Parliaments not only in our region, but the entire continent, ours is lagging behind on this particular matter and I just want to commend Members that the committee is set up.

Let me also say something about paragraph 37 of the composition of committees, which is talking about the Committees of Public Accounts, and that of Local Government, Commissions and Government Assurances. I am quite curious to know, because I do recognize that among some of our Independent Members of Parliament there are some very brilliant brains that have contributed immensely to the way this Parliament has operated, but I am not quite sure and I have in mind with due respect, Dr Epak and hon. Wacha, these are some of the Members that have distinguished themselves. I am quite anxious to see that we capture them on some of these committees.

Lastly, I know Sir that (ii) is talking about taking into consideration interests of Independent Members of Parliament, but who is going to ensure that such Members are captured on these committees? Thank you, Sir.

3.36
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only two areas of concern that I would seek clarification on, on page 3, paragraph 3(1). 

The use of Swahili as the second official language; if you read the middle sentence carefully it says, “The Committee considered this proposal and noted that Swahili can only be used as a second official language in Uganda in circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe.” I would imagine that this would be a second thought and Uganda has sent to the East African Regional Organization in Arusha, an Assistant Secretary General on first tracking of this programme. So it would in a way mean that we want a speedy regional federation. If we are considering Swahili as an after thought, we would be doubted on our commitment because this is already one of the languages –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the problem is that when we made constitutional amendments last year this issue came up and it is in the Constitution that Parliament will make a law concerning what circumstances Swahili would be used. So what he is saying here is that now that the law has not prescribed circumstances as yet, you cannot make a rule to say that Swahili shall be used when the circumstances have not been set.

MR ODIT: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I hope we shall move fast enough to respond to the requirement.

My other concern is on page 5, paragraph 3.9 - the last sentence. It seems the committee had some fear being expressed here, which we did not understand. It was further agreed that the only ground for disqualification of a nominee might be evidence to satisfy the committee that the nominee does not possess legal qualifications. What is the other requirement that they wanted to avoid, which would lead towards disqualification for a nominee? This is one thing, which I wanted to understand. Thank you.

3.39
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine was also on 3.9. What hon. John Odit has just talked about looks like the committee wanted to prescribe the role; to specifically give the Appointments Committee guidelines on how to perform its duties. It looks like this particular sentence is either trying to target some individuals or to help individuals. So I would like to know from the chairperson the harm in leaving the committee with the power to do its work the way it feels right?

3.41
MR NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee. On page 4, 3.7(5) says; “Parties shall have the power to withdraw and relocate Members from individual committees.” Who will have powers to withdraw and relocate Independent Members?  

I have another issue, which I want the committee to help mw with. On the issue of the sitting arrangement, the committee left it to the individuals to decide. What happens if I decide to sit this side today and tomorrow I sit on the other side? What actions do you take on such issues?

Another point, which I wanted to raise, is about the issue of the committees. There is a need for more committees because of some work coming up. I want to ask the chairman, supposing these specific issues were known and assigned specific committees, will it not be handled rationally through them instead of creating committees here and there every now and then?  

Finally on representation of members to the East African Legislative Assembly and Pan African Parliament, the committee is talking about Independents also being represented but how will you go down in the market, because the people going to East African Legislative Assembly are coming from outside there? How will you know that this person who is coming from out is an Independent whereas we know very well that in Uganda we have gone multi-party? 

Mr Speaker, I think we made a law concerning parties. It would be very important that we promote the idea of parties and that is the only way, unless we put up parties without an intention of maintaining them. Thank you.

3.45
MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on pages 3 and 4, that is, the sitting arrangement in the House. It is not clear to me as yet why we notify the Speaker as to where we should sit. 

I am a very important Member of Parliament, a very important opposition member indeed in this House, and it is the moment when I decide to sit on your right that I cease to be in the opposition. But if I am on your left, I am seriously an opposition member of this House. If you surrender your position to the left and sit on the right, then automatically you are NRM; and while you have become NRM, the opposition Members of Parliament must question it. 

So, let it be very clear because it is bringing confusion in this House and the confusion, which when I decided to stand Independent of my party and against the NRM, I think there were reasons for that. If I am notifying you, it means I should surrender in totality and then I cease to be in the opposition; that is very important.  

In that respect, it brings me to a minority report signed by hon. Ekanya Geoffrey and hon. Obua-Ogwal Benson. On page 4 there are four committees that will not be chaired by the party in power: the Public Accounts Committee, Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, Local Government Accounts Committee and Committee on Government Assurances. This idea of appointments even as far as ministers are concerned will be elected. If the Chief Whip of the Opposition is going to appoint, what will happen to us who are on this side who are not opposition? How are we going to get a chairperson in one of the committees, because it is not clearly spelt out? 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think this should be addressed to enable Independent Members of Parliament to also hold on to the seats. That is my concern. Thank you.

3.48
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to speak. I am sorry that I used your door, I did not know. 

I refer you to page 5. I should thank the committee for the good work they have done in a very short time. Page 4, 3.8, which will lead us to page 5, there my concern is about the establishment of three new committees and it suggested that the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee be split into two distinct committees. I support that because indeed I believe they are distinct; Presidential Affairs have their own mandate and Foreign Affairs can also have its own comprehensive mandate. I think the Committee on Foreign Affairs will have more to do with foreign policy, issues of international relations, conduct of diplomatic practice and compliance with international treaties. What then would be the rationale of proposing another committee on international treaties? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.50
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of Members who have thanked the committee for the work done in a short period. 

I have one thing to note on page 3, on the issue of sitting days. When you look at the proposal made by the committee, they suggest sitting from Tuesday to Friday but I am of the view that we leave Friday out so that it gives Members enough time to travel to their constituencies, more especially Members who come from constituencies, which are far away. You find that that day is always used to travel and on Saturday you can be in position to move through the constituency. 

The constituencies also need us and we need to nurse them because if you travel on a Saturday, you have less time to interact with the people so you find that you have less time because Sunday is always a day for worship. So I would propose that we leave Friday out so that we are not limited by the time we have to move out to the constituencies.  

Mr Speaker, I would like also to thank the committee for the proposal concerning the creation of new committees but I am of the view that we rearrange some committees like the Committee on Natural Resources. When you look at that committee, it is really so big. It has very many ministries in it, including Energy, Mineral Development, Water, Lands and Environment, and it makes it look so bulky. I suggest that we at least rearrange and form a committee called Lands, Housing and Physical Planning, because when these three are related, they directly impact on the economy. 

Let Lands, Housing and Physical Planning be together and Housing be in the Committee of Works, which has three components: Works, Housing and Communications; it looks big, looking at the status of development of this country. I think we need to have good monitoring that is why you find that am I bringing in physical planning. You find that physical planning is always buried in these other committees and it is never given priority. 

I think it is high time we put physical planning at the forefront so that it is monitored very well to reduce on the growth of slums in this country. That is why you find that even Kampala is having very many areas, which are developing slums because there is no clear focus at the moment on physical planning. I think if we need to create this committee; this will help us –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Tubwita for giving way. The information I would like to give to hon. Tubwita is on page 19 of the report. Page 19, under paragraph (e), actually what hon. Tubwita is requesting for is captured there under the re-arrangement of that committee and renaming it Physical Infrastructure covering Lands, Housing, Urban Development and Works. Thank you.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, for that information. I am grateful if it is covered but I would request that at least the name Physical Planning should come out directly in this proposal, perhaps as urban development. We can make it more comprehensive because physical planning does not only look at urban development, it can go on growing even to rural areas because rural areas at times turn up to be urban centres. So, I would propose that at least we make it broader to cover a larger area by making it a physical planning proposal. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, but I request that my proposal be put into consideration. Thank you.

3.55
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for the report. But I would like to get some clarification, regarding the new committee. 

I think the phrase “sessional committee” is befitting because we have one session of Parliament, which elapses for almost one year and if we call it “sectoral committee” it does not reflect the session. So, I suggest that we amend it to our former sessional committee. 

Then, on the new committees, I am happy that Social Services have been broken into two: Social Services, and Gender and Development. Mr Speaker, I would like to amend the name of this new committee called Gender and Development. I would like it to encompass some other marginalised groups. If you look at our national objectives, we say that the state will have fair representation of gender and other marginalised groups. So, it is not proper to put only gender while the other marginalised groups are not considered, for example persons with disability, minority tribes and other people who are marginalised because of history. So, I would like us really to amend that one to cover all other marginalised groups. 

Mr Speaker, my second concern goes to the timing of our sittings here. I think for us who come from very far, as far as Koboko, we take one day to travel from morning up to evening; then you take one day for coming back. I suggest that we leave Monday and Friday free so that we can adjust our timing for the three days because definitely you cannot manage to travel and attend a session here. Maybe when we are coming to discuss the detailed rules I would like to know also the time of sittings here –(Interruption)

MR KABA SALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ekanya raised the issue of ethics in the House. Is it in order for some Members to sit as if they are in their dinning rooms, like hon. Lukwago?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thought I pointed out that I saw a lot of comfort on this side –(Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, I was worried, I thought you were ruling me out of order. Mr Speaker, I think the timing when we are to starting and ending Parliament must be reconsidered - when we should arrive to Parliament, when we are to travel from our homes, and so on.

Then there are women here who are Members of Parliament but they are very young; they have families - they have children, so we need to know when Parliament is ending. If it is left open ended, we may go up to 10.00 O’clock and it will create problems in our families. When we discuss this rule by rule I will be able to give you the appropriate time, which will suit the women who need it.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for suggesting that this document should be circulated very early. I am a victim - when the documents are circulated here in the House my guide outside there cannot sit to read through for me - while other Members are reading very fast with their eyes, I cannot read. So at least if the documents are supplied two hours earlier, I can read outside with my guide and know what is there. I am also begging Parliament to transcribe some few things like the Order Papers in – it is not very expensive so that I can also read some of the reports and Order Papers without begging some people to read for me in the House. Thank you. 

4.00
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to page 3, the sitting days of Parliament. First of all I would like to agree with hon. Baba Diri about Parliament being user friendly to women. Although some Members might not take that seriously, but definitely we have some young women here whose lives and families are affected by time. We have had cases of women whose homes have broken up because of work in politics. If that can be considered, I think it would help women quite a lot.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to assume that we all need to be able to predict the times we are supposed to be here. We can then organise our lives and fit in other activities that we do. While I appreciate fixing sitting days, I would also like to see sitting hours. We can say that we normally sit between 2.30 to 5.00 or 6.00 or whatever time. If we are not sure that Parliament sits from 2.30, then we are not able to fix other activities that demand our attention in the hours of the morning. I, therefore, would like to request or to suggest that we fix the sitting times as well. If there is a special need for Parliament to sit in the mornings then we can always adjust to your call, Mr Speaker. 

Thirdly, establishment of three new committees –(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for some Members of the Opposition to have their phones on ringing and –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is out of order. Members, please switch off your mobile phones.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on 3.8, the establishment of three new committees. While I agree with the proposed new committees, I think it would be an exaggeration to establish a committee on millennium development goals. As much as we know that it is important, it is divided within the different sectors. We have these goals in education, health, infrastructure development, social development and everywhere. I think those could be catered for there. 

And about these treaties, since we are going to have the Foreign Affairs Committee, they could be taken care of under the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Lastly, you cannot have a committee to cover NEPAD. It is a programme of the African Union and there are so many other programmes that will come and go. We cannot have committees that are overseeing a framework or a programme.

Mr Speaker, I am also aware that these committees once established have monetary implications. Out there the public is already making noise about how much money is spent on Parliament. I think these could be adjusted in such a way that we have a new committee on foreign affairs, separate from presidential affairs, which can take care of international committees and so on. I thank you.

4.06
MR STEVEN MUGENI WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): My concern, Mr Speaker, is on the minority report. When you look at the minority report, there is a section that says that the opposition parties shall, through the Opposition Chief Whip, appoint the chairperson and deputy chairperson. If we take it like this, it is introducing an element where the party is trying to say some people are not qualified and others are qualified. However, a Member of Parliament qualified to be on a committee is qualified to chair a committee. It introduces an element of seniority and generality, which is a bit unfair. I think this one should be left out.

THE SPEAKER: I think I can venture an explanation here. The minority report is saying that since we have agreed that the chair should be taken by somebody from the opposition side, the choice of the chairperson should be by the party rather than the committee itself. We have earlier seen instances were it says the leadership of the committee shall be democratically set up by the entire membership of the committee. In this particular case, the minority report is suggesting that we leave the choice of the chairman to the whip. I think this is what he is trying to say.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, if that is the case then the word is not “appointing” but “nominating”. The two are not the same. You nominate and after nomination it is understood but the whole process of composition of committees of Parliament must be done by Parliament itself. We cannot appoint. That is the clarification I thought –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the intention here is that the committee should have no business in selecting the chairman. It should not have any part to play. The whip would just say they have chosen so and so to be the chairman of that committee. Whereas the main report is to the effect that the chair should be reserved for somebody in the opposition, the members themselves should participate in deciding from among the opposition who should be the chairperson.

MR MUGENI: Mr Speaker, it should be left to the committee to elect. That is democracy. It can be taken by a member of the opposition because they are all qualified and they all belong to the opposition. 

My supporters from Samia-Bugwe were wondering whether I was going to chair the Local Government Public Accounts Committee –(Laughter)- in order to check on some of the opposition civil servants. When you look at the civil servants and the underlying principle, you cannot assume that all civil servants are pro-government. 

In fact, the truth of the matter is a number of civil servants are not pro-government. We have several town clerks who are actually anti-government and they are going to meet an opposition chairperson. When you assume that every civil servant -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I am well informed. You will find that many of the civil servants may be in the opposition. It also explains why the Government is losing in urban centres.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I did not want to disturb my brother from former Bukedi but we amended the Constitution and even in the Political Organisations Act, civil servants are supposed to be apolitical. Is my colleague in order to insinuate that some civil servants are NRM, some are UPC? Is he in order to insinuate and violate the provisions of the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you did is to give him information about where he should check and then change his view.

MR MUGENI: Mr Speaker, my concern is the assumption that the civil servants are mainly pro-government and yet it is only the opposition, which can check on the civil servants, whereas the reverse was true. That was my concern. Thank you. 

4.11
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I want to first of all agree with my honourable sister who talked about No. 3 on page 3, the sitting days of Parliament. I just want to recommend as she did that being the representatives of the people, it is good that we should have at least one working day in a week when we can travel back to our constituencies in order to keep in touch with the constituencies. I want to recommend that if it is agreed by all Members, Friday could be dropped out of the sittings in Parliament.  

The other point that I want to also recommend is on page 4, the establishment of three new committees. I just want to say that Parliament should also consider adding another sectoral committee to monitor or supervise the Commonwealth conference, or at least add it onto the issues that are being attended to by the Foreign Affairs Committee. Parliament will then have a role to play in the preparation of the Commonwealth conference. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.14
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, 3.1 on page 3 of the report; we amended the Constitution and made a provision for Swahili to be a second official language as you correctly said a little while ago. We recommended that Parliament in certain circumstances will prescribe a law that will operationalise that provision in the Constitution. I want to invite the entire House to quickly create these circumstances, to have a law that can operationalise the use of Swahili in this country. 

Some of you who lived outside Uganda especially in the East African region like you, Mr Speaker, hon. Kawanga and hon. Nasasira who studied outside, I am sure you make a very interesting appreciation of leaders when they are addressing their people. In Uganda if I go to Teso, Gulu or where –(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, you have quite ably told us that we are not deliberating the details of this report. We are handling the basic principles of the report. The honourable members and my dear honourable colleague seem to be debating the details already. May I request that you guide the House once again?

THE SPEAKER: I fear being repetitive but I said so. However, I think he was talking about the importance of creating circumstances under which we should promptly use Swahili. 

CAPT. GUMA: Yes, Mr Speaker, that is all I was saying. The circumstances should be seen to be now or in the very shortest time from now so that we can put a law in place to operationalise that constitutional amendment. This comes especially in light of the fact that we are going into a possible East African Union. It is extremely important. You go to Teso, Gulu and address our local people in English as if we are colonial governors! I find it extremely bad, especially more than 40 years after independence.

I absolutely concur with those colleagues who have talked about Friday being part of the legislative work here. We should not forget that we are largely community leaders. Apart from our historical legislative duties here, we are also community leaders in our respective constituencies. If we do not go to the constituencies as often as we should, I can assure you in 2011, for those of you who may be having ambitions of returning, you will have trouble. 

MS MATSIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to inform my honourable colleague that Friday is a worship day for some Members of Parliament and also a big section of our community. We should also honour such a day as we have done to Sundays and Saturdays. I thank you.
 
CAPT. GUMA: Thank you, hon. Winnie Matsiko from Rukungiri. 

Lastly, still on page 3, I want to thank the committee for proposing the last paragraph under this new arrangement. I want to thank the committee for making that proposal of availing the Order Paper at least three hours before the sitting so that Members can know the business that is coming. Those who are interested in going into research or coming here to discuss issues and content can have sufficient time to go and read. 

At a later stage when we go into the details, I will probably move an amendment that the Order Paper is here by 10.00 O’clock. If my political assistant can come and pick it and bring it to me wherever I will be, I will be able to see what is on the Order Paper, delve into the subject matter and come here at 2.30 p.m. when I am informed legislatively. Thank you. 

4.20
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): I have just a few comments. One is on the creation of new committees. There is a tendency for very high fertility, with many committees being suggested. I just want to comment on the one on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). One of the concerns raised by some Members was that Parliament is not sufficiently involved in the monitoring of MDGs. Look at the different goals - poverty and hunger, primary school education, gender, child health, maternal health, HIV AIDS, Environment, technology and partnerships - all of them are catered for by various sectors in government and these sectors are catered for by various committees of this Parliament. The government is required to produce a report on MDGs every two years. 

What happens is that the various sectors prepare the reports, which are then synthesized by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I propose that we do not require this committee. The various committees can link with the sectors and then the overall production of the report is done by the committee responsible for the Ministry of Finance. It can then participate at that level.

My other comment was just a clarification on the proposed Committee on Conflict Management and Resolution. I do not know what the proponents exactly want this committee to do. Is it within the perspective of this Parliament or they are trying to look at emergency and humanitarian settings like Northern Uganda? I would like to know so that we appropriately rename it.  

My last clarification is on the minority report. Hon. Ekanya kept referring to the law but he did not cite which law. The interpretation now is that the Independent Members of this Parliament are not legally part of this House because the law only allows the Opposition and the Government. In other words, he is trying to block the Independents from chairing these oversight committees and yet the Independents are not NRM. So, unless you cite the law, your argument -(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you my honourable colleague. The information I want to give to the honourable colleague is that we are being governed in this House by the provisions of the Constitution. The Constitution established the political system under which we now operate. It is a multi-party political system and, therefore, the recognition that exists even in this House is of practice not individuals. First and foremost, it is of parties. The party can actually recall you from the committee or assign you to a committee. If it thinks you have breached their rules, it can expel you from the party and you lose your seat. That is the law. 

We are also confronted with the reality that we provided for people to stand independent of parties. They do not have to be sponsored, but once they are in Parliament obviously they will have tendencies. We have seen tendencies here and we recognise these tendencies. I am giving information. I do not know whether it is procedurally right to clarify when I am giving information. 

Basically, the issue of dealing with independents will depend on what type of independent. An Independent can be on the government side or on the opposition side. The basis of the argument is, first and foremost, there is an official opposition recognised by law, which is mandated to act with the party in power in Parliament. However, we would like everybody to understand that we recognise our responsibility to the whole opposition. We do not want you to suggest by legislation that we shall be irresponsible to those with whom we share common thinking on many issues.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition for your information. I think you are wrongly interpreting the law. If an Independent Member sits here, it does not entitle him to a membership card of the NRM. The same is true for whoever sits there. It is just for convenience in Parliament. That interpretation makes your argument incurably defective. My submission on that point is that I do not accept the argument raised in the minority report.

Lastly, I want to support my sister from Ruhama on the need to have Parliamentary involvement –(Interjections)- she is my sister. Okay for clarity, my sister hon. Janet Museveni. I want to support the need for Parliament to be involved in the arrangement of the Commonwealth conference. Maybe we can just have an ad hoc committee for that since it is a one time event.

MRS MUGISA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some supplementary information to give to the honourable member on the Floor. The first point he raised was about the Millennium Development Goals. He said that if you look at the Millennium Development Goals there are quite a number that are not core under any ministry covered by the committees of Parliament. If you look at the line-up of the committees and what they handle, there is no committee specifically handling global partnership, which is one of the first things in the Millennium Development Goals. 

If you look at Uganda’s overall development strategy, it is poverty alleviation. If you look at the NRM manifesto, which all of us here are implementing including FDC, we are looking at prosperity for all. I think poverty alleviation should be under a specific committee not really a committee on its own. I am opposing the idea of the Millennium Development Goals being a committee. Substantially perhaps they could go under the Ministry of Finance but as a core subject of that committee. I thank you.

MR BARYOMUNSI: I think that was supplementary information. If you read carefully, MDG no.8 is about technology transfer of knowledge partnership, which the new committee on ICT will definitely cater for. Even when you look at the various quantitative indicators for it, I think it covers that.

4.29
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I would like to address issues on point 3.8 regarding the creation of a new committee on international treaties, protocols and even conventions. I am in total support of this. I support the previous speakers, hon. Namayanja and hon. Dombo.  

My worry straight away is the way we are qualifying this to deal with those treaties, which have direct economic significance. First of all, we have not been having committees on these important conventions and yet Uganda is signatory to many of these conventions, some of them have even been ratified. Some of them may look as if they are not of economic importance but if this committee is given a chance to look at them you might find that you identify more of these. I propose that we adopt the principle that this committee is set up and it is left to their discretion to look at all these. It will be able to decide on which of those may even require domestication in our national laws. That is my proposal, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MRS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to discuss these matters. I first wish to congratulate the committee for presenting a report that is very comprehensive and is not drawing so much controversy.  

I would like to draw this House’s attention to page 5, the Appointments Committee. When the appointing authority appoints anybody they are actually making a public statement saying, “I am appointing so and so, I know them, I believe her or him to be an ethical person, an upright person, a person of integrity, a person who can do this job.” It is actually a public statement when the President appoints someone. He or she sends that person to the Appointments Committee to verify what he believes the person to be. That is in effect what it is. It says, “This is what I believe of this person, Appointments Committee, please confirm it or give me more information.” 

Mr Speaker, I would like to know, based on that my belief, the rationale for one holding it as a closed session. Two, why do you need the committee to box itself to only concern themselves with matters of legal competence?  

I would also like to draw the attention of this committee to the minority report by Mr Ekanya and hon. Benson. I would like to urge this House –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am a member of this committee that has presented the report. There is a typographical error that we had adjusted: instead of “legal qualifications” it should be “qualifications as prescribed by law”; in other words it is very broad. All qualifications in statutory requirements, the Constitution and other relevant legislation would be evoked in appraising a person for a post. In other words, we are not tallying these qualifications. They are actually not legal qualifications. One does not have to be a lawyer, for instance, to qualify. It is “qualifications as prescribed by law”.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, when you read the Constitution they say “so and so must be of integrity and that is a qualification”. If integrity was mentioned as a qualification for the appointment of somebody, the committee should look into the evidence of integrity or lack of integrity then there can be qualification. Being a graduate is another qualification. So this is an all-embracing term where all requirements as by law are considered by the Appointments Committee. They wanted to economize on their words by saying this and then subject to interpretation.

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Ruhindi Freddie. In that case the whole of the second paragraph is irrelevant because it says “the only ground for disqualification of a nominee”. If the only ground is as broad as you say, I would say that maybe this paragraph is irrelevant.  

Having said that, I will take you to the minority report. I would like to urge this House to support the President’s expression, if not intention, to crack down on corruption. If we are really going to support the President’s expression during his swearing in speech to crack down on corruption, I think we should seriously consider making the committees that are intended to be supervised by the Opposition exclusively supervised by the Opposition. If that is supported by everybody, in my opinion it will go a long way in supporting the President’s intention to crack down on corruption. When corruption happens, all of us from both sides of the House will walk with our heads down in shame. If we can have a strong will to crack down corruption then we should take the minority report very seriously. Thank you very much.

4.37
DR WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This being my first time to contribute in this House, I would like to use the opportunity to congratulate you on your appointment to the high office of the Speaker of Parliament and to congratulate your deputy as well. 

I would like to make one observation on the new committee that has been suggested, the Information Communication Technology Committee. Mr Speaker, information technology is a current development. Even if science were mentioned by one of the honourable members, I think the original Standing Committee on Science and Technology would have been upheld. 

If we are just putting science as a sideway on this committee, it will not cover the areas which the original committee would cover. Science and technology would have been appropriate instead of Information Communication Technology. This is a superfluous use of words because in science we are covering all biological sciences as well as natural sciences. In technology, the House will be recognising a technological development in our current setting in the 21st century.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that instead of putting in this new committee on Information Communication Technology –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not my habit to disturb the honourable Professor when he is giving his maiden speech. However, the chairperson of the Rules Committee, which I happen to be a member of, told this august House that the working documents are the red book, the rules of Parliament. There is also the blue book, which contained many amendments and some other documents.  

The committee of Science and Technology is already provided for under the standing committees. What is being suggested here, as an amendment, is a committee on ICT as a sessional, or what is being called a sectoral committee. Is the honourable member in order to presume that there is no standing committee on Science and Technology when actually it is properly provided for?

THE SPEAKER: This should be in form of information to the Member about the existence of the committee. I think he is satisfied that there is a Committee on Science and Technology.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think it may be an oversight. I thought this was a committee going to replace the Committee on Science and Technology. If that was the case, it would have been a very serious oversight. 

As it is a sessional committee, Mr Speaker, I think it may not even be necessary because of the new Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology. I do not think it would be prudent to establish a new committee for that ministry alone. Whereas we have actually -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Information was falling under Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. We have heard the explanation that they have realised that the Presidential and Foreign Affairs committee is a big one and they are splitting it. These ministries require a sessional committee to deal with a number of things concerning the ministry, for instance, the budget, policy matters and so forth.  

If the Presidential Committee were split then where are you going to put Information and Technology? It is a new ministry and they think that Parliament should supervise it by having a sectoral or sessional committee, as the case may be. It needs a committee to process its budget to look into its policies and so forth.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is that Information, Communication and Technology cuts across all the committees. I think honourable members will agree with me. I think we will discuss this when it comes to debating. I am just making an observation.

The other observation I would like to make, Mr Speaker, is on appointments. In my view, when His Excellency, the President sends in his nominees, it may be useful for him to indicate portfolios to the Appointments Committee. In addition to qualification, the committee can then advise His Excellency, the President on the suitability of the nominee to that portfolio. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe as Chairman of the Committee on the Appointments currently, I will comment. I have also picked, in papers and on radios, the issue about the President indicating the portfolios when he sends the list to the Speaker.  If this has to be the case and he says X should be Agriculture, it would mean that if we approve him because we think he is suitable for agriculture, the hands of the President will be tied. The President would not make a reshuffle to move somebody from Agriculture to Works, for example. 

The work of the Appointments Committee is to consider the suitability of a person to be able to carry out political leadership of any ministry they may give him today or next time. If you adopt that, it would mean any time he wants to change or appoint a minister to another ministry, he will have to come back to us to verify. That is the reason why he does not attach portfolios when he sends a list to the Appointments Committee.

4.46
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise also to extend my appreciation to the committee for this role well done. I, however, have a few comments to make. 

On page 4, point 3.8 mentions the establishment of new committees. Mr Speaker, I am worried. Too many committees are mushrooming. I see that this could be the problem. It may be that the load Members of committees have been experiencing could have arisen from the commitment of Members to attend committee meetings. I draw an example from this very report, the last page, where Members appended signatures. It does not mean that this was the only day they had to attend. Over eight Members of the committee were not here to append signatures on the work the committee had to do. I understand we can do all this work the committees have to do if the commitment of the Members is checked to attend to the committees’ programmes.

Mr Speaker, I am worried about the financial implication of these committees. In this multi-party Parliament, I know very many Members would wish to be placed here and there and have offices. If we had the ordinary committees and the commitment of Members of the committees to handle the business and the programmes are checked, I do not think these many committees would have a role to play.

Mr Speaker, now I will take you to page 4, point 3.7, on composition of committees. There are provisions here that may look an insult to Independent Members of Parliament. The 7th Parliament enacted laws, providing for the existence of Independents and so the 8th Parliament would harmonise the roles Independent Members have to render in this multi-party Parliament as so is done. If Members say, Independent Members, as independent as we are, we should not be doing such and such roles, this defeats my understanding and credibility as an Independent Member of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, whereas we say Members are independent, very many Members of Parliament convene meetings in parties. Others did not even return cards. Some of them were saying, “I am both, I am everything” during campaigns. Two Independent Members have been appointed and approved as Members of Cabinet. Therefore, Independents have some role to play and others have alienation to parties. We do not have to suspend some of the roles Independents could do in this House because we came as individuals. This is my worry, Mr Speaker.  

4.51
MR MICHAEL NYEKO OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are making these Rules of Procedure, I implore Members to focus more on the functioning of Parliament. How are we going to have this Parliament to function for the next five or so years, rather than trying to move into our own affiliations? If we make these rules lousy, then this Parliament will fail to function and we shall fail to deliberate correctly for this House.

Mr Speaker, I got up on the issue of Independents. When we were making the electoral law regarding the matter of Independents the other time, it was passed unopposed. However, it came to a point whereby they say, “No. It is a constitutional right” and that is how it entered into the electoral law. But in particular, if you are looking at where we are now and where we are moving, we are getting organised in as far as the politics and policies of this country are concerned. It is thus very important that we strengthen the functioning of parties within this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, we are not saying the Independents are useless. We hope that over time, they will finally evolve and join parties so that the House is more organised under parties. The parties are not organised on just electioneering; it is about policies and programmes for government. If you are in government, you support government programmes. For us in opposition, we check bad government policies, all for the good of this country. 

The issue of the Independents performing the oversight function may not be reliable. We have already seen within one or two days the behaviour of some of the Independent Members. They have already moved and joined government. How are you going to entrust a Public Accounts Committee, a Local Government Accounts Committee to Independents who are also eyeing the government side? Any time they will cross to the other side -(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to focus on the committees you have talked about: Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts and Government Assurances.  These are clearly standing committees and when you go to the genesis of these committees, you realise that they are professional committees. I think that even if I am in Government, I need to be checked.  The work, which is checked, must be professional.  That is why Rule 132(5) of our Rules of Procedure says: “Parties shall take into consideration experience, interest and qualifications of individual Members while recommending them for membership of committees.” 

I think that does not mean only people in opposition. Government is a general concern for all of us. If you checked me, there would be nothing wrong, professionally. That should not be a worry of the opposition because my government would also like to improve for the good of this country.  

MR NYEKO: Hon. Kakooza, I thought you were adding knowledge in the clarification but sincerely I have not gained anything from that information. I raised this matter because a colleague talked about the Independents being allowed to chair these committees. I am talking about checks and balances in our system.  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have 35 Independent Members of Parliament. They have the mandate of their people to come here and do work. In respect of these committees, one of the qualifications for chairing is that a Member should not be aligned to the party in government. You said that there are some Independents now who are in the Movement. If they are, then they will not qualify because of this particular disqualification.  However, the question is, should we completely exclude these Independents from this category? I think that is the issue. Forget about those who have aligned with the government.  

MR NYEKO: Mr Speaker, all that I am emphasising is that it must be a prerogative of the parties to either choose that such and such an Independent Member will chair and we know he will not disappoint us. But we also have to consider how the Independents came up: was it because of ideologies or was it because of political survival? If you look at the composition, let us face facts, most Independents either lost in primaries and went ahead to contest, or had no room in their parties. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that I did not lose in the primaries neither did I go for the primary elections. I decided to stand independently. So, it is not correct to say that we who went Independent could not find space in parties. Therefore, if you are talking about Independent Members, I think we must be very careful. I have decided to be on the opposition side. If he is talking about the Member who has left the opposition because of his independence, then I think that one is clear.

MR NYEKO: Mr Speaker, let me conclude. As I said earlier, I think the details are coming. Maybe we shall finalise when we have the details.  

Finally, the essence of belonging to a political party is being disciplined by a respective party.  We have already gone ahead to provide in our rules that the parties could withdraw or reallocate people to a particular committee. Who will discipline Independents or withdraw them from committees? Therefore, I implore Members that when we come to the details, we be very objective. Let us see how to accommodate our Independent colleagues. Thank you very much.

4.59
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to address myself to paragraph 3.4 on page 3 as well as paragraph 3.7 on page 4. I will start with 3.4 about the sitting arrangement in the House. I notice that this clause captures only two sides: the Leader of Government Business and Members of the party in government shall be on your right hand side, and the opposition on the left hand side. The Independents are given the opportunity to choose on which side they want to sit. However, I do not see how the Members of UPDF are catered for here. They are neither Independents nor Members of political parties. So, on which side are they going to sit?  

Mr Speaker, the last time we were here, we got information that they are here on deployment and that they probably sit on the other side.  However, that would mean that they have become partisan, that they are Members of the party in government. That would absolutely be unconstitutional.  

Another thing, which is related to the above, is in paragraph 3.7 still on the representatives of UPDF –[Rwamirama: “Point of information”]- Mr Speaker, I reserve the right to reject the information.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The armed forces and the civil service are supposed to support any government that comes to power. This is not an exception. I do not see why Members are bothered as to where UPDF should sit when the rules provide that they could sit anywhere. Sitting on the side of government is normal. It is like breathing. They must support the government in power.  

MR LUKWAGO: I appreciate the information given to me but I implore my honourable colleague to look at the provisions of Article 208 of the Constitution, which –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue came up when we first sat here. The problem as you will appreciate is the configuration of the Chamber here. We have only two sides. We do not have another slot where these Independents or UPDF would sit. Therefore, they have to be accommodated in the limited space we have. If UPDF said, “We should be neutral and we want to sit on the opposition side” somebody might say they are no longer neutral because they are in opposition. I think we should not care where somebody sits. As I said before, swimming in a lake does not turn you into a fish. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that the honourable member raised is really in respect to protecting the interest of UPDF so that they are not misunderstood. It is true they are not obligated to sit on any side. But if we put in our rules that since they are not partisan they are free to sit on any side of Parliament, when they sit this side nobody says, “You have now crossed.”  It makes them free –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Should I repeat what I said?

PROF. LATIGO: He is suggesting that if that could be put in the rules to protect their common interest.  

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you for that information, the leader of our government -(Laughter) - and I will rest that point –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You may lose your seat. (Laughter) 

MR LUKWAGO: No, Mr Speaker.  Only one aspect on paragraph 3.7 in regard to the same matter but in a different context. Here we are talking about establishment of committees and their membership. The point we are emphasising here as clearly spelt out in (iv) is, “Membership to committees will be through designation by parties through their whips.” 

Again these UPDF representatives are Members of this House. I am just wondering as to how they are going to be deployed on these various committees. At least Independents could choose to belong to any committee, to deploy themselves but how about these Army representatives? I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think we have extensively held a general debate? I think it is better that we ask the chairman to clarify the points raised. When we go to the actual making of the rules, you will bring all the contributions you have. 

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to sincerely thank my colleagues from both sides of the House for the questions that have come up for clarifications. I read a spirit of constructiveness and I salute you for it.  

Mr Speaker, you have also correctly guided us. There are two sets of issues that have been raised: one set relates to issues of principle; the other set relates to details, which will be answered during the consideration of the specific recommendations of the committee. I would, therefore, like to follow your guidance and concentrate on the issue of principle and any clarifications that may be required will be discussed later.  

There was the question of the terminology “Sectoral”. Why has the committee chosen the word “Sectoral” and not retained the word “Sessional.” During the deliberations of the committee, there were indeed a number of proposed terms to be used. If you look at our term, these were departmental related committees. The idea here was to fix to each of these committees a department or a particular institution within government. This committee is supposed to play an oversight role in relation to that department. 

We could also have retained the word “Sessional” but the committee opted for “Sectoral” because it felt the term “Sessional” was not descriptive enough about the specific role that is supposed to be given to a particular either sector in this case, but you could even relate it to portfolios and you could relate it within that context to the departments. 

Therefore, the idea was to try to make it sufficiently descriptive for everybody including a person who is not a Member of Parliament being able to quickly capture the spirit behind the creation of these committees.  It is in that light that the word “Sessional” was excluded. If you read the report specifically it does talk of sectoral committees, which will be operating as sessional committees. I think that is all I would say as far as that word is concerned.

There was a question about how we measure the proportionality in representation. The committee is specific in talking about numerical strength and numerical representation in the different committees. Therefore, the proportion will be in relation to the number of Members of Parliament as reflected in this House. There involves mathematics. We decided to take a very simple but obvious and almost undeniable method. If the treaty as it is the case for East African Corporation or the treaty establishing the East African Economic Community specifies that there must be representation of various shades of opinion or representation of political diversity, then obviously what the treaty is doing is to say, “Please, do not limit yourselves to political parties.” Those are already provided for in the treaty itself.  

It is like saying, beyond the parties, find the way of making sure that opinions other than those reflected by the parties themselves but which are represented in the Parliament are also represented.  Maybe, this is a question that we shall further explore when we get into the details. The basic mathematical principle here is that where you are talking of at least a certain minimum number, the minimum number obviously is not half a human being. It has to be one whole human being. Therefore, it is that kind of simple but clearly pragmatic mathematics that will be used in this particular case.  

A colleague on front bench on the opposite side raised a point, which I think was genuine that, does the closing of meetings of the Appointment Committee not result in violating the access to Information Act? I am lucky that I was actually deeply involved in the conception and development of that Act, working very closely with my previous colleague hon. Basoga Nsadhu and then later with the colleague holding the portfolio of Information 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you could say hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: I can see a lot of verbal gymnastics being brought out here.  Mr Speaker, the essence of this Information Act is to access information, which is within the government’s discretion. In the past, most of the information was not easily accessible by the public. In this case, the information that we are talking about constitutes discussions, which are actually going to be carried out by the Appointments Committee.  Therefore, the two are not at all in contradiction with each other. 

We could at the right time, when we come into the details, see whether it is appropriate to close it or not. However, in our committee, after due consideration, we felt that the most appropriate thing to do is to close the deliberations of the Appointments Committee.  

The next question, which arose, is who is to ensure the interest of the Independent Members? The details obviously are going to be worked out but the basic principle was that the Independent Members of Parliament would be called upon and I think they have already been called upon.  

I am assured by the Speaker that in fact Independent Members have already been called upon to show their areas of interest in terms of what committees they would prefer to serve in. The idea is for us not to cast things in storm. Some of us talk about Britain as if we have read the British Constitution. I am a student of comparative constitutional systems and I have taught it at university level. There is no book that you can lay your hand on which says this is the British Constitution. You have learned professors and experts who have written commentaries about the British Constitution because it is not written.

I am saying that we in Uganda should learn to get the spirit of the Constitution. What the committee is saying in this regard is that, we could work out a formula through which the Speaker will interact with the chief whips, the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip and the Independent Members themselves. These Members are 35! Ways and means could be devised in a pragmatic way, to ensure that these colleagues who are as Ugandan as any one of us are also represented in the committees. That is the spirit that we had in mind. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Omwony Ojwok. If we are to go by your reasoning, I would like to take you to page 4 of your report, 3.7 composition of committees. Bullet five says, “Parties shall have the power to withdraw and relocate Members from individual committees.” For this case of Independents, who withdraws or relocates them if we are to go by your argument? What is the reason behind that? Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, for withdrawal, Independent Members will withdraw themselves when they wish. This is because Independent Members have no whip. I could give you the information on what has happened on the two committees that have been working since we started. On the Appointments Committee, we have two Independent Members. When these committees were being constituted, the requirement was 20 Members. NRM, the party in government took 14 and the opposition with the greater numerical strength has to be treated differently from other parties in the opposition. They gave four names and two went to the Independents. 

We have to find a way of dealing with JEEMA, which has only one Member, just as CP. What we have suggested is that, they write to indicate their order of preference on the committees they want to sit. For these Independents, that is what we shall do. In fact, the Office of the Speaker will have to take care of these Independents who have no whip. 

However, for question of withdrawing is up to a Member who has been on the committee because he/she whips himself/herself. He says, “I am no longer interested.” He indicates this to the Clerk or Speaker and that will be the end. But for the party, because you have come on the recommendation of your party through the whip the whip could say, “You are no longer functioning properly. Please, I withdraw you and substitute you with another.” I do not think this causes any problem.    

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am quite satisfied with the explanation you have given. I remember when we constituted the two committees, you asked the Government Chief Whip and myself to sit and agree on the personalities of the Independents to serve on those committees. Why did the two of us have to agree? This was because each one of us was suspicious, as it were, of the characters of the Independents -(Laughter)- and indeed, we agreed that since there are two slots for Independents, my colleague hon. John Nasasira would identify that Independent whom he strongly believes will have some lenience for NRM, and I would also be there to identify that Independent whom I know has soft spot for the opposition. 

I thought those were the considerations, which were taken. And if that is the spirit, then we will have no problem in saying that the slot for Independents is say two. The two sides must agree on how to apportion those two slots. That way we will have no problem.

MR JOHN NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, what hon. Wadri is referring to was for the discussions that went on, and were never concluded. (Laughter) We have these emergency committees, which we knew were of a temporary nature, in order to do this work. However, I think the procedure has been set in place to the effect that all Independents will inform the Clerk’s Office about their interests of which committees they want. In the long run, but proportionally to their numbers here, on each committee of 20, two slots will be left for Independents and it will be between the Clerk, with the consideration of the Speaker to handle those allocations on the committees. That is how I understood it during those emergency meetings we had. 

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with my chairman’s principle that we should try as much as possible to cultivate a spirit, which will make us work in this Parliament. I also know that I am here as an Independent Member of Parliament because of a provision in our Constitution which allows me to be here. 

I am as much a Member of this Parliament as any other Member including you, Mr Speaker. I detest the idea that somebody somewhere should sit in judgement over my ability to effectively participate in the proceedings of this Parliament. I, therefore, cannot accept the position, which has been taken by the chief - What do we call him –(Laughter)- what does he think he is?

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I have actually benefited from these exchanges. If you do not mind, we could stand over these and discuss them in detail later. There is only one area where I would like to comment and that is on Rule 16(2) on page 25. This is in relation to the sitting days.

I took note of the fact that Rule 16(2) says: “Subject to sub-rule (4), the House shall sit on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.” We have taken note of the very powerful representations from our colleagues who were really calling for us to appreciate the specific circumstances of: -
•	Our female colleagues
•	Members of Parliament coming from very far off areas, which include myself. It takes nine hours for me to arrive from my constituency. 

But taking note of this, I also realised that under the same Rule 16(3), there is a provision for sittings subject to the directions of the Speaker making the necessary adjustments. I think we could be flexible on this and concede that we delete 16(2) and simply operate on the basis of 16(3). In this way we will be more practical.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall come to this when we get to the details, but it seems there is an indication that we sit from Tuesday to Thursday and leave Members to travel to their constituencies. They then come back to Kampala on Mondays and be ready to sit on Tuesdays.  However, should there be need, then the Speaker could appeal to Members to sacrifice their time and be here. This is how we have been operating. (Applause)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the chairperson to clarify this. Whereas we appreciate the need to create new committees, why didn’t the committee also consider committees where there was overlap and sometimes causing unnecessary confusion? I draw your attention to the responsibilities of the Committee on National Economy.  National Economy is a standing committee. Among other responsibilities, that committee has to approve loans for sectoral committees, which we used to refer to as sessional committees. 

Mr Speaker, you would find National Economy Committee approving a loan without the involvement of the sessional committee that oversees the sector and I found this irregular. I had originally thought that the Committee on Rules would consider otherwise. Secondly, the monitoring: we had a Committee of Finance that was monitoring the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, including other sessional committees. Naturally, I thought the committee would apportion roles: the former to go to the Budget Committee and the latter to go to the sessional committee so that we avoid confusion.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I have been a Member of the Committee on National Economy for the last eight years. I appreciate hon. Rwamirama’s concern and if I remember very well, in the last Parliament you gave a directive that when the Committee on National Economy is handling loans, it must work with the sessional committee and that was the policy adopted. Therefore, I think my brother’s position is not up-to-date. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I was also a Member of the Committee on National Economy and at one time the Budget Committee wanted to swallow this committee. I took the trouble to sit down and academically deal with the matter. I wrote a paper that settled the matter. But the point is that, even those loans largely develop from Finance; sectoral inputs are ordinarily very limited. 

The point is that, at each of the consideration of the loans, you have the loan document; you have the implementation manual and all these large documents. Sometimes we have four or five loans coming to the committee at the same time. If this was moved, for example, to National Economy or to other committees, we would be considering the budget and yet there are always loans that are linked to the budget to be considered.  

You will find that Parliament will run into very serious problems. I think the challenge is for us to make that committee work efficiently so that some of the loans that overstayed - and partly there was the problem of government. You ask for certain critical information, which would not come.  Therefore, the working of the committee, Mr Speaker, as you had directed, resolved so many things. I think the committee should not be disturbed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was the chairperson of that committee, which had very competent people under my competent chairmanship. We handled work with real professionalism. I do not see what my colleague is saying about doubting that committee’s competence. However, what we want to put in place is –[Maj. Rwamirama: “Clarification”]

THE SPEAKER: No. Haven’t we really resolved this matter? We have agreed that when the Committee on National Economy is handling a loan that would have to be administered by Works, there is no harm for it to consult the Committee on Works. They sit together and discuss. I think that is how it should be done. Let us conclude this business and see how we proceed.

MR OMWONY OJWOK:  Mr Speaker, I should mention that our committee looked at the possible overlaps and gaps. This is the reason on page 5 paragraph two we specifically say: “The committee strongly recommends that Parliament, through the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, conducts a review” - the key word here is “review.” This is the overall review of the functions, the numbers and it even goes on to be specific to say, “The committee should recommend to Parliament the optimal number of committees specifying the types, having looked at areas in which they overlap and harmonise their roles with a view of saving costs.”  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have generally debated the report and I put the question that we adopt this report for further action.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now the actual work on the rules will be done tomorrow. This is the convenient time to adjourn so that tomorrow morning we start on amending the necessary rules. Hopefully we shall complete in the evening. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 June 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)

