Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Friday, 31 May 2019

Parliament met at 5.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this final sitting of the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament. 

Last week, I had occasioned to thank honourable members for the good work done in the committees and Parliament during this session. I would like to thank you very much.

In legislation, we have exceeded the record in any other country in the region. I will be giving you the detail during the State of the Nation Address. I thank you for the work that has been done. (Applause)

We shall be proroguing the House but I would like to remind you of the State Opening of the Fourth Session on Thursday, 06 June 2019. You are required to turn up. I think your cards are already in your pigeonholes.

Like all state functions, dignitaries are assigned particular time to arrive. According to that programme, Members are expected to arrive at 1.00 p.m. During the last State of the Nation Address, I was quite embarrassed that many Members arrived at the function after the Head of State. We have been talking about decorum, discipline and so on this afternoon. Therefore, keep time and accord His Excellency the due respect and courtesy as expected.

There will be no parking space at the Serena Conference Centre. You are advised to park in the South Wing of Parliament. We have also secured additional space at the National Theatre for Members and dignitaries to park. 

In order to avoid traffic congestion along the entrance of Serena Hotel on Nile Avenue, Members are advised to be dropped off either at the National Theatre or Parliament and walk for a short distance to the venue.

I have also heard announcements on radio that there is no parking near those buildings and no double parking on some streets.

Also, I know that sometimes people want to show what they are in public. There was quite a bit of indiscipline exhibited at the last State of the Nation Address. There was heckling of the President as he addressed the nation. I know that there is freedom of expression but if it borders on disrespect and any dignitary of high standing is given such a hostile audience – my colleagues, the speakers in the region were in shock that people could heckle the President. They do not find it the right thing to do.
Therefore, we can do the fighting ourselves here but that is a solemn occasion when Parliament and the President are accounting to the country. I would like to remind you about that so that we have a good function and also go to the reception where we can all dance and enjoy something to bite.

We need a break, however short. I am going to prorogue Parliament today so that you can take off a few days and return on 6 June 2019. I wish you a happy recess and urge you to find time for your families. I know we have kept you here during the budget period; a lot of work has been done and time spent here. Get some time with your families so that you give them also some quality time. Let us build on the achievements we have registered in the next session. God bless you all. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

PARLIAMENTARY SERVICE (STAFF) REGULATIONS, 2019

5.10
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuak County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, allow me to smuggle in a statement after officially laying the papers –(Interjections)– I know why I am calling it smuggling.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 37 (1) of the Administration of Parliament Act, Cap.257, the Parliamentary Commissioners made the Parliamentary Service Staff Regulations, 2019. This is to enhance the effective performance of the Parliamentary Service. 
Therefore, in compliance with Section 37 (2), I hereby lay it. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Usuk, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and God for bringing you back to chair this august House. (Applause) I know it has been a hard time for you and your family and particularly the people of Kamuli, who have kept you in this august House. 

I am happy we have just been paying our last respect to a great leader of this nation. I would like to thank and ask all great leaders who have served in this country; the day the nation mourns them, what will the people say about them? That is why I would like to thank God for you. I know the God we serve and uphold will always protect you whenever you will be and go to serve this nation. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me to make a point about my life. I almost lost my life two days ago. I would like to thank God that I am here. 

My advice goes to the Uganda Police Force. The Prime Minister is here; if you recall about a month ago, there was a trailer, which rammed into some people along Kiira Road round-about. I do not know what the Uganda Police is doing to help us get rid of these trailers along the highways. 

I am talking about an incident, which happened at Strecher–Ntinda-Nakawa Road. Imagine, these drivers are so bold to come out and even ask traffic officers that because their car is in a very bad mechanical condition, can police stop – (Interjections)- these drivers get out and ask traffic officers to stop other road users so that those driving a car in a bad mechanical condition can pass. 

This is our country; what is the role of the traffic police in managing this kind of cars?

Secondly, the mandatory vehicle testing must come back. It is very painful. I survived because of God. Up to now, I cannot explain how a trailer, which lost control and there was jam, by-passed me and found itself ramming into other cars behind me. 

The Parliament car, which is badly damaged. I thank God because I was in that car but I came out unhurt. That is the miracle, which is in my life. I would like to thank my family and all those who have been praying for me.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we demand from Uganda Police - right now, you cannot imagine that such a car has been ordered to leave the place where it had been seized and parked. I shared it with the minister, hon. Obiga Kania, before I came here. 

I asked them, “Who gives you the authority?” First of all, the Parliamentary car, which is supposed to be repaired by the owner of that truck, is still there. Nevertheless, you have gone ahead to remove the goods and release the car – (Interjections) - it was a trailer. 

Therefore, it is very painful to know that Government property can be managed like this. Imagine if I had lost my life. I would like to appeal to our institutions to act professionally. I thank you and I wish all colleagues a happy Eid Mubarak and a happy Martyrs Day. I say all this for God and my country. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make this statement.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwang. I am relieved to see you here. The day you had the accident, I was quite worried about you. In fact, I did not want you to come to Parliament. I wanted him to go and lie down but it seems that he is okay.

Honourable members, the regulations are now available. We now have a framework for governance in this institution. In the past, we used to borrow from Public Service but now we have our own regulations. Thank you. 
5.16
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank God that our brother, hon. Peter Ogwang, is still alive.

The issues that hon. Ogwang has raised are very important. Road carnage in this country has hit a record high and the question people keep asking is whether we have authorities in place. We have the police; a fully-fledged and well equipped traffic police department. We see how people are dying because of recklessness of “boda bodas”, we have seen the vehicles in dangerous mechanical conditions on the roads and we have had distinguished servicemen of this country die on the roads. The late Ayume died in road carnage. The vehicle in which he died was towed that very night without proper investigations undertaken. To date, there is no official report about the late Ayume’s death. 

Madam Speaker, it is important that when such things happen, we take serious steps, as a country, because we cannot continue to condone indiscipline on our roads when people are dying. We should use this occasion to call on Government to put in place measures that can keep each and every road user on track to observe law and order and at the same time, respect other road users. I thank you. 

PROROGATION OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the prorogation under Statutory Instrument Number 26 of 2019. 
Proclamation by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation and; 

WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out, it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 

AWARE THAT the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on 6 June 2018; 

NOW THEREFORE in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 31st day of May 2019. The pending business before the House and its committees is hereby saved. 

Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House, Kampala this 29th day of May, 2019. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament.” 

Thank you. Parliament is hereby prorogued. 

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
