

Tuesday, 30 May 2017

Parliament met at 10.08 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

1. Mr Joseph Koluo

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Let us welcome our newest member, hon. Joseph Koluo, Member of Parliament for Toroma. We welcome you to this House, again.

Honourable members, as you can see, the budget is not reflected on the Order Paper. It is not reflected because we have confirmed with the Committee on Budget that they will be finalising their report and signing it this afternoon. However, we have business that we must finish today so that tomorrow we can also finish the issue to do with the budget. 

Today we have those important items on the Order Paper – a Bill and two loans – that we need to deal with and finish today so that tomorrow we can have time to specifically deal with the budget. After the budget, we will also be dealing with the issue of supplementary appropriation. However, it will not be the one for this financial year. The supplementary appropriation for this financial year will be brought after the end of this financial year. 

The supplementary motion that is coming is for the financial year 2015/2016. There was a problem because that was a transition time. You remember the issues of whether there were ministers or not and all the other problems that were associated with it. As a result, the documents ended up coming in Parliament late and there was a delayed process. That financial year, we never closed properly as Parliament. We will be engaging that process to finish once we finish with the budget so that we can create space for the implementation of the new budget. Thank you very much. Can I have the Member for Bukoto East?

10.09
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to present an issue of national importance. In my constituency, in the sub-county of Buwunga, two villages have been given five days to vacate the lake shores. These villages are situated along the lake shores. The UPDF has given all the residents five days. I think by the end of Thursday this week, they should have vacated those places. The reason given is that these people are involved in illegal fishing.

Mr Speaker, as you may observe, these are established villages with polling stations. They are voters and they are there, as local councils. I wonder how the UPDF can come and give five days, without consent of the local authorities and without involving the relevant procedures and laws. 

My humble request to this House is to stop UPDF from evicting the residents so that proper procedures are followed. I also request that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs comes here and tells us the reason as to why these villages are being evicted. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there any response to this issue?

10.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I will ask the responsible minister to make a statement to that effect tomorrow, and also to reach the hon. Florence Namayanja, in the course of the day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would rather the minister deals with it and comes to this House to report on what has been done.

MR BAHATI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister handle the matter that has been raised and find out what it is so that when he comes here, he can only brief Parliament on what has been done. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - THE 19TH ANNUAL REPORT TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA 2016

10.12
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, Uganda Human Rights Commission - the 19th annual report to the Parliament of Uganda 2016. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the Committee on Human Rights, to look at it and advise the House on what to do.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

10.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015,” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by members for Ngora County, Toroma, Manjiya and Bukooli Central. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to provide for the formation of contracts for the sale of goods and supply of services; the effect of the contracts of sale of goods and supply of services; the performance of contracts for the sale of goods and supply of services and; remedies of the parties in the contracts for sale of goods and supply of services.

Mr Speaker, the Sale of Goods Act 20 Cap 182, which now applies in Uganda, sets forth a legal framework for the sale of goods between a buyer and seller. This Act is largely a reproduction of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, of the United Kingdom, which was received in Uganda under Uganda Order in Council in 1902, which made it applicable to Uganda Statutes General Application Force in 1902. The Act came into force in July 1932, by the Batch of Ordinance No. 28 of 1930, and was codified verbatim in Chapter 79 of the laws of Uganda in 1964.

Mr Speaker, there are a number of things that are missing in the law because of the passage of time. A lot has changed since 1964. That is the reason why we have amended the law in order to take care of the emerging issues in our trade, and ensure that the buyers and the sellers are protected while making their transactions.

Mr Speaker, the committee has considered this Bill. It is now ready to report to the House for debate. I would like to suggest that this Bill be debated by the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled the “Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015”, be read the second time. That is the motion entailing a discussion on principles of this proposed Bill. This matter was referred to our committee and as the way of kicking the debate, I now invite the chairperson to report on this Bill. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson for bringing this Bill. However, on several occasions, I raised a procedural matter of not having the Attorney-General here when we are handling Bills. It is becoming a common practice that the Attorney-General is never here. 

Mr Speaker, these are matters of law where members and even the chairperson of the committee need guidance, especially, from the Attorney-General. I would like to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, on whether it is procedurally correct, that within this time the Attorney-General comes in the House, to guide us when we are handling this Bill. They are the custodians of the laws of the country.

Mr Speaker, one time, we had a Bill here. We moved with the Bill but when I raised a procedural matter, the Attorney-General came and the debate on Bill started moving very slowly because the Attorney-General was rejecting different sections of the law and we had arguments.

Mr Speaker, we have two people – the Attorney-General and his deputy. Why don’t they come to the House? That is the procedural matter I am raising. I know within your wisdom, you know what it means by having the Attorney-General - you are a lawyer. Otherwise, we cannot move with Bills without the Attorney-General coming to the House yet they are being paid. They are given allowances; they have vehicles and everything. Why can’t they come here? Thank you, Mr Speaker:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, our rules on processing Bills are very clear and the procedure is clear. There is nowhere it is mentioned in our rules that the Attorney-General must be in the House. You asked a procedural point but there is no requirement for the Attorney-General to be in the House. 

However, it would be good practice for him to come and help the facilitation of the business of the House, especially, when it has to deal with the Bills and other related matters.  Otherwise, there is no requirement in any law that he should be here. Probably, that could be handled by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that we can begin compelling the Attorney-General to be in the House.

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

10.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kenneth Lubogo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This report is brought before this House under Rule 119(2) of our Rules of Procedure. The Bill entitled the Sales of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015 was brought to this House and referred to the committee.

Mr Speaker, the committee has scrutinised the Bill, collected views and processed them and come up with a report. I, therefore, beg to proceed and report on this Bill. This report was uploaded on our system and I believe members have accessed it and it is signed by about 90 per cent of the members of the committee.

Mr Speaker, on the introduction, which is on page 1, the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015 was read for the first time on 26 November, 2015 during the Ninth Parliament. Thereafter, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in accordance with Rule 118(1) of the Rules of Procedure, for scrutiny. However, the Ninth Parliament was dissolved before the Bill was considered by the committee and therefore lapsed upon its dissolution. 

Consequently, in accordance with Rule 221(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015 was reinstated through a resolution of the Tenth Parliament in July 2016. Upon reinstatement, the Bill was freshly referred to the committee for consideration.

In considering the Bill, Mr Speaker, the committee was guided by Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

On methodology, Mr Speaker, in the process of scrutinising the Bill, the committee made and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:

    1. Ministry of Trade, Tourism, Industry and Cooperatives
    2. Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB)
    3. Uganda Law Reform Commission (ULRC)
    4. Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA)
    5. Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU)
    6. The Judiciary
    7.  Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)
    8. Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA)
    9. Uganda Bankers’ Association.
    10. Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA)
    11. Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (UNCCI)
    12. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA)
    13. SEATINI-Uganda
    14. Civil Society Organisations (CSBAG and CEHURD)

Mr Speaker, the objective of the Bill is to reform and replace the existing Sale of Goods Act, Cap 82 by providing for the:

    (i) Formation of contracts for the sale of goods and supply of services;

    (ii) Effect of a contract for the sale of goods and supply of services;

    (iii) Performance of contracts for the sale of goods and supply of services and;

    (iv) Remedies of parties in a contract for the sale of goods and supply of services. 

Mr Speaker, on findings, observations and recommendations, the committee needs to report as follows:

The need for reform 

It has been talked about by the minister, but the current Sale of Goods Act Cap 82 came into force on 1 January 1932 by virtue of Ordinance No.28 of 1930 which was codified verbatim in Chapter 79 of the Laws of Uganda of 1964.

Whereas the English Act has gone through a number of reforms with major changes over time, the Uganda Act has remained static since 1930. It has not undergone a major review to address developments in the area of sale of goods and does not match the Ugandan circumstances. Particular developments include provision for the supply of services under English law, which is not reflected in the Ugandan law.

In the recent past decades, innovations in information and communications technology, and in particular, the emergence of digital commercial services, have presented challenges for the Sale of Goods Act that could not have been envisaged in 1932 when the Act came into force.

In order for Uganda to improve its business environment, it is imperative that commercial laws respond to the modern circumstances so as to improve investment and international business. This can only be achieved by putting in place sale of goods and supply of services laws that are responsive to the current needs in trade and business.

The committee observed that the reform of the sale of goods law has indeed been long over-due. The reform will cater for the new developments in the private sector development as a result of the economic liberalisation.

On the requirement of a contract of Shs 500,000 or more to be in writing, clause 6 of the Bill we are reporting on requires contracts for the sale of any goods or supply of services of the value of twenty five currency points and above to be in writing or else shall not be enforceable by action.  

During the committee interaction with stakeholders, most of the stakeholders expressed reservations on this requirement to have contracts of Shs 500,000 or more to be in writing. 

Some stakeholders informed the committee that the provision was restrictive as far as leaving out enforcement of informal contracts of the value of Shs 500,000 and above. They proposed that clause 6 be deleted since clause 5 is sufficient.

Others were of the view that the threshold should be raised given the nature of transactions the business community does.

Another section of the stakeholders were of the view that the Bill should recognise informal means of transactional evidence used by the majority of the business community in Uganda. These include: ordinary receipts, invoices and acknowledgement of payment documents. These too should be recognised as evidence of or intention to enter into a valid contract. They proposed that the enforcement of informal transactions beyond Shs 500,000 should not be left out.

The committee appreciates the need to have contracts for the sale of goods and supply of services in writing especially for evidential purposes. A written contract gives the parties more certainty and minimises business risks by making the agreement clear from the outset and ultimately reduces the risk of disputes that may arise. On the other hand, oral contracts are often difficult to enforce because the facts are contested or may be remembered differently. 

However, Mr Speaker, a review of the Ugandan market economy and transactions, lack of enforceability of contracts not in writing which are twenty five currency points and above - that is Shs 500,000 and above - may cause an injustice to many. The regular day-to-day character of sale of goods and supply of services transactions undertaken makes the requirement of formal writing inappropriate and unwarranted. 

Further, majority of the day-to-day transactions are way above the twenty five currency points and as such, the provision suffocates reality of transaction taking place in the market economy.
The committee recommends that clause 6 should be deleted in view of the Ugandan market economy. 
The committee further recommends that government should carry out thorough sensitisation programmes in order to educate the populace about the benefits of having contracts reduced in writing.

What we are saying is that sensitisation should be to emphasise that there is need to put these contracts in writing, but where they are not, it should not invalidate such transactions and make them unenforceable.

Exclusion of Seller’s Liabilities

I am now on page six; the Sale of Goods Act Cap 82 strictly adheres to the express terms of the contract and does not dictate the terms of the contract for sale of goods.

According to section 54 of the Sale of Goods Act, the parties may by express agreement vary or negative any right, duty or liability which may arise by implication of law. The terms implied by the Sale of Goods Act apply in so far as there are no express terms varying or inconsistent with them that is Section 15(d). The implied terms under the Act are only applicable where the parties have not explicitly agreed to certain terms. Parties are therefore free to contract as freely as they wish. This is based on the doctrine of freedom of contract which allows parties to provide for the terms and conditions that will govern the contractual relationship without external interference.

However, a seller may by express terms agree with the buyer to exclude liability under section 54 of the Act. Such a clause that excludes a seller’s liability is called an “exclusion” or “exemption” clause. Exemption clauses negative the terms which would normally be implied in favour of a buyer and as such operate oppressively. Exclusion clauses anticipate that there will be a breach of contract, and then excludes all liability for that breach in favour of the seller. In a bid to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, is this the executive summary you are going through? You said it is uploaded on the iPads. Do you have an executive summary so that we can move to the debate?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Therefore, exclusion clauses is on page six and it is 4.3. I would like to read committee observations which are on the next page.
The committee observed that:

    (i) The move by the Bill to restrict the application of exclusion clauses in contractual arrangements is commendable and will enhance protection of the buyers and consumers during contractual arrangements.
 
    (ii) Clause 68 of the Bill – that is the application of the provision to only a contract of sale and does not extend to a contract for the supply of services. This is where some clauses were written and leaving out the element of the service, which we intend to capture here.

    (iii) We also observed that clause 20 contradicts clause 68 by maintaining the status quo and therefore distorts the purpose for which the reform under clause 68 is intended to achieve. There is therefore need to harmonise the two provisions without losing the import of clause 68.

    (iv)  Buyers or consumers are frequently not armed with intimate knowledge of the goods of the seller or services of the supplier and in many cases are not given a fair chance in purchases and examination of the goods or services they intend to buy or procure. 

We therefore recommend that: 

    1. Clause 20 should be amended to harmonise it with clause 68 of the Bill with the aim of strengthening the protection of the buyers and consumers.

    2. Clause 68 of the Bill should be amended to also cover rights, duties and liabilities arising out of the contract for the supply of services.

    3. Government should create public awareness about the laws relating to contracts, sale of goods and supply of services by sensitising the populace about the contractual obligations, duties, rights and remedies to ensure adequate protection of the consumers and buyers.

    4. The committee recommends that government should expedite the process of coming up with a consumer protection Bill with a view of offering comprehensive protection to consumers.

As I get to the end, Mr Speaker, on the supply of services; whereas the Bill provides for the contracts for the supply of services and the performance of such contracts; and the remedies to the parties, it does not define “services”.

The committee observed that one of the major reforms intended to be introduced by the Bill is the aspect of supply of services. However, the Bill does not define “services”. The definition of a “contract for the supply of services” under clause 3 restricts the supply of services to those services that are incidental to goods. It purports to exclude those services that are rendered in cases where goods are not necessarily supplied, for example, provision of information technology services, banking services, hotelier services, among others.

The committee recommends that the Bill clearly defines “services” for purposes of clarity and addressing the restrictions created by clause 3 of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, on the whole, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Mr Speaker, the next are the attached amendments which we shall go through. I have the original copy of the report and the minutes of the meeting preceding this report and I beg to lay the report and the minutes on the Table. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee report and the text of the original report. Honourable members that is the report from the committee on this Bill; basically the committee is saying that we need independence because the law we have been using was enacted on the 1 January 1932; we became independent on 9 October 1962. I don’t know how many years those are but we are thinking of doing that today.

Therefore, in this particularly area, we have not been independent. The Bill is seeking independence of Uganda in terms of regulation of sale of goods and services. That is where we are and debate starts now on the principles of the Bill. Is it a necessary Bill or should we throw it out at this stage? Debate starts now. 

There being no expression of interest in speaking to the principles of the Bill, I would like to put the question. I put the question that the Bill entitled the “Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and honourable minister.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I suggest we defer clause 1 since it is definition; we will come back to that as the committee is also proposing some amendments to that.

Clause 2

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 2, the committee recommends to delete the word “to” which is appearing in the head note. It is just a grammatical error. I would like to delete that word from the head note.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which “to”? They are two.

MR LUBOGO: The head note reads, “Sale and agreement to sell to goods.” Therefore, we are saying, it should read, “Sale and agreement to sell goods.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members that is the proposal to take out that typo and I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we insert the words, “or above” immediately after the word “years”. The justification is to avoid restricting the provision to only people who are 18 years.

Mr Chairman, we also have another amendment on clause 4 to insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (1) to read; “notwithstanding this section, a person of 16 years or above has capacity to contract as provided under Article 34 (4) and (5) of the Constitution.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please read it again.

MR LUBOGO: We propose that we create a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (1) of clause 4 to read; “notwithstanding this section” – which talks about 18 years and above – “…a person of 16 years or above has capacity to contract as provided under Article 34 (4) and (5) of the Constitution.” 
The justification -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please read the amendment without any other word; we need to capture what we are amending.

MR LUBOGO: It should read; “notwithstanding this section, a person of 16 years or above has the capacity to contract as provided under Article 34 (4) and (5) of the Constitution.” 
The justification is to ensure consistency with the Contracts Act of 2010. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you agree to this? You have to be on record.
 
MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, I agree.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, we need to rethink that because when we talk about minors entering into a contract; we should indicate that there must be a mature person who is above 18 years to accompany that minor who is entering into a contract. Sixteen years is quite testing; we should debate that and see a better way of putting it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On what matter do you rise, member for Busia Municipality?

MR MACHO: On a matter of age in the contract. Mr Chairman, I come from a constituency where the majority of the people are business people. By the age of 14, somebody has enough capacity to enter a contract to do business including a cross-border business. I do not see age as a matter of concern for any person who wants a contract. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, why 16?

MR LUBOGO: It seems members do not have the report, but it is consistent with the Constitution, under Article 34 (4) and (5) of the Constitution. 

As we speak now the status-quo is that under the Contracts Act, people from 16 and above can contract. They can be employed in a certain form of employment; it is not a new thing and most important is that it is for consistency with the Constitution of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to this amendment proposed by the committee. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 6 -

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes deletion of clause 6. The justification is that: (i) The provision is very restrictive because there are many informal transactions beyond Shs 500,000. Therefore their enforcement should not be left out. (ii) The implementation of the provision is not practiced. So the committee proposes deletion of this particular clause 6. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete clause 6 from the Bill; honourable minister do you agree to the deletion?

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Chairman, I agree to the deletion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 6 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, deleted.

Clause 7

MR LUBOGO: The committee proposes to redraft clause 7 (3) and (4) to read as follows: (3) “…where the seller in a contract of sale of goods or supplier in a contract for the supply of services purports to effect a present sale of future goods or to supply future services, the contract operates as an agreement to sell the goods or to supply the services.”

And (4) to read as: “a contract for supply of services may be made where the acquisition of such services by the supplier depends upon a contingence which may or may not happen.” Justification is for clarity and to cater for the inclusion of services which had been left out in this particular clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal for the amendment in clause 7 proposed by the committee. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee recommends redrafting the marginal note to read as follows: “agreement to sell goods or supply services at valuation.” 
The justification is for consistency with the scope of the provision. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why are you putting services? Are there no goods? You want to put goods; what about agreement to sell or supply?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, in this Bill when you talk about sale you are talking about goods and when you are talking about supply you are talking about services. We would like it to capture the goods and services. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, I am failing to bring in my input because the chairman never gave us a definition for a “service” in the interpretation section. And yet you gave it within your report that “services” are not defined. I do not know when we are going to handle that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are coming to clause 1 and we will deal with the definition later. Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee? 

MR RUKUTANA: I do not have much objection except in clause 11(1). When you say for them – when you have referred to goods and you are talking about goods or any part of them have been appropriated. It is a bit ambiguous because here we mean that part that has been appropriated. Therefore, I would like to propose that instead of saying by the buyer he or she shall pay a reasonable price for the appropriated goods because when you leave “them” it would read as if you mean all of them; when the buyer has only appropriated his/her own part.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the amendment you are proposing honourable Attorney-General?

MR RUKUTANA: I am saying that instead of saying the last sentence which reads that “shall pay a reasonable price for them,” I propose it to state, “shall pay a reasonable price for the appropriated goods.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the word them is used on two lines before that. Can you harmonise that.

MR RUKUTANA: When you read the sentence it says; “where there is an agreement to sell goods on the terms that the price is to be fixed by the valuation of a third party and the third party does not make the valuation”, the agreement is voidable except that if the goods or any part of them have been delivered to and appropriated. Therefore, when you say the buyer shall pay for the goods, you cannot leave “them” when you are referring only to the goods that have been appropriated. He/she cannot pay for the entire lot. The intention is to make the buyer pay for the goods he has appropriated because the sentence talks of the goods or any part of them.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, already in this very clause, appropriation is catered for. Goods or any part of them have been delivered and appropriated by the buyer. I do not see anything wrong with that?

MR RUKUTANA: The sentence is for clarity. When you say the goods or any part of them, however, it could either be all the goods or any part of the goods that have been appropriated. If we do not clarify it here, somebody - assuming you supply goods and the buyer appropriates part; we are saying the buyer should pay for only what he has already appropriated, but not all the goods.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, since the Attorney-General has advised wisely, I think that we should go by his opinion because that is for clarity purposes and it does not cost us anything. People should know what really – sometimes even determining cases in court is very hard because of the way we structure the laws. Thank you.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am a member of the committee and I appreciate the guidance from the Attorney-General. However, I have not got it clearly. I would have wished that at least he gives us the version for example, should we now say that – allow me to begin from part of the sentence; ”that the agreement is voidable except that if the goods or any part of “them” because he is saying that it is not good to have this part of “them”. Are we now saying that that the agreement is avoidable except if the goods or any part of them have been delivered? Is that the guidance you are now giving? Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairperson, I am saying the buyer shall pay a reasonable price for the goods he has appropriated not all of them. We are talking about valuation, but in absence of valuation; you the buyer have accepted and appropriated goods or any part of them. However, when you leave it at “them”, somebody can turn around and say according to our contract we are supposed to sell to you 125 cartons although you have appropriated only 25 and they ask you to pay for all of them. That is why I would like to say that the reasonable price for the goods appropriated because the catch word here is the goods he/she has appropriated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Attorney-General is saying that the word “them” needs to be put better because it can be misleading. That is what he is saying and for it to be clear, if you get somebody who is smart, they can cause confusion using that word. Therefore, he is suggesting for clarity that we just deal with what he has proposed, pay a reasonable price for the appropriated goods so that it is clear. If it is only part of it, it is what is referred to, the appropriated ones, but not “them” which could mean all of them.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. First, I would like to state that that we do not have that particular amendment as a committee. However, the clarification I would like to get from the Attorney-General is on the possibility of piecemeal appropriation of goods. What if it happens that the seller and buyer have agreed that maybe the goods will be appropriated in sequence and that the buyer will pay maybe when the first appropriation is done? Are we not locking that possibility out?

MR RUKUTANA: To appreciate this point, you have to read the entire length of the clause and it is where there is an agreement to sell goods on terms; the price is to be fixed by valuation of a third party and the third party cannot or does not make the valuation. The third party who is supposed to make valuation has not made the valuation, but nevertheless, part of the goods have been supplied to you and you have appropriated that part and not all.

Therefore, this law states that if you have accepted and appropriated part of the goods notwithstanding that they were not evaluated, then you pay for the goods you have appropriated because you will have by your own act accepted them without being appropriated. However, you can only be said to have accepted those that you have appropriated. Therefore, if you leave them assuming the agreement was to sell 130 cartons and you accept and appropriate only 30 cartons before valuation, if we do not say for the appropriated goods, somebody will come and say, “no, under this section, you are supposed to pay for all the goods” because they will say reasonable price for them including those that you have not appropriated. It is just for clarity.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, I would like to make a small amendment to the Attorney-General’s submission and that is why I was very interested in having him here and we are now moving. Mr Chairperson, why don’t we say that - I will start from the word agreement and I will make a small correction at the end? “The agreement is voidable except that if the goods and any part of them have been delivered and appropriated by the buyer. He/she shall pay a price for those particular goods.” In language you do not have to make repetition because already you have appropriated and that is why I am suggesting that those particular goods and the word reasonable is not good because you are giving this situation to the buyers                                     to determine the reasonable price they want. However, already in the contract, there was an agreed price of the goods. Therefore, when I say you will pay the price, I am saying particular goods but I have left “appropriated” as it has been. Can I repeat it? Let me repeat it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is clear.  The issue is that you will pay a reasonable price for either all of them or part of them. Not to use too many words, you will pay a reasonable price for what you have appropriated; either all of it or part of it. Is that clear? Can I put the question? It is reasonable because it was not valid. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I do concede to the proposal by the Attorney-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal in its final form is to remove the word “them” which is at the end of the sentence and in its place put “the appropriated goods.”  That is the amendment. 

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, I just wanted to make it clear that that is the second amendment to the one which was moved by the committee on the marginal note. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I am going to process it. Are we okay now with this provision? We had already adopted the amendment that you made. Had we not adopted it yet?  

Okay, there are two proposals for amendment. I put the question that we adopt the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the learned Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please participate. 

Clause 13

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 13 on where conditions to be treated as warranty, particularly clause 13 (4) to read as follows: 

Where a contract of sale or supply of service is:
    a) Not favourable and the buyer has accepted the goods or services or part of the goods or services or; 
    b) For specific goods, the property in which has passed the buyer;
the breach of any condition to be fulfilled by the seller or supplier shall only be treated to be breach of warranty and not as a ground for rejecting the goods or services and treating the contract as repudiated unless there is a term of the contract, express or implied to the effect that the goods or services may be rejected and the contract treated as repudiated. 

The purpose of this, Mr Chairman, is for clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, members is that clear? 

MR AOGON: Honourable chairperson, my concern arises from sale of goods, particularly when we talk about plots of land. The chairperson will guide me because I do not know whether it is a part of what we are trying to handle. 

I have seen situations where people sell a particular plot of land several times; one sells it now and continues to repeatedly sell it. I do not know whether this is the right time for us to handle such people so that you draft for us something to capture that and deter people from doing that. One buys plot from somebody who has already sold it to somebody and then one has trouble everywhere. You will guide me. 

MR LUBOGO: I know the concern of land in this country is too much and I am not surprised that you are bringing such a proposal. However, land is not a good and it is not part of what we are capturing here. Land has its own law that deals with it so here we are dealing with the goods and services.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we agreeable to the proposed amendment from the committee? I put the question to the amendment. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am hoping the minister has agreed to it. Let me first confirm again. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Chairperson, I agree with the amendment made by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we have adopted the amendment. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, in clause 14, particularly sub clause (3), the committee proposes that the phrase “third person” should be substituted with the word “third party”

The justification is to be consistent as it is written in other provisions. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, will that be a proper thing to do or you had another idea of a third person. 

MS KYAMBADDE: No, chairperson, I agree with the proposal by the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to that amendment? 

Question put and agreed to

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, clause 19 is about implied terms as to care and skill in supply of services contracts. The committee proposes that we redraft the provision to read as follows:

“In every contract for the supply of services, where the supplier is acting in the course of a business, the following terms are implied: 
    a) That the supplier has the necessary skill to render the service;
    b) That he will supply the service with due skill, care and diligence;
    c) That a service and any product resulting from it will be reasonably fit for any particular purpose and of such a nature and quality that it can reasonably be expected to achieve any particular result that the buyer makes known to the supplier, as the particular purpose for which the service is required or the result that the consumer desires to achieve.”

The justification for this is to broaden the implied terms in the contract for the supply of services and further strengthen protection of buyers and consumers. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General and honourable minister, are you agreeable to this? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, chairperson, I am agreeable to the proposals by the committee.  

MS NAUWAT: (b) reads, “That he will supply the service with due skill, care and diligence.” We are just looking the male; we could also have women participating in the process. I think it was a typing error and they could have skipped that. Mr Chairman, so it should read; “He or she will supply the service with due skill, care and diligence.”

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to have a clarification. This is because we have two types under the law of sale of goods. We have the “contract for services” and we have “contracts for services”. I do not know whether these implied terms are pegged to “contracts of services” or “contract for service”. That is the clarification I would like to seek.

MR LUBOGO: To start with, hon. Nauwat Rosemary, I must say that I am sorry for the omission of “she” in the sentence. I would concede and say that “subsequently, wherever it may appear, it should read as “he” or “she”. As for the amendment of hon. Mugoya – first of all, I would like you to bring out clearly –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He had sought a clarification and not proposed any amendment.

MR LUBOGO: I did not know exactly what he wanted; that is why I would like him to clarify and let me know what he wants the clarity on. Please re-state it so that I may answer you appropriately.

MR MUGOYA: I will give an example of a casual labourer. He offers a contract of services – are you getting my point. A professional doctor will offer a contract of service. Are you getting the difference between the two? That is why I would like to know specifically, whether these implied terms are pegged to “contract of services” or “contract for service”?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, if I have really heard the amendments, they cater for both. Secondly, even if he is a casual labourer, he must have a skill. When you come to my place to dig a pit latrine, I, Ssewungu, salute you because of the skill you use to go deep down to bring out soil and you reach 40 feet deep and come back. That is a skill within your service.

When I was listening to the amendment – only that I am not seeing them here, they are in the Chairman’s submission, it is catering for both of them.

MR RUKUTANA: First of all, Mr Chairman, I have a small problem with the amendment. It is mixing two principles; the principle to ensure that the supplier takes care and skill, and the second one is the principle that the goods are supplied when they are fit for purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it for the services only, not goods as well?

MR RUKUTANA: Well, there is the principle to take care and skill in the supply of service and secondly, to ensure that the service is fit for the purpose. Well, I didn’t have an objection to the wording; I would have been comfortable if it was a separate section. These two principles are different and distinct to make sure that your supply is undertaken with care and skill, that is a section.

If the purpose is made known to you, make sure that the service for which you are contracted to supply fits the purpose. I would like to separate them. There is a duty once you contract to offer a service to ensure that you take care and skill in providing that service. That duty is known. If the purpose is made known to you, you are under obligation to ensure that the service for which you are contracted to supply fits the purpose.

Those are two distinct principles. I do not know whether we can achieve them by having the two principles in one section. I again thought that for clarity, those two should be separated so that the duty to take care and skill is one as it is. In that case, I would take 19 as it is and then put another section which deals with ensuring that the services fit the purpose, where the purpose is made known to you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General has given us good wisdom on this but he is not giving us an amendment. Can you separate them? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to understand why the amendment has been proposed. If you read the original text of the Bill, what is the improvement you have brought, in specific terms?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the original Bill, clause 19, on implied terms as to care, skill and supply of services of contract to treat. In a contract for the supply of services, where the supplier is acting in the course of business, there is an implied term that the supplier will carry out services with reasonable care and skill.

In this amendment – first of all we chose “to expound”. Our justification was to broaden the implied terms in the contract.

    a) The supplier has the necessary skill to render the service 
    b)  That he will supply the service with due skill, care and diligence. 
    c) The service and any product resulting from it, will be reasonably fit for any particular purpose and of such a nature and quality that it can reasonably be expected to achieve any particular result that the buyer makes known to the supplier, as the particular purpose for which the service is required or the result that the consumer desires to achieve.

Mr Chairman, we are not fundamentally changing much from the original text, but we are only making it a bit broader and more encompassing. So, the departure from the original meaning is not big. We are trying to broaden it and make it even clearer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In modern drafting, we are moving away from that complex use of words to make legislation simpler and understandable by ordinary people. That is the trend in drafting now.

MR RUKUTANA: I have looked at this and I am of the view that we maintain section 19 and then we say that – this one remains 19(1) 19 (2) becomes “where the buyer makes known to the supplier the particular purpose for which the service is required, of the results that the consumer desires to achieve.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But learned Attorney-General, will that be an implied term or that will be an express term of the contract? Here they are talking about implied terms that you do not have to write down. However, if you were stating a purpose for which you want, wouldn’t you state it in the contract as an express term?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairperson, I agree with you but putting it here would still have the same effect. If we were to put it here, then I would rather we separate it. If we want it to remain implied, then we do not put it. In my view, by the way, not putting it there is much better than having it there because describing it here is so delimiting.

I am suggesting retaining the context as it was in the original; take reasonable care and skill. That embodies everything. When you go to court and say, the service rendered does not answer to what I went out to contract for, the supplier did not take care and skill then you can bring all these.

However, if you try to over express yourself, you may be delimiting the scope of somebody who wants to seek a remedy when there has been a breach. Sometimes, over stipulating matters delimits them to that which is stated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you see, these things have principles that have been developed over the years. As cases come, they are tested to see. Therefore, when you talk about implied terms, those are seen, same like if you talk about sale by sample. The understanding, which you do not have to write down, is that in the end the sample will correspond to the bulk of the goods. You do not have to write that down. 

If you are selling by sample, we will take the sample and they are saying the rest of the goods that are coming in trucks, the presumption is that, the sample will correspond to those ones because I have only seen the sample. Therefore, you do not have to write it down again. Those are some of the provisions that are implied and all those things. Now if we start breaking them down, you could end up with a legislation that could be the size of this building.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, your guidance is always very precise and it is very hard to depart from it. I want to withdraw the amendment. For hon. Mugoya, on the clarity that you sought, I would refer you to clause 3 of this very Bill. You will get the clarification. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR LUBOGO: On express terms not to negative implied terms under this Act. The committee proposes that we delete the words “unless it is inconsistent with it” appearing immediately after the word, “Act”

The justification is for consistence with clause 68 which we are going to find ahead and to prevent abuse of the provision by restricting liability arising under the contract.

MR RUKUTANA: There is a principle we call freedom of contract; parties should be free to contract the way they want without any hindrance either by law or any other condition. Now, if you say an express warranty or condition shall not replace a warranty or condition implied by this Act, you are impinging on the notion of freedom of contract.

I do not see the use and meaning of the entire clause 20. An express warrant or condition shall not replace a warranty or condition implied by this Act, unless it is inconsistent with it; this is contrary to the principle of freedom of contract, which we cherish. I would beg the presenters to abandon clause 20 and its amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing a deletion of clause 20?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, if I may seek your indulgence, we could briefly refer to clause 68 of this Bill. It talks about variation of implied rights. It states, where any right, duty or liability would arise under a contract of sale by implication of law, it shall not be negatived or varied by express agreement or by the course of dealing between the parties or by usage.

Mr Chairperson, the freedom of contract that the Attorney General is talking about is appreciated but I also believe that there is need for the law to set down some principles that have to be followed and cannot be varied at will.

Therefore, for that reason, we feel that there is need for the law to state those, which should not be left at the liberty of the parties but should be tagged to that they have to be abided to.

Like she brought in the other ascertainment of partial goods and so on. Therefore, some of these need to be in the law that you will not leave it at the hands of may be the strong sellers to do it at the disadvantage of the weak consumers.

Therefore, we think that the law needs to be restrictive on some not everything especially for purposes of protection of the consumer or the buyer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the bigger meaning is on the head note. If you look at it, that is what it is supposed to state; that the body of the provision states what the head note wanted to say. What it is saying is; “express terms not to negative implied terms under this Act”. Therefore, does it respond to that? Does the provision take care of what is put in the head note?

MR RUKUTANA: I have had the opportunity to look at clause 68 also and I am bit worried. Are we attempting to do away with the principle of freedom of contract? Because when you say where any right, duty or liability would arise under a contract of sale by implication of law, it shall not be negatived or varied by express agreement.

Now, first, you are talking of a liability, right and duty arising by implication of law. Then, you say it shall not be negatived or varied by express agreement or by the course of dealing between the parties or by the usage.

Now we know what implied rights mean and you cannot define them; they are so many and unimaginable. 

If you say those rights will not be negatived by an agreement, what are you trying to achieve? You are trying to say that even when you agree that you will do your things this way, you may put a clause which may not be enforceable because somebody will come and say “no, this clause defeats the implied rights in the law”. I do not think we have to go that way. 

In the same vein, I propose that clause 68 is also redundant because implied rights and liabilities are very many and you cannot define them. If you are contracting, as long as you are exercising your free will, the agreement should be construed by whoever is looking at it to ascertain what your free will was. 

If it is an express agreement, it should be given the sanctity it deserves. You have written or put it there. For somebody to turn around and say although you agreed like this, it was contrary to implied conditions - it does not augur well, in my view. 

Mr Chairman, I must admit that this is food for thought, but I would not feel comfortable with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What clause 20 is proposing is to uphold the principle of freedom of contract. It is saying if they have agreed expressly, some of the implied terms in the law will not apply to you. That is what is here. Whatever is implied by the law will not affect what is expressed. However, it is going the extra mile to say “it must be legal” – it must be a permitted thing. This is because you might have an express contract to commit an illegality. You can agree and write even the amount of money to be paid, but not to do something illegal. Probably, that is what they were thinking about. 

Learned Attorney-General, would an express contract to commit an illegality stand in this law, notwithstanding freedom of contract?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, a contract to commit an illegality is void ab initio and we do not need to take it anywhere. If it is a contract that we go and murder - anybody looking at it will know that contract is void from the start – as if it was not made –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is for purposes of enforcing the terms of the contract. It is void in terms of when you want to enforce the contract. You are talking about the terms of it. Would it have to be inconsistent with the law or the inconsistency would not matter?

MR MUGOYA: The general rule is very clear. It is not merely void, but also null ab initio. There is something important that we must understand in this proposal. Substantially, it is promoting the principle and freedom to contract. That is why they are saying express terms shall not be negatively implied terms in a contract. I concur with the learned Chairperson. What is important here is how we should frame it to suit the intended purpose. To me, it appears here as if it is relatively vague. We need to revisit the wording process itself and come up with something that will suit the purpose.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, what he is raising has been catered for in our amendment. In the amendment, we are saying this whole provision should end at the word Act such that it reads: “An express warrant or condition shall not replace a warrant or condition implied by this Act.” In other words, like the Chairperson was saying, can you allow something which is illegal to be contracted upon or taken into consideration when you are doing a contract? We think it is not and that is why we are maintaining that this position of saying “unless it is inconsistent with it” should be removed. In other words, it should always be consistent with the provision of the law.

MR MUGOYA: What we can do is to add the word “term” so that it reads: “term, condition or warrant” and it would be very clear. We should put the word “term” immediately before or after the word “condition”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Express cannot negative implied terms under this Act. It is actually the other way round.

MR LUBOGO: Are you proposing an amendment to read “An express warrant or condition or term shall not replace a warrant or condition or term that is implied in this Act.”? Is that what you are proposing? I wouldn’t have a problem with that, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, we need to understand the difference between a “condition” and a “term”.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairman, a “term” is the primary object of a contract. A “condition” merely goes to the root of the subject matter. The “warrant” is merely something subsidiary or incidental to the application of a condition. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, I found no suitable substitute for my words.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Chairman, a “condition” is a term and a “term” is a condition.

MR MUGOYA: No. One may say; what are the terms of this contract. You will say the terms were as follows: payment should be effected on or before 30 May 2017. What was the condition in this contract? The condition is that in the event that you don’t pay on such and such a date, it would attract an interest. That is the condition precedent to the implementation of a contract. What is the warrant? The warrant is that payment will be effected either in cash or by bank draft. Are you getting the position? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Take a closer look at the provision.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I really have a problem with clause 20. In a contract, there are express and implied terms. Implied terms only come in handy when the contract has not expressed the desired intention. Someone can say “Oh, according to what we see with this contract – though it was not stated, there is an implied term that it will be like this and that”. In other words, it gives whoever is interpreting the contract leverage to exercise his/her brain and know what the parties intended to do.

However, if you say that an express term shall not negative an implied term, - In other words, you are making an implied term superior to an express term. That is where I have a problem. I do not know what the framers of this clause intended to achieve. Implied terms come in handy only when there are no express terms. Once parties express themselves, they must be bound by what is expressed.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, I would like to agree with the Attorney-General. Of course, we all know that contracts can be written or verbal. When you talk of “express terms”, if I say I am going to buy your sugar and that I am going to buy it in bulk, costing a certain amount of money, those are express terms. Mr Speaker, such terms cannot be overridden by implied terms. Actually, it is the courts that will look for those implied terms after the express terms have failed. I do not know whether I am right on that. The House can guide me.

Mr Speaker, what the Attorney-General is saying is that express terms cannot be overridden by implied terms because they take precedence in the contract. Whether it is oral, we agree that we are supplying you a vehicle, which should be white in colour or a six seater Mercedes-Benz. Once you do not put those terms expressly, the judge will run to the implied terms of what was meant by the express terms that you gave. It sets precedence for your case.

However, if express terms are overridden by implied terms – actually, implied terms come in as a result of the failure of the express terms. That is discretionary. It is discretionary and the judge might not use implied terms but look for express terms in your contract. Mr Chairperson, I think you need to concede on this.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, I find a problem with the kind of interpretation given by the Attorney–General and my good friend from Kalungu. They are only saying “shall not negative; shall not value”. They are not saying “shall takeover precedence”. I think that is what we need to understand.

Mr Chairperson, we need to understand that implied terms come into play either by law or by expression of trade usage for custom. That is very important - either by law, trade usage or custom relating to that particular transaction of contracts.  Therefore, before you even evoke the implied terms, you look at the express terms first. That is the principle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I seem to understand from this provision is that in case the matter is for litigation, and the express terms in the contracts are clearer but violate some principles in the sale of goods, would that be valid? For example, when you look at clause 16(2), which we have just passed, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under a contract are reasonably fit for that purpose. That is an implied condition.   

If by error in the contract, which is express, a provision slips in, which is to the effect that a defective kind of good could also be permitted – when it comes to interpretation, the court will not take that contract. The court would say “Anyway, by this law, you should have supplied something fit for the purpose”. Now, you cannot run to the contract and say that we agreed on it, when it violates an implied contract that it shall be fit for the purpose. Maybe that is what they are trying to regulate so that it helps in terms of disputed settlement when they arise so that the principles are clear. Learned Attorney-General, would you like to –

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, before the Attorney-General comes in, we need to realise that this particular provision is coming up after we have passed clause 16. Clause 17, talks about implied terms as to quality of material among others. We are saying that even if you make your contract somewhere, you should not provide in that contract for a situation which will vary the intention of the implied terms. 

Mr Chairperson, what you are saying is the real motive of our amendment – when we say that the express warrant or the condition shall not replace a warrant or condition implied by this Act; it should stop there and that is exactly what we are providing for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that makes sense. If you now put there “unless”, it is inconsistent with it –(Interjections)– what is inconsistent with what? Is it clearer now, Members? Do we agree that the amendment proposed by the committee is actually the best in the circumstances and the whole law? Can I put the question to the amendment to delete the words “unless it is inconsistence with it”, immediately after the word Act? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The committee proposes that clause 21, which deals with modification of remedies for breach of condition in certain cases be deleted.

The justification is that the provision leaves the buyer at the mercy of the seller and will lead to unnecessary litigation.  

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I do not see how this clause leaves the buyer at the mercy of the seller. If you look at clause 2, which says that it is for the seller to show under subsection (1) that a breach is very slight and it will not be reasonable for the buyer to reject the goods.

For example, when a buyer at the border of South Sudan orders for a good from Kampala, the seller will transport that good from Kampala up to the border of South Sudan. In case of any slight mistake, it means that the buyer will reject the goods and the loss shall be borne by the seller. 

Mr Chairperson, we should not only look at the buyer. Let us also consider the cost incurred by the seller in transporting the goods from Kampala up to the border of South Sudan. Therefore, I would like to propose that we leave this as it is. It should not be deleted so that it can protect both the seller and the buyer.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I do not have a problem with the formulation under the original Bill because it protects innocent people who buy from suppliers routinely. It says, “Where, in the case of a contract of sale, the buyer is not a consumer with the right to reject the goods by reason of a breach on the part of the seller…” It does not make sense to me; if I am a buyer, how do you say I do not have a right to reject? 

It continues on to say, “…goods by reason of a breach on the part of the seller of a condition implied by this Act, but the breach is so slight that it would not be reasonable for the buyer to reject the goods, the breach shall be treated as a breach of a warranty.” I would retain it. It is for the seller to show, under subsection (1), that a breach is so slight that it could not be reasonable for the buyer to reject the goods. I do not see any harm.  

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, I wonder why the committee wants to delete this section. First of all, the buyer has good will. Any slight mistake on the goods can affect the buyer’s business relationship with the people he is selling these goods to. This actually protects the buyer’s business. 

If I buy goods from the chairperson of this committee and I sell them in Gulu or Kalungu, I am not the last consumer; there is a distribution chain after me. Now, any slight mistake with the goods will cause a problem in terms of good will. Therefore, this is actually a remedy to any mistake committed by the seller who is selling to me. So, why do you want to delete this section, chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do you have a strong reason for proposing deletion and maintaining your proposal?

MR LUBOGO: Yes, Mr Chairman, I have strong grounds. First of all, the Attorney-General has observed here that subclause (1) says “Where, in the case of a contract of sale, the buyer is not a consumer with the right to reject the goods…” He wondered why a buyer should have no right to reject the goods. That is something questionable. Why would a buyer, even if he is not the consumer, lose that right? Under what circumstance will it arise that a buyer has no right to reject the goods? 

On the issue of a slight breach, we are saying it is the seller to indicate that this breach was too slight. It may be slight in the eyes of the seller but the buyer sees it as a major defect. Hon. Ssewungu is talking about goodwill, but this is not just about those sellers with goodwill; it could be a one-off sale. As a committee, we proposed this to be deleted.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable chairperson, you have used the word “slight” which refers to minor mistakes, not very heavy. Maybe if you change the word “slight” to a word that means something greater, then your reasoning may be okay. 

However, if you are talking of slight mistakes - for example, if you order for a car and the seller transports the car to you up to Amuru but on the way, there was a minor scratch on the car. On reaching Amuru, the buyer may change his mind because of the scratch. However, according to you, the scratch is so minor. Who will recover the cost of the seller transporting the car from Kampala up to Amuru where the buyer rejects the car?  Mr Chairman, let us try to be humane.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Chairman, the laws we are making should not be one-sided. In subclause (1), even if the buyer is not the consumer, because he might buy this item and sell it to somebody else, as hon. Olanya has observed, any slight mistake on the good might affect the cost of this good in the end. In this case, if we say the buyer will not have any position to reject this good, then we are not fair. The law we are making must favour both parties. Therefore, I strongly believe this clause should be retained. 

If I bought a car to sell it to somebody in Gulu, for example, but on the way one of the side mirrors got knocked off, by the time this car arrives in Gulu, the recipient of the car may reject the car because it would be expensive to buy the side mirror. Therefore, instead of buying the side mirror, he could prefer the same amount of money chopped from the cost of the car. In the end, it will affect the business of the buyer though he is not the final consumer. Thank you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I support the proposal of the committee because we have just approved a clause that takes keen interest in the terms and conditions - they are supposed to be respected and observed by both parties. Therefore, I do not believe that what they are proposing is to delete what we have approved already. 

In this same proposal, we shall be able to protect the interests of the buyer. I do not think just a scratch on a car will make a buyer reject the car. I do not think that will really be the case in this provision. There are minor and major cases that this law will also provide for. We need to protect both the seller and the buyer. Therefore, if we are mandated to protect the buyer, I do not believe it implies those minor things will give full authority to a buyer to reject goods. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank the chairperson of the committee. The problem I see here is our definition of the word “slight”. How slight is “slight”? There must be a measure or degree to determine that when it is this much, then it is minor and if it this much, it is medium or major. Otherwise, if we leave it open like that, it is likely to be subjected to abuse and the buyer will suffer.

Mr Chairperson, I will give the example of milk. Milk is a perishable good and the conditions of perishing are determined by a number of factors such as transportation, maintenance of utensils or containers, time taken and preservatives used. Therefore, you may receive the milk at that time when the damage is minor, but as soon as you receive it, the damage extends further. Slight damage can lead to major damage. Therefore, to me, it is wrong for us to leave this provision like that. It puts the buyer at a very serious disadvantage. 

We have received iPads here, which were brought from far. If Parliament said, “We need 1000 iPads in good condition of these specifications” and the supplier delivers 100 defective iPads that are not up to the standard, Parliament would be right to say they needed 1000 of certain specifications and not others. Therefore, this clause should be deleted because it puts the buyer at a disadvantage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the issue this situation is trying to answer is: when should a breach of a condition be treated as a breach of warranty? This suggests that where, from the look of it, it is not really a breach of a condition, it should be treated as a breach of a warranty. 

The word “slight” simply imports discretion to the person going to determine it as a question of fact. You asked, “Slight according to who?” It is according to the person who will be handling this particular case to determine whether it is slight or not, whether it is a big issue or not? That is importing discretion, which we cannot deny the courts which will be applying this law. That is how slight comes in. As Parliament, we cannot determine what is slight, but a court sitting and looking at a particular case can decide whether it is slight or not slight as a question of fact.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Chairperson, instead of deleting the whole section, let us amend it to see that we cater for the dual parties - the consumer and the seller. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me summarise the provision; it might help. All it is saying is, where the buyer is not the final consumer and the buyer cannot use the issue of breach of condition to reject the goods- The buyer is not the final consumer and cannot have the right to reject the goods by saying that the seller has violated a condition of the contract especially as provided for under the Act.

Let us use one of the implied conditions, for example fit for purpose. Where the buyer is not the consumer and he cannot say the seller has given him something that is not fit for purpose - If it is a scratch on a car, for example, the buyer has lost the right to say, “No, I cannot take this because it is not fit for the purpose anymore”. Do you get the point? It is a little scratch on the vehicle. Therefore, the buyer, who is not the final consumer, has lost the right to say that the seller has not performed on that condition because he has supplied something that is not fit for the purpose. 

“Fit for the purpose” is one of those implied terms that are contained in the Act. This is what this particular provision is saying. When that happens, it should just be treated as a breach of a warranty; for example, you told me that- Please, Members, understand this and then you will contribute better. 

If you told me that you are going to transport my car in a container; the car has come, it can work and is fit for the purpose but you brought it on an open ship and now there is some little rust on my car. The buyer cannot say that the car is not fit for the purpose, but he can say it is a breach of a warranty. You had warranted that this would come intact but there is a little problem with it. Therefore, that will be treated as a breach of a warranty. In this case, you still take the goods; you cannot reject the goods. You take the goods but you get some compensation for the small problem that has happened to the car. That is what it is saying.

MR RUKUTANA: I entirely agree with you, Mr Chairperson. The import of this clause, when you read it, appreciates the fact that we are talking about three parties - the seller, buyer and the consumer. We are saying that if you, the seller, sells something to a buyer, who is not the final consumer, and there is a slight breach, which would not enable the final consumer to reject the goods, the breach shall be treated as a breach of a warranty.

In other words, go and see the definition of warranty: “‘Warranty’ means an agreement with reference to goods which are the subject of a contract of sale, but collateral to the main purpose of that contract, the breach of which gives rise to a claim for damages, but not to a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated.” Therefore, if you are a final consumer, if the breach is so slight, treat it as a warranty; take your goods and claim for damages. In other words, the buyer who bought and sold to you is protected. 

This clause is meant to make trade fluid. I come and buy some goods that are consumable but they have slight defects for which the final consumer would be uncomfortable but would not reject them. He would maybe say, “This should have been like this; I can still drive the car but it has a crack on the sides.” Now, let that final consumer treat it as a breach of a warranty and seek damages, instead of rejecting the vehicle because of the crack and then you have to go back to the seller and say, “You sold me goods which cannot go”. It makes business easier.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. We need to take a decision. 

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you talk about commercial contracts, there are two major things, which must be noted - the terms and the conditions. These two are being agreed upon between the two parties, the buyer and the seller. What accompanies them, in the case of whatever we have been talking about like the scratches, is insurance. Insurance will cater for all the misdeeds within the contact. Where the car was shipped in good condition but it was delivered with scratches, that is where insurance comes in. Insurance must be prominent in any commercial contract. I beg to submit. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Attorney-General is insisting on the final consumer and I am getting confused. How do you ensure that the buyer does not become a consumer? I think he should redesign this clause so that it is open to cater for either a buyer or a consumer. If somebody has been a buyer and ends up being a consumer, that person should still be able to benefit in case of any damage. Also, what yardstick are you going to use to measure a breach in the contract? 

I would like to support the chairperson’s proposal that we delete this clause because it is vague, unless we can redesign it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That provision is not vague at all. 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Chairman, I also wanted inform the Attorney-General that sometimes the buyer might be the final consumer. 

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairman, I strongly oppose the deletion of clause 21 and I have three reasons. One is that it provides the circumstances under which a contract should not be repudiated or rescinded, and the provision is very clear. That is why there is room. What the law is trying to do is to differentiate between repudiation and claim for damages. Under what circumstances do you bring a claim for repudiation or a claim to entirely seek for damages?

Secondly, there is the aspect of the burden of proof, which is very important under our legal system. If you look at subclause (2), it shifts the burden of proof on the part of the seller to prove that actually, this was a minor breach not a major one, which we term as a “condition”. 

There is something important I thought we could address ourselves to. Mr Chairman, I do not know whether we should go by the notion of slight or minor. You provided us with over 20 cases at Law Development Centre and there is nowhere our courts have defined a warranty as a slight breach. They talk about a minor breach. Therefore, I do not know how we are now going to reshape this amendment. We either go with the term “slight” or with the properly defined position of a warranty indicating that it is a minor breach. I propose that we maintain clause 21. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have passed clause 13 of this Bill, which is about instances where conditions are to be treated as a warranty. I think all that we are talking about has been catered for in clause 13. 

The problem we have in this particular clause is that we are leaving it to the whims of the seller. The seller will deliver and say, “Take the goods; this is minor damage”. We are not protecting this buyer because we are leaving it to the seller to say, “This is very minor”. The buyer is losing his right to reject because, after all, we are leaving it to the seller to show that this is minor damage.

We think it is going to bring problems and will lead to a lot of litigation, just like we have justified. A disagreement will come up but the goods will be imposed upon the buyer because the seller, in his eyes, sees that after all, this is a slight or minor damage. I would not want to drop this because we need to protect the buyers. However, the House will have to take a decision on that. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought that in law when we say “it is the seller to show”, it is a serious statement. It does not just mean that the seller will say “this is a slight damage” and you take it at that. It actually says that you must prove that this is slight and it is not affecting the entire contract. 

If you look at subclauses (1), (2) and (3), you will find that all the ingredients to protect the buyer and at the same time guarantee the transaction are in this clause. I would persuade the chairperson of the committee to monitor the mood in the House and allow us to progress with the Bill. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, my mood is not very far from that of the chairperson of the committee. (Laughter) We are coming up with a law and at the same time trying to modify the law that we have put in place. My problem with this is that we are going to water down the provisions that we have in this piece of legislation because eventually, we are going to compromise the quality of the goods and services that should be supplied. 

Looking at the details of clause 21, it leaves a lot of ambiguity that can be misinterpreted and will eventually be a grey area in our legislation. This provision may not be very helpful for us at this moment and my proposal is that we take on what the chairperson has proposed. Thank you. 

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If a buyer cannot hold the supplier liable due to the contrary clause that we accepted earlier in this House, and if the buyer again cannot reject the goods if this clause is deleted, then we make the buyers weak in this contract.

We are also creating a gap for connivance. If minor defects can be determined by the two parties - the supplier and the buyer - in public contracts, that means these people can even connive and at the end of the day, the goods reaching the final consumer will have defects. Therefore, we are not protecting the consumer and the public contracts. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MR RUKUTANA: I would like to begin by responding to the honourable member. When we say it is for the seller to show, under subsection (1), that the breach is so slight, we are not saying that the two are sitting together and arguing alone. We are presupposing that there is an arbitrator somewhere, maybe it is a court, and the seller is justifying that the breach is not that big. 

That said, I would like to agree with my learned friend that having closely looked at this provision and having read the definition of a warranty, this provision is very necessary. As I said earlier, we have three parties: the seller, the buyer who buys maybe with a view of reselling to the final consumer, and the consumer who is defined as somebody who buys goods for his final consumption. 

I would like to amend and use the word “minor” instead of “slight”. So, the buyer has bought goods, but on the goods there are minor defects which do not entitle the final consumer to say that the goods are not fit for consumption. Let us not bury our heads in the sand; whatever you sell, you cannot guarantee that everything will be one hundred per cent perfect. There could be a minor defect, which does not go to the root of the usage of the goods you are buying. 

In that case, we saying that, let this minor breach be treated as a warranty. If you look at the definition of a warranty, it says, “Warranty means an agreement with reference to goods which are the subject of a contract of sale, but collateral to the main purpose of that contract…” The car can move, because you buy a car for mobility, and it has everything but there is a breach, which gives rise to a claim for damages; for example, it could have a scratch or a crack on the windscreen, which you can replace. However, under that, you do not have a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated.

This eases commerce and trade. If you are to say that for all goods I purchase, everything must be one hundred per cent perfect, then there would be no business or trade. We appreciate that where one buys a pen to write but it has a minor defect, they can go to the arbitrator and seek damages so that the defects can be remedied since the pen can still perform its intended purpose. 

Therefore, I am appealing to you, chairperson and honourable members, to allow this clause to remain but instead of “slight”, we use the term we normally use, which is “minor”. Those of us who have been to court use the word “minor” and not “slight”. So, it would read, “…but the breach is so minor that it would not be reasonable for the buyer to reject the goods…”, then the breach can be treated as a warranty.

In subclause (2) we say, “It is for the seller to show under subsection (1) that a breach is so minor that it would not be reasonable for the buyer to reject the goods.” If we do not do that, we are suffocating trade. Somebody will wake up and say, “I wanted this thing immaculate but you can see that there is something down here” and yet the car can move but he or she rejects it. That would not be good for –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the headnote reads, “Modification of remedies for breach of condition in certain cases”. Therefore, you are seeking a remedy to a problem, and that is when it arises in certain cases. Those things are on a case by case basis. 

I will give you an example. If hon. Abiriga orders for a yellow car, –(Laughter)- even if you bring that car and it is so sound, nothing has cracked and it is perfect but it is not yellow, it will be a matter of substance in the case of hon. Abiriga. He has ordered for a yellow car because for him “fit for the purpose” means that it must extend beyond driving and it must also show colours. That is why I am saying, leave it to the discretion of the court to examine the cases on a case by case basis. 

Therefore, can we take a decision on this, please? I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson that this particular regulation should be deleted. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the Attorney-General to substitute the word “slight” with the word “minor”.       onpoH

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Since there are amendments on this clause, we might need to pause here, take a break and come back in the afternoon and we finish. Can we, at this stage, pause for lunch and come back? Is that okay? It is now 12.30p.m. We will resume at 2.00p.m. so that we finish early.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.31
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.31
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sale of Goods and Supply Services Bill, 2015” and passed, with amendments, clauses 2 to 34. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.32
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let us break off. The House is suspended until 2 O’clock. We will resume at 2 O’clock on the dot so that we are able to finish early. 

(The House was suspended at 12.33 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.05 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we start with the Bill, there are some urgent matters that happened when we were sitting here and I need the Members to raise them very quickly. 

2.06
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent issue of national importance regarding the crisis in Nwoya County, Nwoya District. 

We have been having land wrangles, which involve the use of soldiers, army officers and those in privileged positions and the situation has worsened. As we talk, there is one person who has left us and is being buried right now. He was shot by a soldier in the morning and unfortunately, the soldier that shot him is still at large and is threatening the community. He is warning everyone that whoever dares to report him anywhere will be the next victim. 

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Nwoya, I would like to place a request to you and to this august House that we come in and intervene in this crisis. If possible, we request that a select committee be formed to thoroughly investigate these issues and report to this House. This is not happening only on one farm but in many farms. We have two subcounties with over 200 soldiers deployed in private farms and they are involved in land wrangles. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise this urgent issue of national importance.

2.08
MS LILLY ODONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to rise on the same note and add to what my colleague has said. Time and again, we have asked this House to intervene and help the people of Nwoya with what they are going through. Land wrangles have escalated to a level where the leadership of Nwoya can no longer handle. When you go to the Resident District Commissioner, he simply says that he is also afraid. The LC V chairperson says the same thing.

There is one particular group of youth that hired land using the Youth Livelihood Programme funds. They planted over 80 hectares of groundnuts but soldiers have been deployed and they have stopped these people from weeding their crops. I do not know where they are going to get money to pay back. I therefore request the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development or whoever is concerned in this House to come to our rescue. Let us help the people of Nwoya. I believe the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) is meant to protect persons and their property but not individuals. 

Mr Speaker, I beg this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I get a communication from the Government side. You seek clarification?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, we know that this problem in Nwoya has been going on for quite some time. However, I am shocked that the person that was shot by a soldier only this morning is already being buried when the soldier that shot him is not apprehended; he is on the run. Why would we rush to bury someone that has been killed like that?

I would like to know because we would expect that this person would be given a befitting send-off and that those who have killed him would be apprehended and his people would be compensated. Why would they be in a hurry to bury this person?

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, you know that the issue of death is very emotional and I am actually trying to control myself. The person was actually not shot today but yesterday morning. All the due diligence in regard to the funeral arrangements, including the post-mortem, was done and the police visited the scene of crime. They were the ones that picked the body. In any case, the perpetrator of the crime actually came with his group and wanted to steal the body but thank God that they came when the police had already removed the body.

The unfortunate thing is that the UPDF said that they cannot take the responsibility of meeting the burial expenses because the person was not shot at any military installation. They are also saying that the person in whose farm or neighbourhood that the man was shot should take up the responsibility. However, he is not committed or he is not willing to cooperate with the family of that poor man. That is why the poor family cannot continue keeping the body. You know that the body of someone who was shot and killed by a bullet is very difficult to preserve. That is the situation we are in. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ONGIERTHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the House that the person that was killed is actually somebody from my constituency. That part of Nwoya District is inhabited by both people who originate from Nwoya and those who come from Jonam. This person was from our side, Jonam.

The unfortunate bit that hurts me is that this incident now brings up issues between the Jonam people and the Acholi people when actually, there is nothing between them. It is just some few individuals that are bringing these problems. Unfortunately, when that comes to our side, some people quickly want to look at the issue of the tribe when there is completely no problem between the Jonam and the Acholi people. It is just these individuals. It pains us that this continues in that way and we think that we need to be helped. Thank you.

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, on behalf of Government, I would like to express our heartfelt sympathy to the bereaved family. I want to inform the House that one of the hallmarks of the NRM Government is peace and security. This matter will be investigated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs immediately and they will be in touch with the communities in that district. At an appropriate time, we will inform Parliament.

In terms of action, the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is also coming to the House, will be informed immediately to swing into action and investigate this matter and make sure that those who are responsible are brought to book.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need a preliminary update on this issue tomorrow at 10 O’clock. Let the Minister come and tell us what is going on. Thank you.

2.15
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a voter called Mudenyo Sulaiman who went missing after being arrested as one of the many suspects that allegedly killed the late Felix Kaweesi. The family is struggling to come in, but allow me read a brief statement of the facts as they gave them to me. 

This is the statement on the arrest of Mudenyo Sulaiman, the Imam of Mpungwe Mosque, Mpungwe Subcounty, Bunya East County, Mayuge District. The suspect is the Imam of Mpungwe Subcounty but a resident of Mwezi Village, Maina Parish in Mpungwe Subcounty, Bunya East, Mayuge District.

He was arrested from his home at Mwezi at around 9.30 on 9 April 2017. It was alleged that he is among the many people who are suspected to have killed IGP Kaweesi Felix. They took him alongside his son, Kassim Mulawa, who is now part of the team that is outside. They were taken to a place referred to as Wembley in Buligo in Iganga. 

His son was released but he kept visiting him at Wembley, taking him food. When the family went back one time, he was not there. They were referred to Nalufenya in Jinja. When they went to Nalufenya, they did not find him but they were referred to Kireka. When they failed to trace him in Kireka, they were referred to Luzira Prison. While at Luzira, his other son called Umar Mulawa searched for him but could not find him. The family of Mudenyo Sulaiman contacted the District Internal Security Officer (DISO), the District Police Commander (DPC) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Mayuge, but none had any information about their father. Later, they contacted the Regional Internal Security Officer of Jinja but he also did not have any information about the said Imam.

Imam Sulaiman has four wives - some are pregnant - and many children. Some children are sick while others are not going to school. They came to me on 26 May 2017 as their last resort. Therefore, I would like to request you, Mr Speaker, to order the Minister of Internal Affairs to produce Imam Mudenyo Sulaiman to his family within 12 hours and report to Parliament. Secondly, I request that Parliament also investigates the legal status of the said Wembley in Buligo in Iganga District. I beg to submit and thank you.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in a similar manner, the Minister of Internal Affairs will report to this House on this matter tomorrow at 10.00a.m. Mr Speaker, I am standing here as the acting Government Chief Whip.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have these matters responded to tomorrow at 10 O’clock when the minister comes. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister; sincerely, you do a good job in this House whenever we have you here. However, the procedural matter I want to raise is that we handled this matter, but the issues coming out now regarding particular individuals are very pertinent. I want to put it on record that the issue of Kaweesi and the people you are talking about - You see, the killer- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a procedural matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am raising a procedural matter, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, put forward the procedural issue and we proceed.

MR SSEWUNGU: Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that when the minister comes to give a report, he does not only handle the matter raised by the hon. Majegere Waira? This is because incidents of people being arrested in regard to the late Kaweesi’s killing are becoming too many. 

I want to state that the killers of this man, from the way he died, were well guarded. When we get very many people involved in the death of this person, it becomes abnormal. It was highly guarded and that is the procedural matter I am raising because we are going to get more arrests of this kind. I am also about to give the names of people in Kalungu who have got lost in relation to the same death.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will hear from the minister responsible for this matter tomorrow at 10 O’clock. Let us go to the next item.  

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

Clause 35

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment in clause 35, which deals with duties of seller and buyer. In the headnote of that clause, the committee proposes that the word “supplier” be inserted immediately after the word “seller”. The justification is: to align the headnote to the content of the provision.  

Mr Chairman, I pointed out in the beginning that “seller” refers to the seller of goods and “supplier” to the supplier of services.  Therefore, we want it to encompass both the seller of goods and the supplier of services.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would the headnote read now? 

MR LUBOGO: It will read, “Duties of seller and buyer and supplier”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you used some commas there, it would help.

MR LUBOOGO: I think there should have been another amendment on punctuation, which we did not bring out. It should have been, “Duties of seller, supplier and buyer”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Attorney-General, put your question on record so that we know what you are proposing.

MR RUKUTANA: Isn’t it better, Mr Chairman, to say, “Duties of parties to a contract”?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with Part IV of the Bill, which is, “Performance of contract of sale and supply of services”. The first provision under Part IV is, “Duties of a seller, supplier and buyer”. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37 

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, we dealt with a similar clause -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a consequential amendment. 

MR LUBOGO: Yes, Mr Chairperson. We changed the phrase “third person” to “third party” wherever it appears. Therefore, we are proposing that we substitute the phrase “third person” with the phrase “third party” wherever it appears in this provision. The justification is: for consistency in the usage of the phrase in the Bill. Actually, it is now consequential because we adopted it before.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, in clause 38, the committee proposes the deletion of subclause (4). If that is done, we will propose the consequential deletion of subclauses (5), (6) and (7). 

The justification for the deletion of subclause (4) is that subclauses (2) and (3) suffice and, therefore, we do not need subclause (4) to appear there. It is of no value in that provision. Its deletion would not change anything because it does not carry anything significant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it pose a danger to the flow and interpretation of the law? Is there a problem of consistency? Sometimes when the drafts people put those details, they have seen something else somewhere which you might have missed.

MR LUBOGO: If there is anything we have not seen, maybe the minister can clarify to us. However, let me read subclauses (2) and (3): 

“(2) Where the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods larger than the seller contracted to sell, the buyer may accept the goods included in the contract and reject the rest, or the buyer may reject the whole and where the buyer accepts the whole of the goods delivered the buyer must pay for them at the contract rate.

(3) Where the seller delivers to the buyer the goods the seller contracted to sell mixed with goods of a different description not included in the contract, the buyer may accept the goods, which are in accordance with the contract and reject the rest, or the buyer may reject the whole.”

Now, subclause (4), which we feel adds no value, says, “Notwithstanding subclauses (1), (2) and (3), a buyer who is not a consumer may not-
(a) 	reject the goods, where the seller delivers a quantity of goods less than the seller contracted to sell; or 
(b) 	reject all the goods where the seller delivers a quantity of goods larger than the seller contracted to sell, if the shortfall or, as the case may be, the excess, is so slight that it would be unreasonable for the buyer to do so.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now you know why they put it there – The issue of “slight” which you amended to “minor”. It has a different meaning from the upper ones; if it is so small, then they should not reject.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, I would still think that subclauses (2) and (3) are sufficient to cover this. However, if they are not, I will concede.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairman, if you look at subclause (4) critically, it is clear that it imposes what we call the severance principle. I will give an example. If you are supposed to receive a quantity of 6,000 pieces but they deliver 10,000, your duty is only limited to accepting the 6,000. I feel there is no reason as to why we should delete subclause (4) because it brings out the essence of the severance principle. You are supposed to pay for what you contracted for and nothing less or above.

MR RUKUTANA: I support the opinion of the learned honourable member because this clause is qualified by its conclusion, which says, “if the shortfall or, as the case may be, the excess, is so minor that it would be unreasonable for the buyer to do so.” There is nothing wrong with that.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, kindly protect me from hon. Bahati. (Laughter) He is trying to intimidate me. I concede to the position of the Attorney-General and your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson of the committee. However, I think there is an amendment where instead of using the word “slight” we use the word “minor”. Can you propose it properly?

MR MUGOYA: I propose that we delete the word “slight” and replace it with “minor” wherever it appears.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we now agree that it will be consequential; where they have used “slight” in this context, we will change it to “minor”. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to call upon you to participate in this process.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, we have a proposal to redraft clause 41(5) to read as follows: “Where the seller fails to give notice to the buyer under subsection (4) above, the goods shall be deemed to be at his or her risk during that sea transit.” 

The justification is: To harmonise the provision with subclause (4). The duty to insure the goods should not be placed on the seller outright, but should only arise where the seller fails to notify the buyer in accordance with subclause (4) of this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any comment on this, honourable minister and Attorney-General? Is it necessary to say “under subsection (4) above”? Subsection (4) is subsection (4).

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, your guidance is most welcome on this. I think when we say, “subsection (4)” and we are referring to that subsection, then it is sufficient to bring out the meaning. Therefore, the word “above” can be dropped from this proposed amendment.

MS KAMATEEKA: I think that if we just say “subsection (4)”, it may refer to any subsection (4). Is it specifically within the clause?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is in the same clause and so it could not be referring to any other subsection. If it was a cross reference, they would say, “subsection (4) of section this or that”. I now put the question to the improved amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not hear the voting. Only a few Members are voting. 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I have not put any question now; why are you voting? (Laughter)

Clause 42

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 42, which is about risks where goods are delivered elsewhere than at a place of sale, by substituting the word “buyer” appearing in line two with the word “seller”. The Justification is: To accord the provision its appropriate meaning for purposes of clarity.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, if that is done, then it becomes superfluous. You are saying, “Where the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the seller’s own risk at a place other than that where they are when sold, the seller shall, unless otherwise agreed, take any risk…” You have already said it is at the seller’s risk, why do we say this? Do we need to have it like this?

You are saying, “Where the seller of goods agrees to the deliver them at the seller’s own risk at a place other than that where they are when sold, the seller shall, unless otherwise agreed, take any risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incidental to the course of transit.” I do not see the import of this clause. In the first place, the seller has agreed to deliver the goods at his or her own risk; so, why do we repeat that it will be at his or her risk? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The current clause is correct and more appropriate because it reads, “Where the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the seller’s own risk at a place other than that where they are when sold, the buyer shall, unless otherwise agreed, take any risk…” I feel this statement is more appropriate because if we replace the word “buyer” with the word “seller”, it may change the meaning. What we have currently is more appropriate.

MR RUKUTANA: Maybe someone wanted to say, “…the buyer shall not take any risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incidental to the course of transit.” The seller has already agreed to deliver the goods at his own risk but now you will say, “the buyer shall, unless otherwise agreed, not take any risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incidental to the course of transit.” 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been consulting with the senior counsel and we agreed that maybe when we go to the third reading, there will be something we can consider in the section on delivery of goods.

Mr Chairman, the Attorney-General knows that in a contract of sale of goods, if you read the Income Tax Act, there are processes. The seller can take on all the risks of transferring goods but also there is a stage where the buyer can agree to take all the risks. However, as it is in clause 41, which we have just passed, we have not catered for that particular area. I would like us to bring it back, but it can come during the third reading.

Mr Chairperson, the only way we can handle clause 42 is when we have remedied the issue of the seller and the buyer and where they take on their risks. Delivery has different procedures and those procures are fully stated in the Income Tax Act. I do not know whether the Attorney-General can give proper guidance here because in clause 42, we are only looking at the seller’s advantages but not those of the buyer. However, you can also have a contract where at the delivery stage he can incur all the risks. I would like to seek for guidance regarding this particular area.

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Mr Chairperson, this phrase in the Bill says, “Where seller of goods agrees to the deliver the goods…” With whom does he agree? If the seller is agreeing with the buyer, then it would be acceptable that at any place where the goods would be, they can take the risk. However, it is not shown here that the seller agrees with the buyer.

Secondly, it says when the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the seller’s own risk, at a place other than that where they are when sold, that means a different place. If you are taking goods to a different place, first of all I have not agreed with you as the buyer, then why do I, as the buyer, take the risks?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, it might help if we looked at clause 43. In clause 43, where the buyer has not inspected the goods before, he is now able to inspect them and accept them.  Therefore, if in clause 42 he has inspected the goods and accepted them and they are to be delivered to him at a destination, then maybe he is already bound because he has already inspected the goods. Clause 43 would otherwise be redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to look at what is proposed by the committee properly.

MR RUKUTANA: I think to appreciate the import of this clause, Members have to know that delivery can take place at the place where the goods are sold. You can sell goods and make a delivery to the buyer at the place where you have sold the goods. 

However, this clause says, “Where the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the seller’s own risk at a place other than that where they are when sold, the buyer shall, unless otherwise agreed…” That is why I said that maybe what was envisaged was, “otherwise agreed not to take any risk of deterioration in the goods necessarily incidental to the cost of transit”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why you may have to look at what the committee has proposed. They proposed to substitute the word “buyer” with the word “seller”. 

MR RUKUTANA: If you say, “shall not” you are exonerating the buyer from taking risks. The seller has agreed to deliver the goods at his or her own risk to a place other than where they are sold. That is the seller delivering them. Now, if the seller has agreed to deliver the goods at a place other than where they are sold, then it should continue to read, “…the buyer shall, unless otherwise agreed, not take any risk of deterioration in the goods…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read it with the word “seller” and see what it is like.

MR RUKUTANA: Okay, it would read, “Where the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the seller’s own risk at a place other than that where they are when sold, the seller shall, unless otherwise agreed, take any risk…” Okay, if you substitute the word “seller” for “buyer”, it makes sense. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what the committee has proposed. 

MR RUKUTANA: Therefore, we substitute the word “buyer” with the word “seller”.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would prefer the first line to say, “Where the seller of goods agrees to deliver them at the buyer’s own risk…” This is where the whole clause will have meaning. In the first sentence where it says, “the seller’s own risk”, it should actually read, “the buyer’s own risk”. That is when the clause would make sense.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am going to put the question to the proposal by the committee to substitute the word “buyer” with the word “seller” in the second line of the clause. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 48 (3)(c) by substituting the phrase “section 48” with the phrase “section 49” to ensure correct cross-referencing.

We have another amendment in clause 48(4); the proposal is to insert the word “remedies” between the words “other” and “are” appearing in line three of the provision. The justification is: for clarity.

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, I have something to propose in clause 48 (2) (a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let us process what has been proposed. Is that what was proposed by the chairperson? 

MR OLANYA: No.

DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I finish with what he has proposed then I come to you? Let us deal with clause 48 (3) (c). Where do we read section 49 from? How sure are we that this is section 49?

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, section 48, which we are dealing with right now, is about the right to repair or replace goods. Section 49 is about the right to reduce purchase price or rescind contract. Therefore, we are saying clause 48 (3) (c) should read thus: “The buyer shall not require the seller to repair or replace the damaged goods if that damage is – 
(c) disproportionate in comparison to an appropriate reduction in the purchase price under section 49.” So, it is in section 49 where we find the right to reduce the purchase price and rescind contract.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is clear. What about the first one?

MR LUBOGO: That was the first amendment. The second is to insert the word “remedies” between the words “other” and “are” appearing in line three of clause 48 (4). 

Clause 48(4) reads, “A remedy is disproportionate in comparison to the other remedies where it imposes costs on the seller which, in comparison to those imposed on him or her by the other, are unreasonable, taking into account…” We are saying that between the words “other” and “are” insert the word “remedies” so that it reads, “A remedy is disproportionate in comparison to the other remedies…” I beg your indulgence, Mr Chairman; just a moment - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you still see a problem with it?    

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, we are looking at clause 48(4) and we suggest that between the words, “other” and “are” we should insert the word “remedies” and this what it should read: “A remedy is disproportionate in comparison to the other remedies where it imposes costs on the seller which, in comparison to those imposed on him or her by the other remedies, are unreasonable, taking into account…” Therefore, we suggest that we should insert “remedies” between “other” and “are” for purposes of clarity.

MR RUKUTANA: Procedurally, we should first consider clause 49 and when we pass it, we go back to clause 48 because clause 48 is referring to a section which we have not considered. Supposing we first approve the import of the section which is referred to in clause 48 and we see whether it makes sense; can’t we stand over clause 48?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it necessary? The cross referencing has no problem. The issue of the insertion of “other remedies” is all that is there. He is saying, “…in comparison to those imposed on him or her by the other remedies…” The same phrasing is put in the first line: “…to the other remedies where it imposes…” Is that okay, learned Attorney-General? Can you be on record on that?

MR RUKUTANA: That is okay. Inserting the word “remedies” between the words “other” and “are” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, between the words “other” and the comma because there is a comma before “are”.

MR RUKUTANA: Okay. That is correct.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is to insert the word “remedies” immediately after the word “other” in the third line. That is the amendment as proposed by the committee. Can I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to refer you to subclause (2) where it says, “Where the buyer requires the seller to replace or repair goods, the seller shall- 
(a) repair or as the case may be, replace the goods within a reasonable time…”

Mr Chairman, my concern is with the words “reasonable time”. We need to define what reasonable time is. From the seller’s perspective, he may look at 10 years as being his reasonable time yet the buyer may look at one week as being his reasonable time. Therefore, I propose that if we could give a timeframe so that it guides both the seller and the buyer. Leaving it open like this may not be appropriate. I propose that we give it at least three months. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are two timeframes here; there could be a different timeframe for repair and a completely different timeframe for replacement. If you are ordering a car from Japan and you are going to repair it by spraying a dent on some area, it is a whole different timeframe; that is why they are saying “reasonable”.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my colleague that these contracts vary; it depends on the time of the contract you have set out. If it is about bringing a car or selling sugar, it is within that contract that you agree on the time of delivery. Therefore, when they say “within reasonable time”, it must fit within the time you are contracted to deliver. If you give yourself three months and the contract was for two weeks, where is the repair going to take place? You cannot express the time here because contracts vary.

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, after the explanations, I concede. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I have a problem because this subclause connotes that the moment the buyer requires, the seller is obliged. Supposing the seller has an objection? It says, “Where the buyer requires the seller to replace or repair the goods, the seller shall…” However, circumstances may be such that it is not necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is paragraph 3. In subclause (3), there is an examination process. Can I put the question? I put the question that clause 48, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes two amendments in this particular clause. The committee proposes to insert the words “or supplier” between the words “seller” and “for” appearing in line three of this provision.

The justification is for clarity and part of it is addressing the service -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how will it be housed?

MR LUBOGO: In clause 63 (1) we propose to insert the words, “or supplier” between “seller and for”. “…action against the seller or supplier for…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean supplier of services? 

MR LUBOGO: That is correct, Mr chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t the word “supplier” be sufficient? 

MR LUBOGO: It is “seller or supplier”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think “supplier” will be sufficient. 

MR RUKUTANA: I concede to that; let us insert “or supplier” to mean for the services. 

MR LUBOGO: We have another one in sub clause (4). The committee proposes that sub clause (4) of this particular clause should be deleted and the justification is that this particular provision is redundant since it is catered for under sub clause (1) of this very clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are two proposals; one is for deletion of sub clause (4) and the other is amending sub clause (1) by inserting those words “or supplier” immediately after the word “seller”. 

MR MUGOYA: I am starting with the deletion of sub clause (4) and it says, “where the supplier wrongfully neglects or refuses to deliver the service.” That is purely what I said before; that it is a contract of service.

The one in clause 64(1) provides for contract of services or goods. We need to distinguish the two. I would like us to maintain sub clause (4) because it is very relevant since it caters for the contract of service as opposed to contract of services.  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I think the amendment of clause 63 (1) - if it was carried - takes care of sub clause (4). In clause 63 (1), the chairperson proposed an amendment to say where the seller - if you can read it serves the purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is still a problem in (1). If you want to combine everything in that sub clause, would you leave the word “seller” alone in the first line?  

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, we have proposed that this amendment of clause 63 (1) should read: “where the seller wrongfully neglects or refuses to deliver the goods.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why I am asking that shouldn’t you have also put there “supplier”? Or the supplier is on the third line. There are two places; there is the first line and the last.

MR LUBOGO: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. I think after “seller” in the first line, we should equally put “or supplier” and move to do the same in the third line and then delete sub clause (4). 

MR SSEWUNGU: It justifies the deletion of (4).

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I listened when the chairperson proposed amendments to (1) and he said that where the seller or supplier -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, he initially did not say that. It was initially only in the third line. 

MR RUKUTANA: Now if you put it here, “or supplier” then it caters for (4). 

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairman, it does not. We need to understand the qualifying statement here or explosion or notion. The notion is goods or supply of services. Once you say supply of services as opposed to supply of a service, you are looking at two contracts. Remember that this law is basically creating how contracts should be enforced, implemented and executed. 

Once you mention services you are talking about a contract of services and once you say it is a contract of service, you have qualified that particular service and that is the relevance of sub clause (4) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, a contract of service is an employment contract; it is not part of this. 

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, I beg to clarify on this. You may be interested in looking at clause 3 (2) which says, “Notwithstanding sub section (1), a contract of service or apprenticeship is not a contract for the supply of services.”

What you are talking about is what is dealt with in this particular provision. We are actually looking at a contract for services. 

MR SSEWUNGU: He has to believe that there is totally no difference between clause 63 (1) and (4) after amending the word “seller”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question on deletion of sub clause (4) of clause 63.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sub clause (4) deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 63 (1).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 68, which is on variation of implied terms by inserting the words “or supply of services” immediately after the word “sale” in line one. 

The justification is to broaden the provision to include the supply of services. It would be a consequential amendment as we have already adopted it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, can I put the question to that proposal?

MR RUKUTANA: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, “Clause 72: Powers of the minister to amend the schedule. The minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of Cabinet, amend the schedule to this Act.” I wish to give the powers to Parliament –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On currency points?

MR SSEWUNGU: I concede. (Laughter)      

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 72, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, in clause 73, the committee proposes to draft the provisions to read as follows: “The Sale of Goods Act, Cap 82 and the Bulk Sales Act Cap 69 are repealed.” 
The justification is to clarify on it as it is already captured in the object of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, I need your guidance on this because we have quite a number of amendments on clause 1, probably I will read one by one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are they definitions? Let us deal with them one by one. 

MR LUBOGO: Most obliged, Mr Chairperson. Clause 1 is the definition of “buyer”. The committee recommends that we redraft the definition of “buyer” to read as follows:
That “buyer” means a person who buys or agrees to buy goods or who procures or agrees to procure services. 

The justification is for clarity and to broaden the definition to include an agreement to procure services.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 1 is definitions and we are now dealing with them. We are looking at the object of the Bill. The word “buyer” is defined on page (5) of the Bill, if you have the original Bill.

MR LUBOGO: Can I read it again? We are looking at the definition of “buyer”. The current definition in the Bill is that “buyer” means a person who buys or agrees to buy goods or procures services. 

The proposed amendment is that “buyer” means a person who buys or agrees to buys goods or procures or agrees to procure services. Therefore, it brings in the element of agreeing to procure; in other words, future provision of services.

MR SSEWUNGU: It is a repetition; let me read it: “buyer” means a person who buys or agrees to buy goods or procure services. What is included there is just enough. He has catered for all -  

MR LUBOGO: I am sorry, but hon. Ssewungu, you are not getting it right. First of all, look at “buyer” and its definition on the goods part; it states that a person who buys or agrees to buy; that is for the side of goods. However, for services, we are saying it should be a person who procures or agrees to procure. It is consistency. As we define goods, the same breath should be applied for the supply of services.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)
   
MR LUBOGO: Now definition of “goods” in clause 1; the committee proposes to insert a new paragraph (d) immediately after paragraph (c) to read as follows: “(d) Undivided share in goods held in common.”  

The justification is to broaden the definition of goods to include sale of a share in undivided goods.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: The third amendment we are proposing is on definition of “specific goods”. The committee proposes that we insert the words “and includes undivided shares in specific goods held in common” at the end of the provision. 
The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment proposed under the definition of “goods”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: Definition of “supplier” and those who have got the report is on page 10. The committee proposes that we insert the words “supplies or” immediately after the word “who” that is in the definition of the word “supplier.” 

It shall be therefore that “supplier” means a person who supplies or agrees to supply services. The justification is to broaden the definition of supplier to cater for situations where there is actual supply of services.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we insert the following definitions in alphabetical order: “Data message” means data generated, sent, received or stored by computer means and it includes:
    a) Voice. This is where the voice is used in an automated transaction.
    b) Restored record. 

Mr Chairman, should I go to another definition?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let us deal with that. We agreed we will be handling them one by one. That data message, is it used anywhere in the Bill? Can you show us where?
 
MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, it has been used and if you can grant me just one second - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Has it been used in the Bill? 

MR LUBOGO: Yes, that is why we are capturing it here for definition. We could not define it when it is not in the Bill. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the definition section is to define words, verbs or things used in this law. If it is not used anywhere in this law - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is clause 5(1). 

MR RUKUTANA: But you said it is not used. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is used at least once. Clause 5(1) has that phrase “Data message” and the other one was deleted. 

MR RUKUTANA: Since it is used, then it is okay. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, proceed. Have you defined it already? Is that definition for data message okay? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: The next definition is “services”. The committee proposes that a definition be given for services as follows: 
That “services” means any service or facility provided for gain or reward or otherwise than for free charge, including services or facilities for -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read that again, please? 

MR LUBOGO: “Services” means any service or facility provided for gain or reward or otherwise than free of charge, including services or facilities for -
    a) banking, insurance, grants, loans, Credit or financing;
    b) amusement, curricular activities, entertainment, instruction, recreation or refreshment;
    c) accommodation, transport, travel, parking or storage;
    d) the care of persons, animals or things;
    e) membership in a club or organisation or any service or facility provided by the club or organisation; and
    f) any rights, benefits, privileges, obligations or facilities that are or are to be provided, granted or conferred in the course of services but it does not include services provided under a contract of employment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBOGO: “Unascertained goods” means goods not identified or agreed upon at the time the contract is made. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it again please, if you are reading the same text? 

MR LUBOGO: “Unascertained goods” means goods not identified and agreed upon at the time the contract is made. 

The justification is for clarity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, can I put the question to that? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you still have other amendments in Clause 1? Proceed. 

MR LUBOGO: Clause 1(3); to redraft the provision to read as follows: “In determining whether a person is insolvent within the meaning of this Act, reference shall be made to the Insolvency Act of 2011.” 

The justification is to ensure consistency with the Insolvency Act, 2011. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUKUTANA: Before we approve the clause, I listened to some formulation which includes “other than services for free” so I withdraw. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had not proposed anything, so there is nothing to withdraw. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 1, stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title of the Bill

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Title to the Bill remains as Title to the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.31
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.32
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015” and has passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.33
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

3.34
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE SALE OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES, ACT 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, for processing this through and honourable members for the very lovely concentration you have given to this Bill. At last, we have kicked this from our list of pending business.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, I would like to be accorded just one minute to appreciate the Speaker and the House at large for the support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just doing my job; you do not have to appreciate me. Let us go on with business.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are appreciated for the support and I also appreciate the whole House for supporting us to have this Bill sail through in such a record time. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. You did a good job. Congratulations to you and the honourable minister. Honourable minister, did you want to say something?

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, honourable members and members of the committee, I would like to thank you for supporting this Bill. It will definitely streamline the trade regime.  We were using a very old law of 1932 but now, I thank you for repealing the old one and approving the new one. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister for proposing it. Otherwise, we would still be using the 1932 one.

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 5.84 MILLION, EQUIVALENT TO $ 9.54 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (AFDB) FOR A SUPPLEMENTARY LOAN FOR THE INTERCONNECTION OF ELECTRIC GRIDS OF NILE EQUATOTRIAL LAKES COUNTRIES (NELSAP)

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $9.54 million from the African Development Bank Group for a supplementary loan for the interconnection of electric grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is supported by the Member for Bungokho and the honourable Member for Rushenyi. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this is a supplementary loan to the original project that we approved in this House. The objective of the project is to help strengthen the East African Regional Power Grid and facilitate power exchange within the region.

Originally, the scope of the project included 127.7 kilometres of 220 KV transmission lines from Bujagali via Tororo sub-station to Uganda-Kenya border, 63 of 220 KV transmission from Mbarara sub-station via new Mirama sub-station to Uganda-Rwanda border and the revived hope now, which has necessitated the supplementary loan, comprises of construction of 132.2 kilometres of 220 KVs, double circuit transmission in line with Bujagali via Tororo substation to Uganda-Kenya border, among other items that the supplementary budget loan will finance.

The chairperson of the committee and members have considered this request and they are now ready to report about this matter, for the House to debate and for adoption. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I will propose for your debate is a motion for resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Unit of Accounts 5.84 million, an equivalent of USD 9.54 million, from the African Development Bank Group for a supplementary loan for the interconnection of electric grid of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries. 

That is the motion I propose for your debate but there is a motion when this request was presented, we referred it to the Committee on National Economy. To start off the debate, the chairperson should report on the summary of their findings and what they recommend for this House to do.

3.40
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow UA 5.84 million, equivalent to $ 9.54 million from the African Development Bank Group, for a supplementary loan for the interconnection of electric grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Region in accordance with the Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament.

The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the 2 February 2017 and was accordingly referred to the Committee on the National Economy for consideration.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. The committee studied and made reference to the following documents: the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brief on the loan request, appraisal documents and the draft loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the Africa Development 	Bank Group.

Project objective

The objective is to help strengthen the East African Regional Power Grid and facilitate power exchange within the region. The project, the Uganda Side Initial Scope comprised of construction of 127.7 kilometres of 22 KV transmission line from Bujagali via Tororo sub-station, to the Uganda-Kenya border and 66 kilometres of 22KV transmission line, from Mbarara sub-station via new Mirama sub-station to the Uganda-Rwanda border and the extension of Bujagali-Mbarara-Tororo sub-station and construction of a new sub-station at Mirama.

The revised scope and proposed supplementary loan in Uganda comprise the construction of: 
    i) 132.1 kilometers of 22 KV double circuits transmission line from Bujagali via Tororo sub-station to the Uganda-Kenya border;
    ii) 66.55 kilometers of 22 KV, double circuit transmission line from Mbarara North sub-station via Mirama sub-station to the Uganda-Rwanda border;
the extension of 220 KV Bujagali switchyard, construction of new 220, 132 KV Mbarara North sub-station, construction of a new 220 KV –Tororo substation and construction of new 220/132/33kV Mirama substation.

Status of Implementation of the Project in Uganda

Following signing of the ADB loan agreement on 13 May, 2009 and JICA loan on 26 March 2010, the ADB's conditions precedent to first disbursement were fulfilled on 7 July 2011 and procurement of services started immediately.

Procurement of Services, Goods and Works

The project implementing agency, the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd (UETCL) signed contracts on 16 June 2011 with the project supervision consultant, 29 November 2012 with the EPC contractors for the transmission lines construction and 6 December 2012 with the EPC contractor for the substations construction.

Mr Speaker, the project is ongoing and is estimated at about 75 per cent completion.

Project Cost and Financing 

The initial financing arrangement, for Uganda’s portion of this project of interconnection were ADB, JICA and Government of Uganda with an AFDB loan of UA 7.59 million (15.77 per cent) JICA loan of ¥5,406 million (77.85 per cent) of the project financing and 37.48 units of accounts from Government of Uganda (6.38 per cent).

Terms and Conditions of the Loan

The AFDB facility will have the following terms:

    a) Loan amount - $9.4 million
    b) Maturity period - 40 years 
    c) Grace period - 10 years 
    d) Commitment charge - 0.5 percent
    e) Withdrawn financing balance and service charge: 0.75 per cent on the withdrawn and outstanding credit balances.

Project Implementation

UETCL is the executing agency for the Project and it is being implemented by the UETCL Project Implementation Units (PIUs) on behalf of Ministry of Energy, which is playing a supervisory role.

The Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Programme (NELSAP) Regional Coordination Unit (NELSAP-RPCU) on behalf of NBI is responsible for the project coordination and supervision at regional level.

In discharging its coordination and supervisory duties, NELSAP-RPCU is guided by project technical committee drawn from power system operations and planning experts from participating power utilities and ministries responsible for electricity.

The Loan and the Current Debt Situation of the Country

The loan will increase total nominal public debt that is currently at $ 8.5 billion; as at the end of November 2016 external debt contributes 60 per cent of the total debt while 40 per cent is domestic debt. 

The Debt Sustainability Analysis conducted in November 2016, revealed that in both the medium and long-term, Uganda's public and publically guaranteed external is sustainable and is under no debt distress when subjected to stress tests with the present value of public debt-to-GDP ratio of 24.6 per cent as of end of November 2016. This is relatively below the Public Debt Management Framework threshold of 50 per cent.

Committee observation 

There is substantial worldwide increase in price for various items of the project materials both local and imported and installation prices. 
Such increase of materials and equipment prices has resulted in higher bid prices compared with the original project cost estimate at appraisal stage. Downsizing the project scope or design after bid opening would jeopardise the completion time and achievement of project objectives given that the project is part of a coherent programme of regional interconnection projects involving five countries.

Depreciation of loan currencies (UA and JPY) against the contracts currencies (USD and EUR) has resulted in utilisation more of the loan amounts. The procurement process has been completed four years after the bank approved the loan and the project completion time is extended due to several reasons.

Introduction of design changes such as the construction of new 220/132 kV Mbarara substation instead of extension of existing Mbarara substation, required a new control building, wider substation area to accommodate future lines and additional equipment consequently, increasing the project costs.

Variation orders to change the Optical Ground Wire (OPGW) of 24 fibres with 48 fibres to harmonise the specifications with the neighbouring countries resulted in increased project costs.

Unforeseen ground conditions and terrain resulting in changes in transmission line towers and foundation types occurred due to transmission line crossing on swampy area and hilly landscape, which increased the cost.

The committee noted poor planning on the side of Government which did not incorporate the requirements for Uganda to participate in the East African power pool whereby Kenya and Ethiopia are going to trade in power between themselves. Uganda has a comparative advantage in this power pool but is going to miss out due to poor planning.

In preparation for this power pool Kenya and Ethiopia, have constructed interconnections of 440KV whereas Uganda is going to interconnect with Kenya at 220kv, which puts it at a disadvantage if it has excess power to trade.

It was further noted that the lines, which have been constructed so far, cannot be upgraded without dismantling the entire newly constructed infrastructure if they are to interconnect with Kenya at 440KV.

Committee recommendations

Since Uganda is part of the East African Community, when planning for infrastructure project connecting within the region, Government should take into account the projected infrastructure in the region in order to avoid the mismatch manifested in this project.

Since Uganda is now constructing hydropower projects to avoid capacity, which may not be fully utilised by Uganda, Government should plan to sell off the excess power to avoid paying for redundant capacity.

Government  should  also  consider  constructing  a  complete  system  to evacuate  power  and  also  distribute  it in  order to  minimise on  losses incurred   when   Government   constructs   infrastructure   without   ready transmission and distribution lines like in the case of Bujagali where we are paying for redundant capacity.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker, considering the high investments so far made in this project, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $9.54 million from ADB, for   a supplementary loan   for the Interconnection of Electric Grids of Nile Equatorial Lakes Countries be approved by Parliament. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

MR BATEGEKA: I beg to lay at the Table a copy of the signed report I have just read, the minutes of the meetings of the committee that considered the report, a loan brief by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a brief status of the project by UETCL and responses to the questions that the committee asked UETCL to clarify.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture all those documents that have facilitated the committee in doing its work as well as the original texts of the report of the committee. Debate starts now. 

May I know how many Members would like to speak on this matter so that I can determine the time? That means we will be speaking for two minutes each so that we can cover all the Members that have stood. I will start from Masaka Municipality.

3.56
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I have two things to say in two minutes. The first one is that we agreed in principle that we need to take power to the people and of course, power is needed to facilitate regional trade and integration. 

While we are trying to project the requirement for power to facilitate regional trade and business, we stand a very big crisis in helping our people – internally – to access power. At the moment, we have projects in the ministry that got borrowed funds to take power to the communities and they are not using this money. 

The minister can actually speak to it that they have redundant project money – they are either half-way done, not done or late projects. Here we are, again, in a hurry to borrow to extend power to cross-border and near-border. We have not addressed the power requirement within the immediacy of our communities that are facing a crisis in accessing and utilising power. Some of the power is moving atop their house. We had a crisis in Bugisu sub-region when the wananchi did harambe and tapped it in their own style and there was a problem. 

This might be in tandem with NDP II but planning without a plan will lead us into crisis and I think these loans had better be considered to first address matters in our immediacy before we think afar. 

Mr Speaker, let me report to the House that we actually have excess power in the country. We have excess capacity –(Member timed out_)

3.58
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not happy with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. In the Ninth Parliament, we passed a loan where we were giving power to – I will bring the records – Kalungu, Kamuli and some other three districts. It is now about three years. I have moved to the ministry and they sent me an email about how they were going to distribute power in the whole district in April. Now, here comes another loan. This business of waiting for Members of Parliament to start camping in your office all the time to follow up on how their project is going to move is not helping. 

Secondly, when you get these loans, you know the inflation levels in this country – money loses value. Look at this loan of Kalungu. I do not know what is happening. It is unfortunate that the two ministers are not here. It is only the Prime Minister present. When we were amending the Income Tax Act, hon. Muloni was here giving a lot of vigour to the House. Here comes a loan and she is not around. They have left the chairperson to move on the issue of the loan. We are taking these loans and they are not performing. How is Kalungu benefitting after passing a loan here? We are now here calling them every time. 

Mr Speaker, you have to do something. You should direct the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to give us the list of all the loans they have taken and their performance. That is how they tell us misleading information about how power tariff is going to be reduced. We have now rushed to think about East Africa. In a plane you do not put the protective gadget on somebody near you before you put it on yourself. We have our own but we are now thinking about the integration of the East African Community. It is very okay but for these countries you are talking about - you go to Rwanda and see how –(Member timed out_)

4.01
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the extensive work they have done to come up with this report. However, I stand to bring our outcry to this House. It is not bad for us to borrow money, especially for important projects such as this. 

I come from Bukedi sub-region where Tororo substation is located. However, Mr Speaker, you will bear with me that Bukedi is one of the sub-regions that are under-electrified in Uganda. Look at my constituency, for example. We almost have all sub-counties without power but are now extending power across the border. We need to be sincere and honest to Ugandans who pay taxes. (Applause) We cannot think about extending power to cross-border when our people who are paying taxes to pay back these loans are still struggling. We need to open our eyes.

We appreciate the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as the Ministry of Energy and Minerals but a lot must be done to our local people, especially in regard to rural electrification. We need to move and really get statistics in terms of which sub-counties or districts are still lagging behind. When you visit some districts, you really wonder whether your constituency is in Uganda. 

4.03
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the effectiveness of the loan. It is conditional that before we receive the first disbursement, we must confirm amendment of the agreement for onlending of the initial loan amount signed between the borrower and UETCL to include proceeds of a supplementary loan and the achievement of disbursement rate. Other conditions include evidence of payment of compensation or resettlement of persons affected by the project in accordance with the resettlement action plan. 

Time and again, we have come up to talk about the Chief Government Valuer. Compensations cannot be done without the Office of the Chief Government Valuer being beefed up. This serves as a reminder that if seriousness is not applied in this field, we shall fall back in attaining the effectiveness of the loan and, so, we will not get the money for a start. 

I am just calling upon the relevant office to do the needful because every time we discuss a loan, it comes up. Therefore, can something be done? Thank you.

4.04
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, I support the borrowing of the loan. When you look at this loan, it is in line with the principles of development in East Africa. It is not that maybe as a country we are trying to take power outside. When we talk about the East African Community, the idea is that the development we have in Uganda must be in line with other developments in the East African Community. For instance, issues to do with road networks and electricity among others. This loan will help connect our power to the grid of other countries. Therefore, it is not that the need for internal power is being under looked.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about Standard Gauge Railway and we shall still need power for it. This means that we must also put power lines that will facilitate it.

Recently, we talked about a loan here, which was meant to electrify the rural sub-counties. I support this view but it is not that Government is forgetting the internal problems. Government is trying to see that we are in line with what other neighbours are doing. It is the same like developing routes. The routes in Uganda must be connected to the routes in Kenya and Tanzania. I think it is a healthy move. 

I beg to submit.

4.06
MR MBABAALI MUYANGA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in agreement with the chairperson of the committee that we need a supplementary loan to fulfil our national obligation, regarding the East African Community.  However, when you look at page 8 of the report on terms and conditions of payment, you will find that there is no grace period to this loan. I wonder whether that is considered. Otherwise, I am in agreement with the entire proposal to have a supplementary loan. Thank you.

5.08
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To reiterate the words of hon. SSewungu, this Parliament on 20 August 2015, passed a loan of $100 million for rural electrification. This loan was supposed to extend power to different parts of the country including Kaliro District, where I come from. 

It is coming to two years and work has not started on ground. It was in the previous Parliament when this money was passed. This issue of borrowing money and having it not utilised is breaking the backs of Ugandans.

I would like to support the recommendation of the committee. Today, we are constructing many power generation stations and we have excess power but we do not have where to use it in the short run. I wonder whether anyone has sat down to compute how much Uganda is going to be losing when Isimba and Karuma are completed. We are not using this power.  

We cannot keep power in the store or in a bag. We shall be producing this power and paying interest on it, yet we are not using it. It is really justifiable that we must find a way of evacuating this power and selling it. Otherwise, we have power, which is not ready for use for the Ugandans today.

Mr Speaker, finally, I would like to say that agreements to sell power to neighbouring countries must be properly executed. Of course, we have had different problems with the agreements we have made. However, they must be properly executed because - (Member timed out_)

4.10
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. My concern is on the pricing of this electricity. I do not know why in Uganda, our electricity is very expensive and yet, we are exporting it to other countries very cheaply. When you go to Rwanda and Kenya, electricity is very cheap, yet, we are exporting our electricity to these countries. We need to know why we should pay more money for electricity yet we are the exporters. We are producing power and exporting it but we are paying much money. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda sometime back was suspended by the World Bank from further borrowing because of failing to use the money at the right time. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pleaded with them to be allowed to again borrow some money. I hope this time round, we shall use this money in accordance to the items being read to us on the Floor of the House. Most of the time, when we do borrow money, it is used for doing different things and this puts the country in a dilemma. 

On the issue of the duration, I am seeing 40 years of paying this loan. Forty years from now, I will be around 80 years and above - we are borrowing every day. How shall we sustain all this borrowing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not worry. You will receive the Social Assistance Grants for the Elderly. So, it will be fine.

4.12
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion despite having some reservations about public debt. First of all, I would like the committee to be very clear. In bullet 12, in its recommendation, the committee is not clear on whether they are actually recommending the House to support this loan or not. The statement there is not clear and it is vague. I would like the chairperson to clarify. Look at bullet 12.0. You leave the House in suspense on whether to support the motion or not.

Secondly, I would like to take two points that you have highlighted. One is that Uganda is going to miss in the power selling pool because Kenya and Ethiopia have already agreed that they are going to trade and Uganda will be missing out.

Thirdly, you have also noted that the Government has not taken into concern the planning. You are actually blaming Government. I think as we approve this loan, those who have caused losses that you stated here must be held accountable. If at the time the other countries were negotiating how to benefit from this project our Government officials were sitting or rather sleeping, it is quite embarrassing. I think someone must be responsible.

Lastly, on the issue of constructing transmission lines, and the people who have offered their land where these transmission lines pass, miss out power, it is very absurd. All over the country, you find transmission lines passing and supplying power to other people but those around are not catered for. In my constituency, this is happening. Recently, I had to call a meeting to calm down people who wanted to cut down transmission lines because they do not have power in their health centre IV and secondary schools. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.14
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I would like to say that I support the motion because we would like to promote industrial growth in the country.

However, my concern is about industrial growth in case we approve this loan, is that we must consider the rural areas for industrialisation. That is where we have the highest rate of unemployment for the youth. If we concentrate only in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono districts, we shall not solve the unemployment issue in Uganda.

Secondly, you can read from the mood of the Members that we are in support of the proposal, but the concern is the absorption, appropriation and duration some of the projects take. The bureaucracy is too long and we need to have an improvement in this. 

We have some projects we were told are being funded by the World Bank. However, these projects have stalled because of the bureaucracy we have talked about. When you go to the offices, you are told that they have not yet found people to do the design. 

I do not know what you are going to do about this project coming up next. We would like to see work being done very fast so that we do not wait for so long. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also here to second the motion to allow Government borrow money from the ADB because extending power to our neighbouring countries is good and developmental. 

However, my area of concern is about the usage of this money. Whenever we borrow loans, some of the money lies redundant and is not put to use as planned. I request the minister to ensure that the money goes to the planned areas so that it is not lying redundant or diverted.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, as you have heard from my colleagues, most of our areas do not have power – if you are extending power to our neighbours in East Africa where we expect development, then the minister should ensure that the money that is borrowed is not misused or diverted. For example, only 40 per cent of the people of Kamuli Municipality have power. If we misuse that money, the country will be at a loss. I beg to move and thank you. 

4.18
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the borrowing of the loan. However, I keenly read the report and I am concerned about the procurement process that took four years after the bank approved the loan. I would like to know whether it was by design or default.

Secondly, on the level of our performance, Uganda has been always left behind. When we take the Standard Gauge Railway, for instance, our performance is poor. Even in this one, our performance is very poor. Can we get assurance from Government on how we are going to improve the level of our performance so that we can compete within the region favourably?

Lastly, I am concerned about stabilisation of power in our country. Even the districts that have power, the power is not reliable at all. Even if it means borrowing loans to stabilise power in our districts - when are you initiating that process? In Adjumani, the locals have gone to the extent of even naming it Asiku; meaning something you can never rely upon. It is embarrassing to us in Government. When are we coming with better strategies to stabilise power in our country? Thank you.

4.20
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report of the committee. I wish to add that when you have some food, however little it may be, you can share with the neighbour. 

However, I would like to raise my issue about rural electrification, especially when they have to contract out services. When the contractors reach the villages, they skip many people and they only serve those who can pay Shs 200,000 or offer chicken. Therefore, those who are skipped do not feel happy and maybe that is why there is temptation to hook power. 

Some Members here alleged that it is the Bugisu region that has the highest number of thieves of power. This is because the contractors in the field do not do their job well. If they did their work well and gave power to everybody on the line - If some people see power going over their heads and yet they also need power, but they do not have the Shs 200,000, it is not good.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that rural electrification should –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry, hon. Mutonyi, but I think we need to have the record clear. What I saw in the region she represents is criminality. People hook power and transport it for over a kilometre. When we went there as the Committee on National Economy, we were told that people have died because of those illegal connections. 

Hon. Mutonyi told us that the contractors did not do a good job because power lines are passing over them. If the record of Parliament puts it that way –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on a point of order?

MR ATIKU: Yes. It would be wrong for us if the record of Parliament records it that way. Therefore, is hon. Mutonyi in order to justify the criminality happening within her area of jurisdiction and for misleading this House to have it recorded on the Floor of Parliament? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atiku, that should have been a point of information or clarification. Please, you now have the information. (Laughter)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not dispute. I only said the temptation comes because people are not well served. That is all I said. I would like to submit. Thank you.

4.24
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe County North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of affordability when it comes to power - people have access to electricity but having access to electricity alone is not enough. If we do not look at the affordability part of electricity, we shall continue electrifying our rural and urban areas when actually, those who can afford are not many. 

Mr Speaker, there is no way we can save our forests without ensuring that our electricity is affordable. We support all initiatives including this one but we should also ensure that there is that kind of affordability. When you look at the lorries of charcoal coming into Kampala, it leaves a lot to be desired. If most people in Kampala and other urban areas are still using charcoal for cooking, then what about people in the rural areas?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I am waiting for the day the finance minister will bring a loan for irrigation as it will impact on all Ugandans.

4.26
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson for the report and reluctantly support it. 

First of all, I would like to comment on pages 9 and 10 of the report. The committee makes about eight observations. However, I do not see the relationship been the condensed three recommendations with all the observations. 

Therefore, I would have thought that observations were purposely made and therefore recommendations should have been made thereafter because these observations inform several other decisions and actions of Government. For you to make an observation and you do not attempt to recommend means maybe you casually made the observation.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to look at observation six and eight. In observation six; the committee noted poor planning on the side of Government which did not incorporate the requirements for Uganda to participate in the East African power pool. 

When you go to eight, it further noted that the lines which have been constructed so far cannot be upgraded without dismantling the entire newly constructed infrastructure. This goes back to planning. 

What kind of people do we have in this planning function? I would like to imagine that even the dismantled lines in order to upgrade the entire line must have been constructed on loan, and that means a waste to Government and unnecessary cost to the tax payer.

I would like to propose that Government gets serious in planning because why should other people go ahead of us and we are always lagging behind yet we keep praising ourselves as good performers? I feel that the committee made right observations –(Member timed out_)

4.28
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report that they have presented today. Allow me to add my voice to the colleagues who have been thanking the committee for what they presented today. I do support this report but have a few observations that I wish to put on record.

First, although this has been said, I need to emphasise it. The whole idea of borrowing money over and again is mortgaging this country to the extent that if this was a company, we would be bankrupt by now and under receivership. If we are going to do that, it needs to be taken seriously and the threshold must be met at the end. 

We need stringent measures to make sure that there are priority sectors that these loans are going to cater for and that the loans are not just borrowed at will.

I know that a number of objectives have been outlined. When I look at access to electricity as one of my colleagues stated, most of my people in Agago cannot afford electricity and many of them are now going for solar and other alternatives. 

I would like to know whether we are still dealing with reality of the situation in Uganda today. Is access done through electricity or do we need to invest in solar supply and other things?

Secondly, they talked about the debt ratio. The cost benefit analysis needs to be very clear in this case. I know that we have talked about poor planning but the amount that was initially borrowed was about US$7.5 million for connectivity and others now, we are borrowing additional US$9.4 million as supplementary.

At the end of the day, I would have thought that a supplementary is missing the target a little bit but when the supplementary is actually more than the amount that –(­Member timed out_)

4.31
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present my reservations about the presented request. 

I am looking forward to that day when the finance minister will say, “For today, I am not presenting this loan.” This is because day after day whenever he stands up, that is what we expect. Indeed the country is having a big burden at the hands of the honourable members who are seated here today. The future is waiting to judge us.

Mr Speaker, we are talking of this loan which is an investment. I expected that in the minister’s presentation, he should have said that it is not our first time to engage in investing in power in other countries and this is what we have so far gained as a country in terms of returns. 

The minister should have also told us of the impact of these returns in reflection of what the nationals would be paying in terms of power. There, honourable minister, we would be talking basing on the impact of what we are investing is for the good of our people. This has missed in your presentation. To me, that was enough for us to say let us revisit.

The honourable member has just mentioned that what we are looking for in terms of supplementary seems to be even more than what we are supplementing –(Member timed out_)

4.33
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Personally, I would like to give a dissenting view and express my disappointment in the numerous amounts of loans that this Parliament has engaged itself with approving. If we are not careful, we are going to end up a clearing house for loans. 

At US$8.718 billion debt burden, Uganda is in a debt distress. We cannot continue borrowing enormous amounts of money. You can imagine a loan of 40 years – I wonder what the leaders at that time will do to serve Ugandans because the whole country would have been mortgaged and hit its debt ceiling. We are making it difficult for the future generation to access services by generously approving loans in this House. 

I would be happy if the minister came up with a specific energy requirement plan for this country and also come up with options for renewable energy so that as we approve the loans, we are very sure of what we are approving them for and what the return on investment is going to be for the current and future generations. 

If we continue generously borrowing money, I think there will be a time where we shall be in need of that money and we shall have nowhere to borrow from because we shall have exceeded our limit. I request Members in this honourable House to prioritise which sectors we should be borrowing for - I heard one honourable colleague talking about agriculture.

I would be very happy to participate in approving a loan that is going to the agriculture sector or one that will develop the tourism road network, because I know tourism is a foreign exchange earner for this country and therefore an economic stimulus approach. We recently gave –(Member timed out_)

4.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very important to have stable electricity for the country but it is quite unfortunate, as my colleague said, that we are paying for electricity very expensively compared to the countries importing from us.

We would like to get a very clear explanation from the minister as to why we are paying higher than Rwanda and Kenya who are importing electricity from this country. Instead of borrowing to supply other countries, we need to strengthen the rural electrification. 

Government came up with a very important programme of electrifying all the villages in this country. However, the power that we currently have in our villages is not being connected to the health centres or schools and it is as good as useless. 

Instead of borrowing to export electricity to other countries, let us borrow to strengthen our power distribution within the country. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the electric poles and the season - northern Uganda has electricity for less than 20 days in a month because the electric poles keep breaking.

on our phones we receive messages from Umeme telling Ugandans to report all the broken and leaning poles. Why not borrow to replace all the wooden electric poles to metal ones? It is very good to enjoy – (Member timed out_)

4.39
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson for the report.

As I support this request, I remember that in 2011, poles were dropped in Akisim Trading Centre in Ngora. But from that time, the place has not been connected with electricity and I am shocked that we are talking about Bujumbura, Kigali, DR Congo and Kenya and yet there is no power in the rural areas. 

In Ngora, we take about five days without electricity because of load shedding but we are here saying that there is a lot of electricity. I am asking the minister to tell the people of Ngora why we should always be supporting loans specifically to take electricity to Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi and DR Congo where there is war and yet there is no electricity here. I am actually – (Interruption) - okay, please.

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, colleague. Honourable minister in addition to Ngora, east or west, home is best. In Buvuma, like in three other districts, there is nothing like electricity. How come you ministers advice the President to put effort in such things and yet there is no power at home, what excess is there economically?

MR MAKUMBI: Thank you, for giving me way. Mr Speaker, I have been frequenting the REA Secretariat in Kamwokya about the rural electrification programme especially in my area of Mityana South, which has no power.

These people all the time tell me that they are looking around for money. I am surprised to hear from the chairperson of the committee presenting such a loan that is about to get money for people outside this country to serve other people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now? (Laughter)

4.42
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Am I protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. Proceed.

MS NSHAIJA: I would like to support the proposal to borrow the money because of the following reasons. 

First, I understand that we are having excess capacity from Bujagali and yet we are to get more power from Karuma and Isimba which means that we are going to have a lot of power. 

We need to have this loan so that we can export power to our neighbouring countries to benefit since our export earnings are less. It is very paramount to earn from power. 

However, we have some problems; the last time when we had a loan that we got to connect lines in Kamwenge, Kigezi and Bundibugyo, a lot of money was allocated to valuers to value money for the leeway in those areas where power was connected without money for the leeway.

Contractors were paid a lot of money and they presented a report but to date, the people who were supposed to be compensated for the destruction of their crops and property have never received any money and it is not indicated anywhere in our forthcoming budget.

How are we going to make sure that as we approve this loan that even the leeway is budgeted for so that it does not delay construction of these lines so that we can benefit from them? I thank you. 

4.44
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot support borrowing that loan. In Kasambya we have the national grid but the only thing we have benefitted from it is the vulgar words of those people pulling the poles. Why is it that Government cannot afford to give us stepdown transformers in places where there are poles so that we can benefit? 

Why should I support the loan to ensure that Rwanda gets all the power yet in my constituency we do not have power?

Honourable members, at the end of our term, are we going to account and say that when we were at Parliament, we passed a loan and gave power to Rwanda and you think people will vote you back when they do not have power?

Mr Speaker, I call upon honourable members to divert this loan to ensure that we access rural electrification. When you go to ERA, they tell you that the Government has failed to even get money for co-funding when the World Bank wants to give money for extending power to our people in the villagers. So why should we approve? I thank you.

4.46
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to also thank the committee for the presentation. However, I would like to comment that the situation of power in our country is like a situation where you cook food in your own home and serve it to the neighbours. 

It is a very unfortunate situation because the affordability of power is very prohibitive in this country and that is why people are not able to connect power yet we have got the power, but the costs are very high. 

Therefore, my appeal to the ministry is that they should revise the power rates and make them affordable to the rural poor. We must also be convinced by the ministry in the case we have this power exported, what is the profit margin we will get from the export of power to the surrounding countries?

Otherwise, I support the motion and would like to know the profit we will get and affordability of power for the rural poor should be reduced by the ministry to ensure that the rural population is served here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will pause it here and get some responses from the ministers. 

Honourable ministers, I would like you to focus in this debate because the issue on the tariffs - and the Speaker is speaking – there is issue on coverage; why are we talking about elsewhere when back home we have issues? Loan performance and why is the supplementary bigger than the original borrowing we are supplementing. Please concentrate on those issues and we find way forward otherwise, I see concurrence with these loans. Let us finish it.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

The original loan was unit of accounts 48.14 million while supplementary is 5.84 which means it is at 12 per cent of the original figure. Therefore, it is not true that the supplementary is bigger than the original loan. Otherwise, it would not have been a supplementary loan. 

Concerning the issue of coverage, hon. Abala asked what we have for the people of Ngora. We have good news for the people of Ngora because out of the 1,500 sub counties we have in Uganda, there are only 287 sub counties without power. 

We will be coming here with another facility for parliamentary approval to cover the entire country at once. All of those that are left will be covered at once.

This project has gone 85 per cent and is a regional project. It is a two way; we have power and we will have more power after these dams have been constructed and if we have excess, we can export to other countries. The same applies if they have excess and we are in shortage, they will also give us. It is a two way that is why it is a regional project.

Mr Speaker, allow me to make this bold statement and it keeps coming on the Floor of this House time and again; is our public debt position sustainable? We now stand at US$8.5 billion with our debt position and out of that US$5.5 billion is external debt and US$2.2 billion is domestic debt. This puts us at 35.4 per cent to GDP. Compared to other countries like Kenya which is now at 52 per cent against a threshold that we set ourselves as East African region, Uganda still remains sustainable. 

I would, therefore, like to assure you that as long as we still continue to handle these issues, Uganda will never go back to a situation where we will need rescue from the western world because after all, some of the monies that we are borrowing will cover the facilitation of production of oil in 2020.

The moment we start drilling oil, we will be able to access US$2.5 billion which is almost half our national budget and we will be able to start paying off our debts hopefully in a few years we will get surplus. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, Members raised the issue of tariff and we had a huge debate about this on the Floor of this House. 

Mr Speaker, if you recall a few days ago, we debated about Bujagali and as a House I must thank you once again that we took a decision to exempt Bujagali from the corporation tax so that we can reduce on our power tariff from 13.8 cents to 8.5 cents. This will be a huge reduction and if this is coupled with the production of power Isimba and Karuma we see our tariffs reducing. 

However, that does not exempt us from the performance and absorption of these loans which we are working on together and yourself, Mr Speaker, requested that this ministry comes to the Floor of this House to present a position and performance of these loans. Such that together, as leaders of this nation, we can find solutions on how to solve the issues of absorption and performance. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this matter and we finish? 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government of Uganda to borrow Units of Accounts 5.84 million, equivalent of US$9.54 million from the African Development Bank Group for a supplementary loan for the interconnection of electric grids of Nile Equatorial lakes countries. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am advised that the next item on the Order Paper is not ready and so we will be dealing with those tomorrow inclusive of the budget. We have a huge job tomorrow because we have got to finish with the budget and supply and pass the Appropriation Bill because tomorrow is the deadline. 

We cannot go beyond tomorrow otherwise, we will be in breach of the laws we have passed ourselves. We will also have this loan that has been postponed to tomorrow. I would like to urge honourable members who have not been able to speak on this loan that I will give you first priority to speak on the loan that is pending that will come tomorrow.

The House will not be able to complete business if we only sit in the afternoon. I am urging the front bench to reconsider tomorrow for purposes of the deadline that we have as Government and Parliament such that we should be able to handle tomorrow starting at 10 o’clock.

Honourable members House, therefore, is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 May 2017 at 10.00 a.m.)



