Saturday, 30 May 2015

Parliament met at 10.36 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I thank you for coming. Today being a Saturday and we agreed that we come today, I am happy that you have come to enable us conclude the business that is left.

You are reminded that as you come to attend the opening of the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament and the delivery to Parliament of the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President at Kampala Serena conference centre, please note the following:

Due to the ever present threat of terrorism, you must come along with your invitation cards; security will be uncompromising on this. All electronic items such as iPads, phones, etcetera are prohibited from the Chamber. Parking for members will be at Parliament.

Your invitations are in your pigeon holes and please check and confirm that you have them. Please endeavour to get to the venue in time to avoid any inconveniences. Further details will be given to you. Thank you.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2015

10.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I see secondment from the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Tourism and the Minister of State for Agriculture.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you doing?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I am sorry, Sir. Let me lay on the Table the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implication.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implication.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we suspend rule 118 and proceed under rule 119(7) and I am moving under rule 15.

The justification is that the figures handled yesterday under the Committee of Supply are the same figures that are in the Appropriation Bill. Therefore, there is no need to refer the Bill to the committee of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Government Chief Whip and the Minister of State for Agriculture. 

Mr Chairman, can you confirm to the House whether what the minister has stated is true about the figures?

10.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have this morning perused through with my team the figures as presented in the Appropriation Bill, 2015 and I wish to confirm that they are consistent with the figures that we supplied yesterday. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for suspension of rule 118 - to dispense with rule 118 requiring reference of this Bill to the committee so that we are able to go to the Committee of Supply and confirm those figures and pass the Bill at that stage if it is correct. That is the motion before the House. Motion for suspension of the rules; do you want to speak to that?

10.44
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily, we would have no problem with the suspension but we only seek your indulgence that if there is any discrepancy as per the figures when we go to committee stage, because we are going through the Bill so that we have an opportunity to raise any issue at that stage substantially because the committee report would have entitled us to have scrutiny of the Bill. 

We want to support the motion on condition that as we go through the Bill, if there is anything we want to raise, we are accorded time at the level of supply as the Committee of the whole House to raise that at that point. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, that is how it is done. When you are at committee stage, you consider all those things.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I have been in this House. I remember when we were dealing with the loan for municipalities, there was a discrepancy with the figures and I tried to raise it; if you go back on the Hansard on what had been proposed and what was supplied, there was a discrepancy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you are saying is not new; it is what is done and that is why you go to committee stage. Otherwise we would pass it from here. Therefore, when you go to Committee of Supply, if there are any discrepancies, they will be looked at, at that level. Is that okay, Members? Can I put the question to the motion for suspension of rule 118? I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2015

10.45
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament resolve itself into a committee of supply to consider the budget -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is Bills second reading.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2015” be read for the second time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, the member for Adjumani and the member for West Budama North.

Honourable members, that is the motion that should have enabled us to discuss the principles of the Bill. We have heard confirmation from the chairman of the budget committee that the figures are the same as the ones we supplied yesterday. Therefore, will there be any need to discuss the principles of the Bill? I think we know what the Bill is about. 

Can I now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2015” be read the second time?

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

10.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report to the House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.49
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Appropriation Bill, 2015 and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.50
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2015

10.50
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to be excused of these rituals. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Congratulations, honourable members. (Applause) I would like to thank you for this spirit that we have demonstrated this time when we had to handle this all near crisis situation of the transition from one law to the other. All these processes have been very difficult. We need a statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. Is he here?

10.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you recall, during the course of consideration of the various sectoral committee reports, a number of issues were referred to the Budget Committee, including the various reports of those committees.

In consideration of those reports, we identified a number of unfunded priorities and we thought these priorities could be incorporated in the amendments that we were considering yesterday in the draft Appropriation Bill. Unfortunately, whereas we were able to deal with some, a couple of others still remain unfunded.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yesterday undertook to consider these unfunded priorities in the financial year 2016/2017 budget and indeed, these items should constitute a first call on that budget.

For the record, Mr Speaker, I found it prudent to present the long list of these items that we had considered priority but unfunded so that in future, when we come to consider the budget for 2016/2017, the record is available on the Hansard.

I have hurriedly done this, this morning. It is possible that I could have left out one or two. I would beg members of my committee to rise up and fill any gaps that may arise -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, please.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. They needed Shs 4.5 billion to defend Government civil cases in various courts. Related to this, the Judiciary needed Shs 5 billion for the enhancement of the allowances of the judges and justices of the High Court.

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries needed Shs 9 billion towards total FMD vaccination. 
    2. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Youth Affairs needed Shs 10 billion for SAGE, UWEPA and the green job projects. 
    3. The Ministry of Lands needed Shs 4 billion for the development of the National Physical Plan. 
    4. Public universities needed Shs 10 billion for enhancement of wages of non-teaching staff. 
    5. Equal Opportunities Commission needed Shs 10 billion for undertaking the compliance exercise for the issuance of the Gender and Equity Certificate as provided for under the PFM Act. 
    6. The Judicial Service Commission needed Shs 150 million for training investigators. 
    7. For supply of oxygen to all referral hospitals, Shs 10 billion was needed. 
    8. The Ministry of Local Government needed Shs 9.5 billion for procurement of bicycles for LC I and LC II chairpersons. 
    9. The Ministry of Education and Sports needed Shs 30 billion for construction of secondary schools per sub-county. 

    10. Furnishing of the Law Development Centre auditorium and other related activities needed Shs 1.2 billion.

    11. NAGRC - the restoration of the various Government livestock farms including the strengthening of the capacity of that institution in their breeding programmes and biotechnology - they need Shs 10 billion. Under statutory - (Interjections) - that was NAGRC. 

    12. Under statutory, I have already mentioned, Mr Speaker, the judges and justices and NPA: Shs 2.4 billion for departmental restructuring and development of sequential plans. 

    13. Finally, the Auditor-General; enhancement of the salaries of the staff of the Office of the Auditor-General: Shs 5.2 billion. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is being done because yesterday, there was an agreement here and the minister had made an undertaking that those budget items which the chairperson has just read would have the first call on next financial year’s budget and that is what we agreed. However, we thought for purposes of clarity, those figures should be captured in the Hansard so that it is easier for the committee to follow up when those processes begin.

10.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I just want to make some slight improvement. Ministry of Education and Sports; the enhancement for primary school teachers, we also agreed that it should have a first call because these teachers are very important. Vote 104: Shs 133,000,000,000. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

10.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have just passed the Appropriation Bill. Yesterday, we supplied. On two occasions, we have done so without going through what is required by our law. The government has appealed to us on both occasions that we should agree to pass the supply and appropriation even if we did not have quorum.

We know there is a transition since we changed the system and made the Finance Management Act. However, Government this year has really messed up this process.

First, they supplied us documents which were incomplete, and the entire process was messed up. My Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying even up to now, he does not know how to respond because the whole process was messed up. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told us that they did not handle this very well because of the transition. We hope that next financial year, Government will be better organised and start the process early so that we do not have this mess again.

Just a while ago, one of my colleagues raised the issue of figures and that if they are not correct, we would capture them at committee stage. We have not done that. Ordinarily, this Bill would have gone to the committee to be scrutinised once again.

Mr Speaker, you have told us that the figures that we went through yesterday are the figures which are here. It is on faith because we have not taken this to the committee to scrutinise and come to assure us that indeed the figures in this are the figures which were here yesterday. We did not have the time. Many of us have not read this, but nevertheless, we have passed it. We just want to end by saying that in future, Government should better organise the way they are doing their things. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been in charge of this House and the statement that has been entered on the record is not true and all the times we took decisions in this House, the House was properly constituted to make those decisions. Let the records show that.

We have had difficulties in the past on this issue, but all these times when we were taking the decisions, the House was properly constituted under my chairmanship. Therefore, there is no issue, but the concerns raised about the difficulty we have had with this transition, are the same concerns I have been raising since we started handling this budget process. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not been able to do very well on this occasion. Most of the documents we required came late and yet they knew that these changes were in the law. They proposed the law themselves and they knew everything that was going to happen in the law.

Therefore, as Parliament, we felt completely - what is the word? Stampeded! Documents and ministerial policy statement came late. Everything was late.  However, in all these, I want to celebrate the spirit the Members of Parliament have demonstrated. The committee leaders and members as well as honourable members from the Opposition side - it is because without this co-operation, we would still be discussing the ministerial policy statements today. Therefore, I want to celebrate this with you that this is the spirit we should all employ when we are dealing with matters that are for the better of this country.

This same principle of co-operation must be transferred when we are handling the constitutional amendments and electoral reforms. These same discussions; the behind the scenes talks that were taking place behind the Speaker’s Chair should continue to facilitate this process. Remember, nobody wins until we all do. If we all win, we have won and if some people win, we have not won. This country is one and we should celebrate that spirit and let it move forward. Thank you, honourable members. That should be the spirit. Proclamation - [MS CECILIA OGWAL: Procedure.] - Madam, please.

PROCLAMATION BY THE RT. HONOURABLE JACOB L.OULANYAH THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

“WHEREAS clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued; 

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 30th day of May 2015. The pending business in the House or its committees is saved. 

GIVEN under my hand and the seal at Parliament House Kampala, this 30th day of May 2015.

Jacob L. Oulanyah (MP)
The Deputy Speaker of Parliament”
 

Honourable members, this House is prorogued and therefore, adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 11.08 a.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

