Wednesday, 30 May 2012 

Parliament met at 10.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome his Excellency the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Ministers, members of the Cabinet, Members of Parliament and the rest of the members. Today is our last sitting of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament. We have a very long Order Paper but I would like to propose that we deal with the issue of the elections of the EALA members first. During the tallying and counting, we can deal with the other statements on the Youth Venture Capital Fund and the other pending issues. 

I want to first ask Commissioner Baryomunsi to give the House a report on the names of secretaries-general of the parties of Uganda and then I will communicate.

10.12
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi East County, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. You will recall that the other day I presented the report of the Clerk to Parliament, who has been carrying out and superintending over the nominations process. I did report that the Clerk to Parliament had discussed with the Chairman of the Uganda Electoral Commission with respect to who the secretaries-general of the various parties are. This is because many of the Opposition political parties were contesting the candidature of some of the members who had presented themselves. 

The Clerk undertook to crosscheck with the chairperson of the Electoral Commission. By then, she had only got confirmation through telephone conversations, but she had written to the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission to put it in writing. Therefore, I would like to read the letter that Eng. Dr Badru Kiggundu, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, wrote to the Clerk to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to confirm who the leaders of the various political parties that are registered in Uganda are. 

This is a letter dated 28 May 2012:

“The Clerk to Parliament, the Republic of Uganda, Kampala

Reference: President-Generals and Secretary-Generals of registered political parties.
Please hereto attached find an attachment enlisting president-generals and secretary-generals of registered political parties in Uganda for your information and use as requested in your letter of 28 May 2012…” It is signed by Dr Badru Kiggundu, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, and this is an original copy, which I am going to read from.  

•	The first party is the National Resistance Movement (NRM). The Secretary-General is Amama Mbabazi John Patrick, and the President/Chairman of the party is Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

•	The People’s Progressive Party (PPP), formerly National Progressive Movement; the Secretary-General is Opii Alira David and the President/Chairman is Jaberi Bidandi Ssali. 

•	In the interest of time, I will not read their addresses. I will just read the Secretary-General and the Chairman or the President of the party. 

•	Peoples Independent Party (PIP); the Secretary-General is Salongo Tamuzadde and the President/Chairman is Yahaya Kamulegeya. 

•	Forum for Integrity in Leadership (FIL); the Secretary-General is Nabudere Enos and the Chairman/President is Emmanuel Tumusiime. 

•	Republican Women and Youth Party (RWYP); the Secretary-General is Mulumba Jackson, the Chairperson is Stella Nambuya. 

•	The National Peasant Party (NPP); the Secretary-General is Wanaba Luqman and the President/Chairman is Ssegujja Wamala Erias. 

•	Movement for Democratic Change (MDP); the Secretary-General is Mutiibwa Johnson and the President/Chairman is Kitimbo Paulsen. 

•	Action Party (AP) has no Secretary-General and the President/Chairman is Ocheger Nelson. (Laughter) At least the Electoral Commission does not know the Secretary-General, so there is a dash in that space. 

•	Uganda Economic Party (UEP); the Secretary-General is Lubwama Umar and the President/Chairman is Watentena James. 

•	Forum for Democratic Change (FDC); the Secretary-General is Alaso Alice Aisanut and the President is Dr Warren Kiiza Besigye. The contact is indicated as Dan Mugarura in the address here. I think that this is the chairperson of the electoral commission of FDC. 

•	Conservative Party (CP); the Secretary-General is Walyemera Dan M and the President is John Ken-Lukyamuzi. 

•	National Unity, Reconciliation and Development (NURP); the Secretary-General is Odoch George and the President/Chairman is Nkonge Moses Kibalama. 

•	Uganda Ecological Party (ECU), formerly National People’s Organisation (NAPO); the Secretary-General is Kutesa Sam and the President/Chairman is Bbale Charles Lwanga.

•	National Convention for Democracy (NCD); the Secretary-General is Kagimu William and the President/Chairman is Degaulle Kawuma. 

•	Farmers’ Party of Uganda (FPU); the Secretary-General is Kivumbi Hussein and the President is Bombokka Nsiko. 

•	Liberal Democratic Transparency (LDT); the Secretary-General is Mukasa Zaidi while the President is Nasser Ntege Ssebaggala. 

•	Uganda People’s Congress (UPC); the Secretary-General is Fr Jacinto Ogwal and the President/Chairman is Olara Otunu. 

•	Justice Forum (JEEMA); the Secretary-General is Hussein Kyanjo and the President/Chairman is Basalirwa Asuman. 

•	Uganda Mandate Party (UMP); the Secretary-General is Kisambira Amos while the Chairman/President is Mulunga Wanjala W. 

•	Reform Party (RP); the Secretary-General is Byamukama George and the President/Chairman of the party is Ndyomugyenyi Robert. 

•	Uganda People’s Party (UPP); the Secretary-General is Ssenkumba Joseph and Al Haji Sulaiman Masaba is the President/Chairman.

•	Movement Volunteer Mobilisers’ Organisation (MVMO); the Secretary-General is Mr Tukashaba Irene and the President/Chairman is Nyabwongo Apollo Oyo.

•	Social Democratic Party (SDP); the Secretary-General is Lubowa Henry and the President/Chairman is Mohammed Kyambadde. 

•	Progressive Alliance Party (PAP); the Secretary-General is Kibirige Bernard and there is no indication of the President/Chairman. 

•	Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM); the Secretary-General is Bukenya Miradih and the President/Chairman is Abbas Lubega Byayi. 

•	Democratic Party (DP); the Secretary-General is Nsubuga Mathias and the President/Chairman is Nobert Mao. 

•	Popular People’s Democracy (PPD); the Secretary-General is not known by the Electoral Commission, there is a dash. The President/Chairman is Webster Lukwiya. 

•	People’s United Movement (PUM); the Secretary-General is Ssewagudde Sam and the President/Chairman is Ogemba Shadrack. 

•	Bridge Party (BP); the Secretary-General is Opoka Jane and the President/Chairman is Kasule Med Leon. 

•	New Order Democracy (NOD); the Secretary-General is Auk James and the President/Chairman is Epajjar Ojulu Stephen; 

•	National Redemption Party (NRP); the Secretary-General is Kateeba Cosmas and the President/Chairman is Bizimungu Charles. 

•	Society for Peace and Development (SPD); the Secretary-General is Adiaka Charles and the President/Chairman is Harshim Mwenyi Matovu D. 

•	National Youth Revolutionary Organisation (NYRO); the Secretary-General is Ssewanyana Hussein and the President/Chairman is Moses Kankiriho Kakama. 

•	People’s Development Party (PDP); the Secretary-General is Kabunga Nathan and the President/Chairman is Dr Abed Bwanika. 

•	Congress Service Volunteers (COSEVO); the Secretary-General is Mudibah Mousa and the President/Chairman is Saddam Bisase. 

•	Activist Party (AP); the Secretary-General is Mudde Jordan and the President/Chairman is Bampigga Stephen. 

•	Green Partisan Party (GPP); the Secretary-General is Ssentongo Muzafalu and the President/Chairman is Haji Jamil Ssali. 

•	Uganda Federal Alliance (UFA); the Secretary-General is Sebunya Richard and the President/Chairperson is Betty O. Kamya.

Those are the 38 registered political parties that the Electoral Commission of Uganda has data about.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this list indicates the authentic secretaries-general and presidents/chairpersons of the registered political parties. This information is very important because from the report that I submitted here, there are political parties, like the Conservative Party, where the president of the party had contested who the secretary-general of CP was. The Electoral Commission has now confirmed that Mr Walyemera, who endorsed the nomination forms for the candidate, is the authentic secretary-general of that party.

Secondly, the Democratic Party has two candidates who returned nomination forms. Of the two, one was endorsed by Mr Mathias Nsubuga and the second candidate, Mr Kenneth Kakande, had his forms endorsed by another person. However, Mr Mathias Nsubuga wrote to us officially to say that as the Secretary-General of DP, he had not authorised any other official in the party to endorse any other candidate.

For UPC, the candidate who returned the nomination forms had his candidature withdrawn by the President-General. However, soon after that, the Secretary-General also wrote to say he had endorsed that candidate. 

That is how important it was for Parliament of Uganda to get confirmation from the Electoral Commission of Uganda in regard to who the secretaries-general and presidents/chairpersons of political parties registered in Uganda are. This list has helped the Clerk to Parliament to draw the correct list of nominated candidates. Thank you very much. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, for concluding the report of the Clerk to Parliament about the EALA elections. Our rules require that secretaries-general of the political parties are the ones that handle nominations. So, that is settled.

Honourable members, I have just received a sad message from hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga about the sudden death of his son, Oscar Akol Malinga, which occurred this morning at Paragon Hospital. The funeral arrangements are ongoing and he will be informing us. I just want members to know that our colleague, Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga, has lost a son.

To conclude my communication, I have read and heard in the media that some colleagues in this House were alleging that there was no consultation process on issues of the election of Members of EALA. This is not true. 

On 14 May 2012, I convened a meeting which started at 4.00 p.m. and ended at 8.00 p.m. in my boardroom. The purpose of the meeting was to review the situation after the East African Court of Justice had issued a judgment, and also to remind the members that as Speakers of East Africa, we had agreed to conduct the election in April so that when the second EALA session ends, the new members would be ready to take oath. Because we were late, I informed the meeting that the new Members of EALA were to be sworn in on 4 June 2012. Therefore, we needed to start the process to ensure that before the end of this month, the elections are concluded. 

The meeting was attended by my deputy, Rt hon. Oulanyah; the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, Gen. Moses Ali; the honourable Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. He was accompanied by the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu, and the Whip of FDC, hon. Betty Aol. The meeting was also attended by the Attorney-General, hon. Nyombi; the Government Chief Whip, hon. Migereko, who was accompanied by hon. Bahati to the same meeting. The Democratic Party was represented by hon. Joseph Ssewungu because hon. Sebuliba had a matter in court. Hon. Betty Amongi, the UPC Whip, attended together with hon. Krispus Ayena. Hon. Otada Amooti, coordinator of the Independents, attended. Hon. Fox Odoi, the Chair of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, attended, as well as the Clerk to Parliament, the Deputy Clerk, and the Director Legal and Legislative Services. 

The purpose of the meeting was to agree on the programme, which was as follows, and which was agreed upon after discussions:
1.	Finalisation of the Rules of Procedure to be done by 18 May 2012.
2.	Appointment of nomination days and publishing them in the Gazette to be done on 18 May 2012.
3.	Nomination of candidates, on 21 May 2012 and 22 May 2012. It was later extended to 23 May 2012.
4.	Sitting of the verification committee and report on the candidates duly nominated, on 24 May 2012.
5.	Publication of the names of successful nominees for EALA on Friday, 25 May 2012.
6.	Campaign by the candidates in Parliament and thereafter voting, today 30 May 2012.
7.	Gazetting of the names of members elect to EALA, Friday 1 June 2012.
8.	Transmission of names of duly elected MPs of EALA to the Secretary-General of the East African Community, Friday 1 June 2012.

This proposal was debated extensively and agreed upon by all the members who were in the meeting. The understanding was that the programme for the Third East African Legislative Assembly had been agreed by the Partner States and required the names of the members from the Partner States to be in by 4th June when oaths were to be administered to the MPs elect. At the close of that meeting, the Clerk was instructed to announce the dates for the election and the parties were expected to sort out their nominations. 

Consequent upon that, several candidates independent of the parties took and returned forms. Equally, the political parties nominated some candidates. I note that at the close of the nomination, the JEEMA party had not nominated any candidate and the FDC party withdrew Mr Louis Dramadri’s nomination. Consequently, today the candidates who have been nominated have been nominated by the Conservative Party, Democratic Party, the NRM party, UPC party and candidates independent of the political parties. So, those are the candidates that have been nominated according to our programme.

Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, we need to send the names to Arusha. We, therefore, need to conduct the elections. We shall be inviting the candidates to assemble in the Speaker’s VIP Lounge and they will be called one by one to address the House. They will address the House from that bar for five minutes each. Voting will take place and during the tallying, we shall handle the other business of the House which is pending. Thank you. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)


THE SPEAKER: Can we have the report on the consultative process?

(The hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi thereupon withdrew from the Chamber.)

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just came back to officially lay on the Table the report which I read. Just before I lay the report on the Table, hon. Kajura was asking what the problem with hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi was -(Interjections)- There is no need for anxiety in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not exchange across the Floor.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, the other day I read the report of the Clerk. In her observations, with your permission, if I could just read one paragraph, she said, “Dr John Edward Bagenda Kayondo was nominated by Mr Walyemera D.M., the Secretary-General of the Conservative Party, and his nomination was supported by 20 Members of Parliament. He has fulfilled all the requirements under rule 4 of Appendix B. However, I received correspondence signed by the President-General of the Conservative Party, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, claiming that Mr Walyemera was suspended and cannot act on behalf of the Conservative Party.”

The report, which I submitted a few minutes ago, confirmed that according to the registered political parties and organisations in the Electoral Commission, Mr Walyemera D.M. is the Secretary-General of the Conservative Party. (Applause) So, he is the authentic Secretary-General. That is the clarification I wanted to make. So, the Clerk is guided by the advice of the Electoral Commission confirming that Mr Walyemera is the authentic Secretary-General of the Conservative Party in Uganda. 

With that clarification, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the letter written by Eng. Dr Badru M. Kiggundu, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, to the Clerk to Parliament listing the various presidents-general and secretaries-general of registered political parties in Uganda, which are 38 in number. I beg to lay on the Table. Thank you very much.

10.42
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am standing here to comment on the Order Paper as prepared for today’s proceedings, and in particular item 4. This is on the order in which the duly nominated candidates are supposed to address us before we vote.

I note that what has been done with item 4 is to list them according to alphabetical order. There is an advantage with being first and there is an advantage with being the last and so forth. Personally, I think that the fresh way of doing this should be to allow the 17 duly nominated candidates to choose a number. The Clerk has 17 numbers and then the candidates come and pick the number they want and that will be the order in which they address us.

Honourable members, you will even note that when God is calling us to heaven where we all want to go, He does not follow the alphabetical order. Therefore, I think let us have them choose the number and then address us that way.

10.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, just to comment on the issue raised by His Excellency the Vice-President; these are elections and from what we have had or what we have gone through, whether in our primaries or in the national elections - presidential, parliamentary or local governments - we have always used alphabetical order to enable us generate a list of candidates. Now if we go into picking like the lottery, I think there will be a problem. I think this is the fairest way, which has been proposed by the Office of the Clerk. It is the fairest way without anyone making any complications.

10.45
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I believe we shall be doing a disservice to the candidates. If the Order Paper was given some time back and some candidates already have a copy, they are prepared as per the Order Paper. So, let us not disorganise our candidates. Let them come as they are on the Order Paper and we shall save time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, every member is entitled to five minutes. I think let us -

10.46
COL. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of the listing of these candidates. The information I have just got is that they were listed in alphabetical order but I know that there is also the French alphabetical order and the Arabic alphabetical order and the Chinese alphabetical order. So, Madam Speaker, for fairness I rise to move that the issue as presented by His Excellency the Vice-President, and without in any way watering it down, would be very fair, so that these candidates vote and pick a number which should guide on their order of coming to the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, every member is entitled to their time and they will be given time to speak. I think let us not disturb the order because we have issued the paper already. They will all get their time.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the rules, the time which should be given to the candidates should be ten minutes. Is it ten minutes or five minutes, Madam Speaker? What is your intention on that?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we thought that ten minutes would be too long because of the number of candidates. We agreed on seven minutes in the consultative meeting. I think they are enough. So let us go to item 3.

REPORT ON THE CONSULTATIVE PROCESS AMONGST THE POLITICAL PARTIES WITH REGARD TO REPRESENTATION IN THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
(EALA) IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 13 (1) OF APPENDIX (B) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (2012)

10.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament, I rise to report under item 3 that indeed consultations had been carried out between the political parties on the issue at hand in accordance with rule 13 sub-rule (1) of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I am sad to report that we failed to generate consensus on the issue. We have tried since that time but we have not succeeded to generate consensus as is required by rule 13 sub-rule (1). I beg to report.

10.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to state that on 14th May, you called us for a meeting where you outlined the programme and what is going to take place in Parliament as far as EALA is concerned.


On May 16th, when Parliament sat – I think first on May 15th - we met to discuss the rules but we could not conclude, especially on Appendix B that deals with EALA elections. On May 16, we came back and asked for time to go back and consult. We scheduled to report back on Friday May 18th but we have never reported back.

Paragraph 13 of Appendix B reads as follows: “Election of members of the Assembly (1) The election of Members to the Assembly, representing the various political parties and organisations represented in Parliament, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda shall be conducted after consultations and consensus by the political parties and other Members of Parliament. 

(2) Subject to sub-rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote.”

Madam Speaker, what this rule clearly says is that before we have nominations, we consult; after consultations and we have failed, then we would come and take a vote. We never consulted and reported to the House. If we did, when did we vote on it since consensus failed? So you cannot talk about voting today when the process was not concluded according to our rules. 

Madam Speaker, it was in this regard that some political parties – Of course, we do not know the procedure used where colleagues in the NRM nominated six candidates, because it was the consultation process which would determine how many each party is supposed to nominate. So, how did NRM nominate six and how did other parties nominate one? 

I want to put it on record that paragraph 13 of Appendix B has not been followed. Since it has not been followed, some other parties have not participated. This is contrary to the rule. So, we want to put it clear, and in the strongest terms, that we have violated our own rules which we put in place regarding EALA elections.

10.55
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Madam Speaker, as the UPC whip I want to put it on record that after the meeting in Parliament, we consulted as a party and the party made a decision in our cabinet to nominate a UPC candidate. (Applause) The candidate was personally nominated by the Secretary-General of UPC, hon. Jacinto Ogwal, and the chairperson of the UPC electoral commission that was duly elected by the party. (Applause) 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, on behalf of UPC, we consulted with the party President of DP, hon. Norbert Mao, and he told us that DP had also consulted and nominated a candidate. (Applause) We consulted with DP and later with NRM and informed them that UPC would put in a candidate and I duly asked for their support for our candidate. (Applause) I therefore would like to state that as an independent party, UPC consulted other parties and has duly nominated a candidate. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek procedural guidance on two matters. I know that our house is not very much in order and it is not a nice feeling to stand up at this time. (Laughter) However, the guidance I am seeking is in line with the Administration of Parliament Act. The law, as amended, gives power to the Leader of the Opposition to be the official head of the Opposition and to put Government at check in that capacity. It now seems that we have a scenario where other political parties have decided to make independent decisions, which is allowed since they are political parties in their own right. However, since that role has been given to the Leader of the Opposition by law, I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, whether it would not be prudent to draw our attention to the provisions of that Act. 

Secondly, if DP and UPC have decided to go their own way, I seek your guidance whether it will not be prudent for them to formally form an alliance with NRM - (Laughter) – so that the Opposition in this House is clear. Otherwise, we are now being shot from the back and from – (Laughter)

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Odonga Otto, a member of FDC that has been representing us for two terms as the Opposition, to come and tell us that DP and UPC have formed an alliance with NRM? Is that the same alliance FDC had with NRM for the last two terms? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this matter we are not dealing with the Administration of Parliament Act; we are dealing with the Treaty for East African Cooperation. If the Treaty had wanted only the main Opposition, they would have stated it so explicitly. (Applause) The Treaty was aware that there are smaller parties as well. I do not think that you can bind the smaller parties. Let us hear from Leader of Government Business. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I rise to put the record right. We did two types of consultations; one was under the chairmanship of hon. Fox Odoi, Chair of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. All of us participated and we came to Parliament and hon. Fox Odoi did indeed present a report, and that is how and when we adopted rule 13. You may recollect, colleagues, that the honourable members of the Opposition did storm out of this House. 

We again carried out consultations in compliance with the rule which talked about political parties and other Members of Parliament carrying out consultations in order to generate consensus. We carried out these consultations. The Leader of the Opposition was the leader of all the political forces in the Opposition and I participated personally in those consultations. At the end of the consultations, we came to this Parliament and I actually reported that we had failed to generate consensus. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi supported my report that we had failed to generate consensus. In fact, it is on that day that you, Madam Speaker, ruled that Parliament would sit on Monday, 28th of May and we did sit.

What I was reporting today, therefore, was on further consultations that had been carried out, like the hon. Betty Amongi has reported. I want to confirm that even then, we have carried out consultations and I am reporting that no consensus was generated, mainly with FDC. 

Finally, the nominations were done according to our Rules of Procedure and the dates were given as we are all aware. We had a debate on this matter on Monday 28th when the FDC complained about their member who had been nominated and formally withdrew his candidature. Therefore, nominations were done and concluded according to our Rules of Procedure. Therefore, today is not the day to go back to the things we had concluded; today is the day for voting. 

Nominations have been done and all the issues that had been raised in respect of nominations have been cleared, according to the report of the Clerk to the Ugandan Parliament. There is absolutely no question that this Parliament has duly complied with all the laws, all the Rules of Procedure of this House and it is ready for elections of Members of EALA from Uganda.

11.06
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kawungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the deputy whip of DP. First, I want to make it clear here that DP is a party on its own. (Applause) Our sign is a hoe and not a bus or fingers. 

Secondly, DP has a national executive council which sits to determine our candidates. As read by the Commissioner here, the Democratic Party President – not emeritus but the current one - is Norbert Mao. I want to state here that for us we say, “What the Pope has said, you should follow”. When the Secretary-General and the DP President sit in any consultative meeting and come up with a decision, we follow it as the Democratic Party. So, DP has a candidate. (Applause)

Our struggle of going to the East African Court of Justice was to be represented. I want to say that there is no candidate in Uganda who is going to contest and will not be voted by NRM, DP and other parties. Whoever comes here has to go through the process where NRM, DP, UPC and any other are supposed to be involved. So, as we go in, DP is going to participate and this is an eye opener for us to come in power in 2016. We shall participate in the elections. I thank you. 

11.09
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am extremely impressed by the statements that the UPC and DP have made up in this House today. I appreciate the role that FDC plays in this House. However, I find myself in extreme shock and mental disorganisation when hon. Nandala-Mafabi stands up to make that statement, that there was no sufficient consultation.

Madam Speaker, I want to report to this House that you pronounced a verification committee which was approved by this House. I was a member of that committee. I attended from day one, and we elected hon. Mariam Nalubega as our chairperson. Hon. Ekanya, who is my brother from Tororo, was with me throughout, participating in this verification. To the best of my knowledge, hon. Ekanya is a shadow minister for finance, he is a member of the CEC of the FDC, and he participated throughout. When the Leader of the Opposition and member representing FDC stands up and says that their party was not consulted, it really shows lack of something. 

Hon. Ekanya stood up here and tried to raise a minority report regarding the same. It was ruled out of procedure because if you look at the electronic minutes, there was general consensus generated at every stage. 

Madam Speaker, I want to urge members in this House that we might have our own differences, - for example, I am independent of any political party – but when it comes to matters of representing Uganda at international fora, let us not wash our dirty linen outside. We can disagree here and it is okay, but when we go outside we are one. This issue of trivialising the politics in Uganda can be done in our constituencies where we start subdividing people on the basis of tribe, religion, race, colour and creed. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to state on the Floor of this Parliament that if the people of Tororo Municipality had voted on the basis of religion, colour and tribe, I would not be here today. So, my plea to honourable colleagues is, let us rise above such. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have listened. I think the Order Paper misled us. It mentions the report, and then it mentions the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business first, and then two, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. The Order Paper does not mention the UPC whip and the DP whip. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I must say that we did everything in good faith. You said here a few minutes ago that the Treaty never took recognition that there would be an official Opposition. That means it also took -

THE SPEAKER: No, I did not say that. I said if the Treaty had wanted to give right only to the main Opposition, they would have been clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in that same line, it is the reason why we have been questioning; if DP had nominated six, UPC six and CP six, it would be a very good thing -(Interjections)- That is no problem. 

I want to clearly say that I led the Opposition parties to this consensus; little did I know that my colleagues I was leading eventually turned against me. (Laughter) This clearly shows that some of our colleagues that we had thought were with us in the Opposition were not. In that regard, I cannot be - (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For some of us who did chemistry, there is something called entropy which is defined as maximum degree of disorganisation of a chemical reaction. (Laughter) We know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is the Leader of the Opposition in this Parliament. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to tell us that he has totally failed to control the Opposition in this House? If so, is he in order to continually keep lamenting and wasting our time? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to hon. Nandala-Mafabi to convene a meeting after these elections with the members of the small Opposition parties so they can harmonise their activities.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am going to demonstrate that I have power. First and foremost, since FDC is not in, we are not going to participate in the election process.

Two, forthwith, I suspend UPC and DP from our population of the political parties. (Interjections) I want to be clear that from now on, and I want to tell the Leader of Government Business, there is only one party in the Opposition you have to deal with. The reason is simple, because there are two sides in Parliament – the official Opposition and the ruling party. I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity and listening to me. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, I want to inform the country that the members of DP were elected here as members of DP and are registered as such in this House. The members of UPC were elected on that ticket and they are here in that capacity in this House. The shadow cabinet is your business and that has nothing to do with this House. You will do that later.

Honourable members, I notice that members are not sitting properly; can I ask somebody to move a motion?

11.19
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to move a motion that before we start with the campaigns, - as you may realise that the House is full to capacity today - you accept that we suspend the rules on sitting so that we share seats with other honourable members. 

I know that in lieu of national unity and in this matter, even hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Atiku will accept that many honourable members are standing and we would all like to participate in the process. Therefore, I would like to plead with you that a motion be moved that we suspend the rules on sitting for purposes of the elections and the campaigns by all the nominees that we expect to represent us in EALA. I can even see the Leader of the Opposition is convinced by this, and I think he will second me in this matter that we suspend that rule. I beg to move.

11.21
MR KENNETH BOSSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion that rule 8 be suspended to allow the members sit comfortably. I beg to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Opposition and members, today is going to be a long day; the members are going to address the electorate and I would want to appeal to you to accept that we suspend rule 8 so that members - In fact you are looking lonely. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the mover of the motion, and I am very excited that today we have 100 per cent quorum. Some Members of Parliament are standing, others are squatting like hon. Kakooza - (Laughter) - So, in the circumstances, I have been instructed by the Leader of the Opposition to allow you to sit this side, but be disciplined. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure be suspended to allow members sit freely in this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF APPENDIX B OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT 2012 BY THE CANDIDATES NOMINATED TO REPRESENT UGANDA TO THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EALA)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to introduce the presence of hon. Norbert Mao, President of the Democratic Party who is in the Gallery. (Applause) I also see two of our colleagues, hon. Kajeke and hon. Mukabera. They are also there in the Gallery. (Applause) 

Honourable members, just for the record, I want to say that I am satisfied that the procedures for the nominations, announcements, gazetting of candidates to the East African Legislative Assembly were duly complied with. We should proceed to receive the addresses from the candidates. (Applause) 

Mr Babigumira, you are welcome. You can now address the electorate. You will have seven minutes. At five minutes the bell will ring to alert you that you have only two minutes remaining.

11.27
MR NICHOLAS BABIGUMIRA (Independent): Thank you very much, Madam, Speaker. Salutations to the House. I am Nicholas Babigumira and I come from Rukungiri, South-western Uganda. (Interjections) Honourable members, I am taking my time because I need to relax a bit. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity which you have given me and I thank the members who endorsed me to contest. Nicholas could be known as a leader through his time back. I am a founder of the EAYE Organisation, which in full is the East African Youth Empowerment. I employ 38 youths, creating jobs. Tonight - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order Members! Honourable members, please listen to the candidate.

MR BABIGUMIRA: Today, we come together bound by our faith in the Almighty God. With respect and love for our nation -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MR BABIGUMIRA: Honourable members, you have always heard people talk about the East African integration; what does it really mean? To some, it means a shared history and a common heritage. To someone in Karamoja and Turkana, it means improved security for their cattle. 

What about the youth? What does it really mean for the youth who make up 73 percent of the East African populace? Provisions of articles 76, 104 talk about the Common Market Protocol. The Protocol provides for seven elements. Of the seven elements, there is free movement of goods, free movement of markets and free movement of persons. So, to the youth who make up 73 percent of East Africa, we come together and provide the market as the youth. (Interjections) Honourable members, tonight I ask for your vote -

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!

MR BABIGUMIRA: Honourable members, tonight I ask for your vote; a vote of conviction, a vote of conscience to drive our nation, East Africa, to the place we seek. (Applause) Tonight in the House, we have the power to seek the world through this vote. The East Africa you have sought is within me and the power is within you tonight. Honourable members, my faith lies in you. 

When we talk about the East African integration, not all is rosy. The East African Business Climate Index 2010 talks about the bribes that are along the borders. But tonight, if we come together in unity and walk down this road, we can avoid these negativities. I call for unity among the countries so that we can realise our hopes, dreams and aspirations that have for long been encapsulated - 

Talking about leadership, as East Africans need to come down to good leadership and governance. From time immemorial, we have seen leadership in kingdoms and great powers rise and fall, and no generation chooses the circumstance or age in which it will fall. But tonight, you have been given an opportunity to change the nation that we see, to change the East Africa that we see. With true leadership, we can actually create jobs - (Candidate timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, candidate Babigumira. I welcome candidate Dora Byamukama. You have seven minutes. At the end of five minutes, the bell will ring to give you notice that you have only two minutes.

11.34
MS DORA BYAMUKAMA (NRM): Madam Speaker, I thank you. Honourable members, I also thank you for giving me this opportunity. I salute you, the great Ninth Parliament, for the work you have accomplished. You have made us proud and you are a model in the East African Community and beyond. 

Allow me, since this is my fist time to be on the Hansard of this Parliament, to also thank you for electing the first lady Speaker since we got independence. (Applause) You have made history; you have made us proud and we look to you for more success to come. We wish you well. 

My name, as you have heard, is Dora Christine Kanabahita Byamukama Akiiki. Allow me to say a little bit about myself. I am an accomplished advocate of over 20 years standing. I am a seasoned politician. I served in the Parliament of Uganda wherein I chaired four committees. I chaired the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Committee on Equal Opportunities, the Select Committee on Industrial Relations, and I was the vice-chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association. (Applause) Honourable members, in a nutshell, I have the requisite qualifications to represent you in EALA for a second time. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to move quickly to what has been accomplished in EALA where you sent us, and I want to thank you again for voting us to EALA. We have done a great job. I would like to humbly outline the following:

I serve as a commissioner in EALA. Only two people serve on the commission from Uganda and I am one of the two. The commission is in charge of administration, and I have served diligently for five years as a commissioner. 

I have also been part of the team which developed the first ever strategic plan for EALA. This plan has helped us accomplish a lot because we are now sure of the calendar of our activities. 

I have also moved a private member’s Bill to establish the East African Parliament Institute. This Bill is now law; all the five Presidents signed and we are looking forward to having participants from all the national assemblies of the Partner States.
 
I also moved the Administration of EALA Bill. This Bill is also law, and currently we are commissioners and we are chaired by the Speaker. 

I am not a stranger in initiating private member’s Bills. In Parliament of Uganda I, together with colleagues, initiated a Bill which is now law for persons with disabilities. With this House and the previous House, we also worked on the female genital mutilation law. (Applause) I also worked on the trafficking in person’s law. These are the laws which Uganda has used proactively to shine internationally. 

I would like to turn to what I would like to do. With your vote, honourable members, I will be able to do more. I have five areas I would like to concentrate on. As a Member of EALA, we have the function of representing you, we have the function of legislating, we have the function of budgeting, doing oversight and we have the unique function of linking the Assembly with the national assemblies. I would like to do the following with your support:

I would like to create more awareness about the East African Community. I would like to do this by linking proactively with you on this mission. We already have a Speaker’s Bureau, we have a Clerk’s Bureau, we have the Nanyuki Series where we meet Members of Parliament, and we also have football, but now I would also like to introduce netball. (Applause) Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think it is high time we had joint sessions so that we can together debate on the interest of East Africans. 

I would like to work on the issue of tangible benefits. Intra-regional trade in East African has grown from US$ 2 billion in 2005 to US$ 4 billion in 2010. This has increased people’s interest in the Community. Now we need to work on tangible benefits. It is my dream and my prayer that that old woman who lives in Kamuli, in a remote area called Kidera, will be able to sell her maize to the people of East Africa. (Applause) However, this lady can only sell her maize if there is added value, if there is industrialisation and if there is infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, I have one mission today, to ask for the vote. Before I conclude, there are non-tariff barriers we have, for example we need to learn Kiswahili, we need to develop infrastructure, work on issues like cattle rustling and we need to have a politically united East Africa. In conclusion, please vote for me. (Applause) I am able, articulate and competent. I thank you. For God and my Country.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I want to welcome candidate Edward J. Kayondo Bagenda to address the electorate. You have seven minutes. The bell will ring at five minutes to inform you that you have two minutes remaining.

11.43
DR EDWARD J. KAYONDO BAGENDA (CP): Madam Speaker and honourable members of this House, the Conservative Party member –(Interjections)- he has walked out. I am here because he is there. The Treaty of the Community was signed on 30 November 1999. It took effect in 2000 – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

DR BAGENDA: This is the second East African Community, the other one having collapsed in 1977, and that one having taken over from the East African Common Services. I want us to pay tribute to the people who brought us this far - our own President, Yoweri Museveni; Presidents Kikwete and Mwinyi of Tanzania; Moi and Kibaki of Kenya; Kagame and Nkrunziza. Since I am not here to re-write history, I will also thank –

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!

DR BAGENDA: I will thank the ones who started everything, Milton Obote, Kenyatta and Nyerere. This history is important because if you do not know where you are coming from, you are not likely to know where you are going. If you have no history, then you have no future. 

The aims of this Treaty are to widen and deepen cooperation among Partner States in social, economic, political, research, judiciary, defence which is for mutual benefit. Honourable members, your job, my job, our job is to widen this circle of opportunity so that every East African can have a fair shot at good governance and uplift their economic standards by representing them. We have got 133 million people in five countries occupying an area of 1,800,000 square kilometres with a combined GDP of US$ 90 billion, a capita income of US$ 660 and a rate of urbanisation of 20 percent.  

The second thing we will do at EALA will be to legislate - make good laws - and the oversight function so that there can be equitable, sustained and balanced development for the benefit of everybody. The Partner States have established the Customs Union, the Common Market and we are now on the brink of financial integration. Napoleon used to say that an army moves on its stomach; so, trade and economic activities are very important. 

In 2005, intra-trade within the Partner States was equivalent to US$ 1.7 billion. In 2010, it was equivalent to US$ 3.7 billion, which is an improvement but that is still very low. The reason is non-tariff barriers. You get to the border at 5 O’clock and it is closed. I will advocate for non-tariff barriers to be removed. 

You may realise, honourable members, that I am the only medical doctor in this group and so health is my subject. We get samples here from children suffering from nodding disease and we send them to the Centres for Disease Control. Let us get serious! We must have a centre here for disease surveillance, detection, giving advisory services and for declaring disaster areas. 

We must have centres of excellence. We can say Mulago National Hospital is for cardiac disease, Muhimbili in Tanzania for musculoskeletal and we can take any other national hospital for kidney diseases. Why do we spend a scandalous sum of US$ 100 million sending a few people abroad? The Abuja Declaration 2002 decided that we should spend 15 percent of our GDP on health and yet we only spend seven percent. I am tired of fighting for an increment.

On expansion, thanks to Uganda, soon Somalia will stabilise and South Sudan and I will support them to join. There has been talk of joining SADC, EAC and COMESA to get 500 million people with a GDP of US$ 1 trillion. We must not fear to expand but we must not expand out of fear. History has placed on us a destiny to make choices either to remain with our sovereignty and poverty and with no voice in our own destiny, or to integrate, become a bigger quantity, politically relevant, something to sell. I will support the integration. 

I will act synergistically, complimenting each other with my colleagues, and I will also act symbiotically gaining from them. I will deliver this message with pinpoint accuracy and military precision. I will not oscillate, vacillate, equivocate or procrastinate -(Candidate timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, I welcome candidate Daniel Fred Kidega. (Applause) You have seven minutes and at the end of five minutes, the bell will ring to notify you that you have two minutes left. You can address the electorate.       

11.51
MR DANIEL FRED KIDEGA (NRM): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. My spirit is in union with the spirit of this House (Applause). I would like to congratulate you for the good job you have done for this country. 

Madam Speaker, the journey to this podium has been long. It started way back from Ntare School when I was made head prefect. It progressed to several statuses of the student movement where I was the speaker for the National Student Association of this country. I progressed to join the country youth movement where I served dearly in my generation in many positions. I was chairman of the National Youth Council and I represented the youth of this country in several fora in and out of the country. I sat in this House under your careful watch as a representative of the youth of this country, where I did a good job. 

From there, these various assemblies, specifically the Eighth Parliament, entrusted me to represent this country in the East African Legislative Assembly, a job I did with a lot of passion and love. I would like to thank you and thank this country for according me the opportunity to do so.

I would like to thank my political party that has given me a vote of confidence to represent it as a candidate in this struggle. My nomination by my party is a vote of confidence to say my qualification is un-doubtable. I have treaded the path of leadership without any stain on my body. I am well qualified; I have so far climaxed with a Master of Science in International Trade Policy and Trade Law. 

My commitment and ability to represent you is abundant. I have done a lot of work in this region, but in the interest of time I invite you to visit my Facebook blog where you will find a lot of information about me. As your representative, I made sure your voice was never silent at any given time in the Assembly. I effectively participated in the debates and made sure that for every matter that was crucial, your voice was heard. I raised many questions - written and oral - to the council of ministers pertaining to crucial issues of integration. I moved motions on the Floor of Parliament that were overwhelmingly supported and passed. 

I initiated a private members’ Bill that was passed, the EALA Members Elections Act. I associated myself with a number of private members Bills moved by my committee. I represented the Assembly and the Speaker in several fora, regionally and internationally. I was the chair of the Uganda Chapter. During my term, I presented two annual reports to the Eighth Parliament on the account of what EALA has accomplished. 

I now have a covenant that I want to sign with you of what I want to go and do. We want to make sure the Customs Union becomes viable and managed by a common customs authority. We would like to breathe life into the Common Market Protocol. We would like to promote the comparative advantage of Uganda in the integration. Our comparative advantage is in the area of agriculture and education so far. We would like to promote sustainable use of the trans-boundary echo system, which is a high risk area for conflict. We would like to consolidate peace and security in the region, enabling the nations. 

Honourable members, in conclusion, I would like to ask you for a vote –(Interruptions)– In conclusion, like I told my party caucus, I would like to issue you and the country a promissory note, and better still, maybe a post dated cheque, and this cheque is drawn from an account and a bank that never goes bankrupt. The face of this cheque is accountable leadership, effective representation and reliable representation. (Applause) Honourable members, I beg for your vote and may God bless you. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Fred Mbidde Mukasa. You have seven minutes to address the House. The bell will ring at five minutes to notify you that you need to conclude. You can address the electorate. 

11.58
MR FRED MBIDDE MUKASA (DP): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am mindful of protocol. I am Mukasa Fred Mbidde. I am the candidate nominated on the Democratic Party ticket. That is the vehicle that brought me here. I am mindful that those are vehicles. Some have boarded a yellow vehicle, some are still stuck in some other vehicles – (Applause) Honourable members, we all know that those are just vehicles but for purposes of integration, we are all Ugandans. 

My candidature is guided by the principle established in Ecclesiastes chapter 9 verse 3, but most specifically, that there is a time for everything. There is time for war and there is also time for peace. There was time for court and honourable members, this is time for elections. I need your vote. (Applause)

My qualifications are guided. I am an advocate of the Courts of Judicature. I also hold a Bachelor of Mass Communication degree of Makerere University. I am a candidate for Masters of Laws of Makerere University. I am also a former Guild President of Makerere University. So, honourable members, I am a tested leader. I have only not been tested thoroughly enough so as to be catapulted into a substantive office. Honourable members, save me from that anomaly. (Laughter)

I have watched the Community grow. The integration process has been clear right from 1993 when it was still a mere tripartite arrangement among the three countries of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. I am also aware, as a lawyer, that it was only in 1999 that the tripartite agreement was itself couched into a treaty. That means it requires a lot of our input as legal advocates. I know that a lot of discontent is everywhere in terms of the Treaty. However, that is because we have not substantively addressed legal minds to it for purposes of doing amendments. That is why I am going there, honourable members. 

I want to promise that I am not going to be useless to the Community, and more or so where we are now couching the Community. The model of integration adopted by the East African Community is clear. It stems from the Customs Union, the Common Market, the Monetary Union, and substantively it creates a final government for the East African Community.

As Uganda, how do we strategically position ourselves for the Community in lieu of the integration? In a political integration for the East African Federation, where do we place Uganda, which does not have shores to talk of, a Uganda that does not have the biggest economy and industries to talk of? How do we take lead under a political federation? It is by sending the best brains to place the federation itself on a level playing field and on course for Uganda to lead. I am not saying that Partner States are dealing with such kind of mistrust, no. What I am saying is that it is the fear of the unknown that makes the tortoise move with its own house. (Laughter)

Finally, what is my input going to be? I have been reminded about time. I cannot leave this podium without humbly asking for your vote, honourable members. I promise to do all that I have talked about, including all that I have not addressed pursuant to the time given to me. All that can only be possible if you accord me your vote. Vote for me and I will serve you. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Bernard Mulengani into the House. You have only seven minutes to address the electorate and at five minutes, the bell will ring to warn you about the time left.

12.05
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (NRM): Thank you very much, honourable members, for the warm welcome and reception. I am humbled by that. My prayer, however, is that you convert that welcome into a vote. 

In the interest of time, I hold a masters degree. I have consulted for international organisations and written papers on repositioning Uganda within the Common Market Protocol. I have also written papers on the determinants of demand for money within Uganda.

Honourable members, with the mandate that you gave me in the last five years, I represented Uganda effectively. At this moment, I want to thank you for the support you accorded me to be able to expose myself both at the national Parliament and the regional Parliament - the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause)

During that period, I can report that I immensely contributed to the passing of over 35 Bills into legislations, several motions and resolutions in the Assembly. However, given the constraint of time, I would not like to go into the details. I also take note that I am addressing a well-informed audience.

While at the EALA, one of my competencies was tapped. I chaired the Public Accounts Committee, which has immensely contributed to the accountability and good governance within the East African Community. In this capacity, I led the Council of Ministers to formulate some of the following documents: the Procurement Manual, and the East African Audit and Risks Committee Charter. Those who are accountants will appreciate how much these documents have created the independence of the internal audit to create accountability within the region.

Because of my lobbying skills, during the time of representing Uganda I sat on the Committee of Agriculture, Tourism and Natural Resources. While there, I lobbied for eight towns in Uganda that have benefitted from the Lake Victoria Water and Management Initiative as compared to other member states which had only six towns.

As chairperson of AMANI, I contributed to the settlement of conflicts along the borders of Uganda and Kenya specifically on the West Pokot and Kapchorwa. I also participated in the process that brought forth the Common Market, the Customs Union and I have laid foundations for the Monetary Union. (Applause)

Furthermore, honourable members, in the effort to popularise the East African Community and EALA, I have been at the centre stage of organising all events of the East African Community specifically the football tournament. The most recent one took place in Bujumbura, Burundi, where Parliament of Uganda emerged winner. (Applause) I want to associate myself with this victory and those who were in Burundi can bear testimony on the role of sports in widening and deepening the East African Integration.

Madam Speaker, I can see that on the Floor, very many members would wish to give information, but in the interest of time I will not yield the Floor. I am here to ask for a vote, but I am also aware of the pending work. I am aware that there are several aspects of the protocols that have not been concluded.

In the next five years, we shall engage in negotiations of the Monetary Union. This is a very critical stage, and I stand before you this morning to ask for your votes to represent Uganda in the coming EALA. When voted in, the priority will be streamlining, tracing back to the Parliament of Uganda. 

At this point, I want to applaud you, Members of the Ninth Parliament, for changing your rules to ensure that the minister of the Community comes back to report. I want to applaud you for changing your rules to create a specific committee that addresses East African Community issues, and also for the forum that is for members to address advocacy for the East African Community. (Applause) 

Lastly, as I pray that all of you come back in the Tenth Parliament, I am also here before you to ask for your votes to go back to the East African Legislative Assembly. I want to thank you very much. Vote Bernard Mulengani. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Susan Nakawuki. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to indicate that you should conclude. You may address us. 

12.13
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (Independent): I thank you, honourable members. Madam Speaker, distinguished Members of Parliament, I salute you all. (Applause) My name is Susan Nakawuki. I am a lawyer, practising with Ochieng, Ayebazibwe and Co. Advocates. 

I have had opportunity to serve this nation. I served in the Eighth Parliament as a Member of Parliament for Busiro East constituency. I was a distinguished member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Committee of Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. (Applause) I want to thank you for that applause because that is a sign to show that you can realise the girl power in me and the youth power in me. 

In Susan Nakawuki, the youth of this country, who constitute more than 65 percent, are represented. In Susan Nakawuki, the women of this country, who represent more than 50 percent, are represented.  

Honourable members, tonight I seek your support for a fresh mandate in the East African Legislative Assembly. Tonight, I present myself as a candidate, a candidate for the East African Legislative Assembly. I come as an independent, an independent who cuts across, an independent who is going to make sure that Ugandan interests are represented. 

Today, as we celebrate 50 years of independence, we cannot forget our history because it is what makes Uganda. We cannot forget about our tortured past but above all, we have exhibited greater aspirations and tolerance and we are determined to get to where we want to go. Honourable members, my overall intent today is to undertake and ensure delivery of a functional political federation favourable to Uganda and to serve the East African Community. (Applause)

What makes Susan Nakawuki the candidate? I have offered myself to serve this country and this is what I stand for in this race: As a lawyer, it is pertinent that you have the Treaty that establishes the East African Community amended. The Treaty needs revision. We have had a lot of blanket provisions – (Applause) – The Treaty has a lot of blanket provisions which need to be amended. It is vague and ambiguous. We have articles, like Article 51, which need to be amended.

Secondly, the East African Court of Justice is limited in jurisdiction. It is limited to interpretation of the Treaty as provided in Article 23. We need to amend it to expand its jurisdiction to handle issues of East Africa.  

Honourable members, there is a challenge of dual membership. Many Partner States are dual members in other blocs, like SADC and COMESA. Tanzania, for example, is a member of SADC. We find this a challenge; they commit themselves to other treaties and when the treaties of the Community come up, they cannot commit themselves. Tanzania, for example, signed the common defence pact and now they cannot sign the defence protocol, which is pertinent in this region. 

My plans today are security, freedom and stability. (Applause) Today there is a high rate of terrorism, and it cuts across. Members, we need to bring the East African Community closer to the people of Uganda. We need enough publicity and sensitisation. The East African Community is only known in this Parliament, in this building. My grandmother knows nothing about the Community. 

Honourable members, we shall use superior publicity; we shall use grassroots civic and political education to educate our people about the opportunities in the Community. Today, there is high demand for milk in Kenya but we find milk going bad here. People are not aware about this. We just need value added production. (Applause) I am going to work hand in hand with you to mobilise our people for socio-economic development. 

As a mother, the issue of maternal health is paramount. We need legislation - (Applause) - I have offered myself as a woman. Members of UWOPA, I need a platform under which I will unleash my legal skills. Many of these laws need legal surgery and I am the surgeon. Look at me, honourable members. (Applause)

This morning, before I left my home, my daughters woke me up and asked me, “Mummy, are you going to campaign today?” Honourable members, I have been told to just ask for a vote. I am here. Your vote counts. You matter for me to matter elsewhere. Please, vote for me. (Applause) Let us create a future for our children. This morning, I looked at my two daughters and I was wondering, “What does the future hold for them?” It is no longer about Uganda; we are East Africans. What state are we leaving for these children? 

Honourable members, you have the answers. Let me share in that responsibility and take our country ahead. The youth are here. Nakawuki is a better youth, 28 years old. The youth need representation. Please, give me your vote. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Andrew Niwabiine. You have seven minutes. At five minutes, the bell will ring to notify you that you should conclude. You can address the electorate.

12.22
MR ANDREW NIWABIINE (Independent): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am called Andrew Niwabiine. I am very honoured to be before you here seeking your vote to go beyond our borders and represent Uganda, carrying the flag with pride.

I have worked for Uganda for over 17 years and I am very grateful to this country, this Parliament and my people. East Africa has come a long way. We started with a Customs Union in 2005, a Common Market in 2010 and we are planning for the formation of many other unions.

Honourable ladies and gentlemen, I want to appreciate the work of our predecessors at EALA. I appreciate the work of hon. Nusura Tiperu, hon. Dan Kidega, hon. Bernard Mulengani, hon. Dora Byamukama and I thank them very much for what they have done. I am asking you, honourable members, to support me so that I can go and join them and add value to what is there.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is not enough to talk about ourselves, our country or what we see but it is enough to make a contribution for the development of our region. As you realise, our manufacturers and producers here are facing a problem of counterfeit and substandard goods. When I reach EALA, I will ensure that Article 81 of the East African Community Treaty is amended.

I am asking for your vote. I would like you to support me and I am not going to disappoint you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Jack Nsubuga. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to notify you that you need to conclude. You may proceed.

12.26
MR JACK NSUBUGA (Independent): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to bring the cause of the young people in this country. I was born on 25 November 1982 in Iganga, Busoga. I lost my parents and so, today you are my parents, you are my brothers and you are my saviours, honourable members. 

I went to Kira College Butiki, Makerere College School and to Makerere University. I was a head boy. I was the first Makerere University student to be voted in the history of the university – (Interruptions) - Honourable members and friends, I am here to tell you that the young people voted for me, and you cannot take away the lead because we have arrived. I want to assure you that for someone to go to Makerere and you are voted the best university leader, you must have the stamina.

I have a manifesto that is embedded in AMBASSADOR, meaning my points will begin from “A” up to “R”. If I do not finish, you will know I have a pragmatic manifesto.

My first point will be to allow Southern Sudan in the same motion. The President of this country said we should allow Southern Sudan, Somalia and Congo. Having a neighbour in the block will give the youth in this country employment opportunities and support. Gallant honourable members, I request for your vote.

Making effective human rights legislation in East Africa; what happened in the elections brought violence to the young people. The workers were not ably represented. We want to make legislation for the human rights problem in this country. 

I am here to tell you that the youth have arrived in Nsubuga Jack Mandela from Eastern Busoga. I do not have jiggers like most of you say. (Laughter) Honourable Members and friends, I have a dream that four of my professors will –(Interjections)

In reference to what Martin Luther King said, I want you to judge me not because I am financially ensconced, not because I lost my parents, not because I come from Busoga, not because I have a –(Interjections)- on the ground but because I have the mental verbal artillery to attack in Arusha. Mandela, oyee!

Honourable members, this is not a show for lawyers or doctors, this is a show for mental verbal artillery - how you can fight for Uganda. Uganda, oyee! As a son of a peasant, I concern myself with the peasants of this country and I left Shs 10 million for the youth of Western Uganda. I come from Eastern Uganda but I was fighting for unity. Mandela, oyee!

We lack autonomous organisations like the East African Development Bank. Do you know that a local investor like hon. Otada can get a loan from East African Development Bank? We can get local investors like Balyeku getting a loan from East African banks because they give loans for projects that certain banks do not afford. I beg for your vote, honourable members. 

The East African Common Protocol has barriers of Kiswahili. When I was coming here, I went to Owino market and I asked some of the ladies, “ndugu nataka kununuwa – (Interjections) - She did not understand Swahili. How do you expect her to benefit from the Common Market?

We have obstacles in the East African Legislative Assembly like language barriers, technocrats and so on. Honourable members, I have a lot to talk, I am a talker. (Applause) For the women in this country, I add my voice to the women parliamentarians – (Interjections) – Infant mortality rates are high – (Interjections) - I am here today fighting for the young people in this county. Barack Obama says that we should help the youth and claim them from violence.” (Applause)

I will end my speech by kneeling down as a sign of - (Interjections) – I will walk with you hand to hand, shoulder to shoulder. (Applause) The youth have arrived. I want to request you, honourable members; this is not a show about money but this is a show about the peasants and the poor. Give our children opportunities to take the East African revolution. (Applause) I am a messenger of Mahatma Gandhi, Kaguta Museveni, Nelson Mandela, Nyerere, Kwame Nkrumah (Applause). Because of time, I will not talk so much - (Interjections) – For the interest of East African cooperation, I am representing the peasants from Karamoja, from Western Uganda, from Busoga – (Candidate timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Moses Nuwagaba. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to indicate that you should conclude. You may proceed.

12.34
MR MOSES NUWAGABA (UPC): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I greet you. I work with a civil society organisation called National Action for Awakening Uganda. (Laughter) On March 16th this year, something struck Kampala; a woman called Juliet Nalujja decided to summarily end her life. After looking for a job for very many years, she went on the top of Workers’ House and decided to end her life. My concern, therefore, honourable members – (Interjections) – My platform, Madam Speaker, is the platform of creating employment and making the East African Community create jobs and business opportunities for the people of Uganda. While we are here, there are people who are crying for jobs; there are those wandering from street to street but with nowhere to land, like Noah’s dove.

I come before you in humility to beg you, to request you, to plead with you and to plead before you to support my candidature for the East African Legislative Assembly. I want to thank the honourable members who endorsed my candidature, 21 of you. Sometimes we go to the forest and find a huge tree and it is difficult to realise that this tree was once a seed. You planted a seed, Members of Parliament who endorsed me; today, the seed has germinated. I request you and I implore you to water the germinated seed. I can assure you that this tree will bear fruit for the people of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, if I were asked to put a mathematical equation for the word “experience”, I would say experience is equal to exposure multiplied by time. It is true that I do not have experience in matters of legislation, but it is equally true that being a quick learner, when you elect me I will take a little while to learn legislative procedures in EALA and shortly thereafter, I will begin doing wonders. 

I have already mentioned that my platform is a platform for creating employment for the people of Uganda. I want you, honourable members, to support me on this. I am looking at emerging industries in Uganda, including ICT, construction, food processing and the service industry. If we emphasise those emerging industries, we shall be able to create jobs for the people of Uganda. 

We should be asking ourselves some scientific questions; for example, ever since we embraced liberalisation there is still a tendency to drift away from state enterprises. In my home district of Mbarara, Kenya Commercial Bank is doing very well. How come that Kenya Commercial Bank is making profit where Uganda Commercial Bank failed? Was the problem the policy of running state enterprises or was it the problem of management?

I would like to see the East African Community having a common development plan, where the countries in the region are each developing a plan that feeds into the main plan of the East African Community. I would like to see the cost of doing business in the country reduce. Up to now, people are forced to move from Kotido, Kisoro, Arua and other districts to come to Kampala to register companies.

Honourable members, I come to you for your vote. I will represent you and I will respect group decisions; I will not waste time on non-issues.

One of the reasons the governments of East Africa are proposing but not achieving the East African Federation is because the people are suspicious in different countries. The supra-national authority that we would want to create on top of East Africa can only achieve its objective of uniting the people if it is explained to the people. The exact advantages it has to the people of Uganda need to be explained - for example, it would take away unemployment, poverty and disease. If you convince people that you are going to tackle the challenges they have, they will support you. 

I want to, therefore, state that it is important for the people of East Africa to understand why we are in cooperation. When Jesus came to the earth, he did not ask for people’s land titles, instead Jesus said, “Give me your burdens.” Anyone proposing that there should be one government should come up with a hybrid formula, where the people of East Africa will see their challenges reduced. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, people have talked about language; I agree that we must have one language in the region. (Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I welcome candidate Chris Opoka Okumu. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to notify you that you should conclude.

MR CHRIS OPOKA (UPC): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to this House for having had the wisdom and foresight to pass rules that protected candidates. (Applause) I really do appreciate this.

I am Chris Opoka Okumu, a lawyer and politician. I hold a bachelor’s degree from Makerere University and a diploma in legal practice from LDC. I have dedicated my life to this country guided by the principles of transparency, accountability and social justice for everyone without discrimination. I have worked both in Uganda and abroad to uplift the ordinary people. I worked in Canada as counsel to the immigration refugee board and as a refugee hearing officer. 

I have diligently served as secretary-general of UPC. (Applause) I created a very good and efficient system that allowed UPC to have a voice and allowed some of the people who tried to frustrate us to take leadership in UPC. I have represented UPC in various fora and in various organisations. 

I represented UPC in IPOD, which is an organisation for political parties which are represented in this House. I have worked diligently with the Prime Minister Mbabazi, hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Saleh Kamba from the ruling party. I have worked with hon. Ruzindana from FDC, hon. Nsubuga from DP and Kalinge Nyago from JEEMA. Currently, I am representing UPC in the national consultative forum for political parties working with Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda. These comrades can testify how I handle national issues in the interest of Uganda, and I am dedicated to continue with that. Infact, in IPOD, the hon. Migereko one time said that, “You cannot afford to disagree with Chris Opoka because he has got such a persuasive tongue.” So, I will work to negotiate with other colleagues in EALA should this House see it fit to elect me among the nine people. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda and East African countries do produce so little. Malaysia, which is five times smaller than East Africa, and has got a population of 28 million, produces US$ 447 billion in GDP terms. East Africa, which is five times bigger than Malaysia, with a population of about 131 million people and a geographical area of 1.8 million square kilometres, produces only US$ 149 billion in GDP terms. We must reverse this trend. We must work to eliminate the non-tariff barriers. As our forefathers have already set the Customs Union, the Common Market and have put in place the Monetary Union, we must work together to ensure that the political federation is achieved. 

One of the issues, which is very important, is the issue of the women’s role in East Africa. The women produce, they are hardworking; we must give women opportunities to play roles, very important decision-making roles, in East Africa. (Applause) Thank you.

I hope at our time we shall be able to stand one with the Community. I believe when Congo joins the Community, we shall have the East African Community from coast to coast. We must work hard to uplift the standard of our people. I ask for your votes. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I welcome candidate Mike Kennedy Sebalu. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes the bell will ring to notify you that you should conclude.

12.50 
MR KENNEDY MIKE SEBALU (NRM): Thank very much, Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament and all Ugandans out there viewing this live session. I want to make one statement as I start my campaign. Uganda has a great Parliament and that great Parliament is led by a great Speaker. That great Speaker is supported by a team of great and able Members of Parliament. It is because we have a great Parliament that we have grateful people like me and that is why I am standing before you. 

A great Parliament needs a great representative. That great representative is none other than Mike Kennedy Sebalu. (Applause) Mike Kennedy Sebalu is an East African of Ugandan origin. I did coin that to create the East Africaness, so that we introduce ourselves as East Africans. I went to school like all of you did. I went to King’s College Budo and I went to Makerere University. I am holder of a master’s degree in international relations, international law and diplomatic studies. For that matter, I am functionally versatile, I am academically very well qualified, I am very technically grounded and I am diplomatically well-schooled both in theory and practice of diplomacy. (Applause) I have the experience, I have the exposure and I have the expertise. I am such one MP who has served this country and the region with experience. I have served this country with dignity, discipline and decorum. 

What do I want to see in EALA? We have the justification already in the city but I want to talk about globalisation and how it affects this issue. We live in a highly globalised world and, therefore, the level of interdependence and interconnectedness that we go through demands that we do integrate to create more viable entities that survive the wrath of globalisation. Globalisation can only benefit the organised, the focused, the strong and those who are willing to work together. East Africa is taking this strategic imperative. 

I want to thank the leadership of Uganda because Uganda as a country, and my party, has been very strategic in terms of East African integration. I want to welcome on board other parties that have realised that, after all, integration is good for this country. They are welcome on board. (Applause)

We have different stages of integration. We have the Customs Union, Common Market, Monetary Union and Political Federation. We have already implemented the Customs Union and we are implementing the Common Market. I want to encourage you to engage Government to make the necessary laws to give legal import to the efforts being made under the Protocol. We need to get our ordinary people to benefit from the integration. We need them to appreciate. (Applause)

Honourable members, I have been the voice of integration. My voice has been heard on radio, on TV and meeting all the other people. I am here to ask for your vote. I have been communicating to you on your mails; you have been updated with the integration. I want the vote to go back and continue doing the good job that I have been doing.

I have one job to do and you will do the other. My job is to ask for the vote and your job is to give me the vote. I am standing here aspiring to inspire you before I expire. (Laughter) I look forward to working with you.

Finally, investing in Mike Kennedy Sebalu is a very profitable venture - (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Nusura Tiperu. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to indicate that you should be concluding. Please proceed.

1.00
MS NUSURA TIPERU: Mweshimiwa Speaker, mheshimiwa waziri, mheshimiwa wabunge wa Uganda, wa na habari, wa mama nawa bibi; nayitwa Nusura Tiperu, bunge W’afrika mashariki. Humijambo. 

My name is Nusura Tiperu. In Buganda I am called Namazzi -(Applause)- in the east –(interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members!

MS TIPERU: Madam Speaker, in the east I am called Nangobi. In Bunyoro, where I am married, I am called Maama Adyeri. (Applause) My uncles in the west call me call me Buyunzi. I am a mother of three. I hold a Bachelor of Arts degree in Social Sciences majoring in Sociology. I am trained in Kiswahili, a language which I have found relevant in the integration process. 

I feel at home speaking here. I feel at home because I was part and parcel of the Sixth and Seventh Parliament. I served as a youth Member of Parliament and served as the Woman Member of Parliament sitting in both sessional and standing committees. My record in this House is clear, Madam Speaker. 

I wish to thank Members of the Ninth Parliament for making Uganda proud. You made Uganda proud when you elected a woman Speaker. (Applause) As we do our job, we, the East African women legislators, walk with our heads high. 

I have been able to be part of a team which carried out research on the challenges women face while doing cross-border trade. I have been part of the Second East African Legislative Assembly, an assembly which made a mark in the integration process, an assembly which is considered one of the best. My colleagues and I - As you know, this is normal parliamentary practice and procedure; the achievements of Parliament cannot be taken by one individual. As a team, we have been able to pass over 34 pieces of legislation. We were able to enact the East African Community Competitions Act. We were able to enact the East African Joint Trade Negotiations Act. Because of time, I will not dwell on that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank members of the Eighth Parliament who gave me the opportunity to serve Uganda during my first term. I know some of the members are here. I made a covenant with those members and pledged that I will serve the interests of Uganda, which work I have done well. (Applause) I have sat in the East African Parliament and articulated the interests of Uganda very well. We are considered the stars in that assembly. 

In the East African Parliament, we were allocated responsibilities. My colleagues agreed that as a businesswoman, as a person with skills in trade, I must serve on the Committee on Communications, Trade and Investment, which work I was able to do very well. That is when we had the last East African Investment Conference here in Munyonyo. (Applause) 

I have come here yet to make a second covenant. I have come here because I intend – (Applause) – Honourable members, I will be working for the stability of the region. You have heard what happened in Nairobi. We cannot back-track anymore. You need legislators who are going to work and ensure that the hard-earned peace is maintained. (Applause)

Honourable members, I am going to focus on the tourism potential of Uganda. I want to thank you for championing maternal health. My work will be to ensure the maternal health of the region is considered. I appeal to you to vote for Tiperu. (Applause) A vote for Tiperu is a vote for Uganda’s interests. I ask you to vote for me because as you know, the integration process is in stages and I have been participating in the different stages of integration. I have been monitoring the stages physically. (Applause)

Honourable members, I ask for your vote. Vote for Tiperu, vote for market access, vote for continuity. You need not change a winning team. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Twinomugisha Mugisha. You have seven minutes to address the electorate. At five minutes, the bell will ring to indicate that you need to conclude. 

1.09
MR TWINOMUGISHA MUGISHA (Independent): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity you have given me and the honourable august House. I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your successful election. You have broken a glass ceiling. You have successfully managed to enter your name on the roll of global women achievers. With your record, Madam Speaker, I pray the sky is the limit.

My name is Rogers Twinomugisha Mugisha. On the 12th of November 1986, I was born in the hills of Kigezi. In 1986, not only did the various liberation movements come into power but it ushered in my life. With that journey, I will accomplish it by going to the East African Legislative Assembly because I am off the conveyer belt. 

I stand on the platform for quadruple issues. First among which is diplomatic representation at the East African Legislative Assembly. As you are aware, Uganda has proven itself militarily but diplomatically, we are still a dwarf. Uganda took the lead in the liberation of Southern Sudan, for example. We did take the lead in the liberation of Southern Sudan, but up to now Ugandan traders are suffering in Southern Sudan and Kenya banks are dominating in Southern Sudan because our foreign policy and diplomatic relations are not articulate. 

Madam Speaker, our army is leading the pacification and peace establishment in Southern Somalia. It does not take a genius to predict who is going to win more influence in post conflict Mogadishu. However, when members vote me into the EALA, I intend to represent Uganda as a country diplomatically and establish the important diplomatic relations. 

I want to articulate various issues. For the information of this House, I qualified as a lawyer and I have articulated issues regarding people’s personal lives. When I get to the Community, my knowledge is diverse and I intend to spearhead the comprehension of different treaties, especially the Economic Partnership Agreement that is about to be signed with the European Union. 

Honourable members, I implore you to vote for me because I will bring diversity into that place. Not only will I spearhead the engineering of sharing of international agreements, I will also advocate for at least representation at the international institutional levels. I will advocate for representation at institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, of which we should have shareholding of at least six per cent, so that we sit on the board and for the Community to have a say in global economic issues. 

According to the United States National Intelligence Council briefing, East Africa is among the world’s emerging markets and it will be a stronger economy in 2050 than Europe was in 1700. That means if we position our economy very well as East Africa, we are likely to benefit and the Community will be a global economic power. 

When members elect me to the East African Legislative Assembly, I will move for the transition of the East African Community to create relations with the global south; establish cooperation with the raising states, especially the Asian Tigers, that is, Brazil, Russian, India and China. 

With the time allocated to me, I cannot fully express the issues that I want to lay before this House. The East African Community faces various problems, among which is endemic corruption, non-tariff barriers to trade. I implore you, Madam Speaker, that the office of Speakership is important in the Community. I intend to spearhead the creation of the Speaker’s forum as another organ of the East African Community.

Honourable members, we did inherit Uganda from our parents, let us bequeath East Africa to our children. Vote Twinomugisha Mugisha to the East African Legislative Assembly to further the ideals of the glorious liberation movement. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity accorded to me and for enabling me to be on the record of the Hansard. It is a star within my career achievement. I implore you to vote for Twinomugisha Mugisha to EALA, 2012/17. 

Madam Speaker, you are not only voting me for confidence but you are also curing Article 50 which provides for different special interest groups. (Applause) At 26 years of age, I have the ability to articulately represent Uganda within the Community so that we can end unnecessary litigation that surrounded this election. 

Honourable members, I implore you to tick Twinomugisha Mugisha. When you do so, you are voting for articulation of issues, diplomatic representation and first tracking of the East African Community. The youth, who represent the biggest percentage of this country, will be effectively represented. For God and My Country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Ben Wacha to address the electorate. You have seven minutes. The bell will ring at five minutes to indicate that you should conclude. 

1.17
MR BEN WACHA (Independent): Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I thank you for this time. Let me first congratulate you, Madam Speaker, on achieving that chair. (Applause) Those of us who know you better know that it should have come earlier. I congratulate you all, Members of the Ninth Parliament, upon this achievement. I congratulate you on what you are doing for Uganda and I thank you for making us proud of having a viable Parliament. I stand before you to seek your support and vote for the independent slot for the EALA elections.
 
I am an advocate of the Courts of Judicature and also an advocate of the High Court of Tanzania. I am also a practicing politician. I have served this House for three terms, during which period I was a commissioner of Parliament, a two-term chair of the rules committee and a two-term vice-chair of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee. Before that, I was privileged to have chaired the ad hoc committee which formulated the Rules of Procedure of Parliament after the 1996 elections.

Madam Speaker, I was also privileged to have co-chaired the ad hoc committee which made the Rules of Procedure for EALA during its formulation period. I served in the CA and while in the CA, I was vice-chairperson of the legal and drafting committee of the CA. 

I ask you for your vote knowing that I am competent to be a member of EALA. I stand before you asking for your vote knowing the heavy responsibility a member of EALA has to bear. The EALA has the mission of legislating, oversight and representative functions for the people of East Africa. I can say, without any fear of contradiction, that the years that I spent here in this House schooled me to do legislative and oversight functions at the highest level possible. (Applause) 

I can also state, without any fear of contradiction, that while I was a member of this House, this House sent me to represent it at the level of leader of delegation to represent it to various fora in various countries. I am told, Madam Speaker, that I carried out that representing functions with dignity and diligence. I promise that I will carry that diligence and dignity to EALA if you elect me. (Applause)

I will go to EALA knowing that I will be representing Uganda – the totality of Uganda and not only parts of Uganda. I go to EALA knowing that I will be carrying out the functions of Uganda and that I will be above any differences that we may have here. I go there knowing that the people out there are not interested in our differences. I will therefore rise above those differences the way I did while I was in this House and while on those delegations. (Applause)

Honourable Members of Parliament, for the benefit of those that may not know me well, let me give you two examples of my being able to go above petty differences when representing Uganda. Madam Speaker, I am happy that you are here to bare witness that while I was a member of your delegation, we worked hard and brought the IPU conference to Uganda. (Applause) I congratulate you, Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament of the Ninth Parliament, for a perfectly organised and fantastic arrangement of the IPU.

What the Speaker may not know is the role some of us played at a time when Uganda’s relation with the Republic of Ireland was at its lowest. Rt. hon. Edward Ssekandi, as he then was, led a delegation of Members of Parliament to the Parliament of Ireland. We found a very hostile ground because of the unfortunate death of Fr. O’Toole in Karamoja. It took us plain talking to get the foreign affairs committee of the Irish Parliament to exactly know what was happening in the North and what Government was doing to bring the situation under control. (Applause) (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome candidate Martin Wandera to address the electorate. You have seven minutes but at five minutes, the bell will ring to notify you that you should conclude. Please proceed.

1.25
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Independent): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to confirm that I am the said Martin Wandera. 

William Arthur Ward, one of America’s most quoted writers on inspirational maxims once said, “Feeling gratitude and not expressing it is like wrapping a present and not giving it.”(Laughter) I therefore, Madam Speaker and honourable members, would like to thank you for granting me this distinct honour and privilege to address the Parliament of Uganda on this occasion. This occasion will go down in the annals of history as another demonstration of Uganda’s commitment to the aspirations of our forefathers in whose symbolic shadow we stand here today, like Julius Kambarage Nyerere, Jomo Kamau wa Ngengi Kenyatta and Dr Apollo Milton Obote. (Applause)

As a former Member of Parliament, and to be exact in the Seventh Parliament, I know how difficult it is to become a Member of Parliament. If becoming a Member of Parliament was easy, I would not be addressing you here today as a mere stranger. I therefore would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election to the Ninth Parliament.

In a special way, permit me, Madam Speaker, to congratulate you on your well deserved and historic assumption to the high office of Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) I further congratulate you for the excellent performance of all Members of Parliament under your able stewardship. At this rate of performance, I have no doubt whatsoever that the Ninth Parliament will inevitably occupy a place of focal significance in our historic march to the pinnacle of democracy, good governance, development and tranquillity in this country. (Applause)

To the business of the day I now beg to turn. I come before you here today to present my candidature for EALA with a great sense of commitment and responsibility to serve my country. The candidature that I present is premised on two key commitments. It is one thing to create an opportunity and another to take it up. My first commitment as I seek your vote is to ensure that Uganda and East Africa as a whole take full advantage of the benefits of economic integration. That economic integration enhances the free movement of goods with several concomitant welfare gains is a fact that is not in dispute. We are therefore lucky as a country to be party to the East African Common Market Protocol. 

I however hasten to add that luck is when opportunity meets with preparedness. Unfortunately, the phenomena that I observe in Uganda and the region are one where the opportunities for free movement of goods and services have not been met with sufficient preparedness on the supply side. I will give an example; the manufacturing that is crucial for the production of goods and enhancement of intra-regional trade accounts for just about 8.5 percent and 8 percent of GDP in Uganda and East Africa respectively. 	

The poor performance of the manufacturing sector is attributable to a number of factors which include the absence of an active industrialisation strategy, poor roads, the high cost of credit and electricity. These challenges, however, should not be a cause for despair but a call for action. A call to adapt an active industrialisation strategy, a call to build and expand our road and rail network, a call to fully exploit our hydro and thermal power potential and a call to re-capitalise and expand the East African Development Bank. (Applause)

If we do not adopt the above strategies, our manufacturing sector will remain weak and consumer power of the 133,000,000 East Africans will not benefit Uganda nor the other East African Partner States but the economies of other countries like China. We cannot afford this in Uganda. No, we cannot afford this. We are not about to create a common market for other countries to come and benefit.

Madam Speaker, due to the constraint of time, I will proceed to conclude. My other commitment is to make sure that we adopt strategies that will address these problems. I know that undertaking huge industrial and infrastructure projects can be very expensive, if not impossible, for a country like Uganda. However, I also know that given the interconnectedness and dependence of the infrastructure and economies of our country, huge industrial and infrastructure projects can be undertaken jointly. 

Fortunately, the East African Community Treaty provides for an East African industrialisation strategy and joint financing of programmes that enhance integration. I am therefore going to be a strong advocate for the actualisation of the East African industrialisation strategy and joint infrastructure – (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Order, members! Honourable members, I welcome our final candidate, Margaret Nantongo Zziwa. You have seven minutes to address the House. At five minutes, the bell will ring to indicate that you should conclude. Please proceed. 

1.33
MS MARGARET NANTONGO ZZIWA (NRM): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, it is an honour for me to be before you this morning to present my candidature seeking your support and your vote to represent this great country in the East African Legislative Assembly. First and foremost, Madam Speaker, let me congratulate you upon this very distinguished opportunity you gave Uganda of being the first woman Speaker of the Republic of Uganda. You make us proud as women. 

Allow me also to say the Ninth Parliament has been exemplary. The Ninth Parliament has actually gone one notch higher over the Eighth Parliament, the Seventh Parliament and over the previous ones where I had the honour and opportunity to serve. Thank you very much. 

My name is Margaret Nantongo Zziwa and I am always privileged because I come last in the rows and columns, and that makes me say that I am an accomplished Ugandan and an East African for that matter. I am a mother and most importantly, I have the credentials which enable me to come before you to represent Uganda. 

I hold a Masters of Science in Policy, I hold a Master of Gender in Women Studies of Makerere University, and I hold a Bachelors Degree in Economics, again from Makerere University. I have taught children in high school and I have been a banker with the Uganda Commercial Bank. I have always had the opportunity to be called a politician. It is good that before you today, I feel proud because I was a member of this House in the Sixth and Seventh parliaments and I served as a parliamentary commissioner. 

Honourable members, I congratulate you over the many achievements you have gone through. I want to say that the Commission of the Ninth Parliament should keep the fire burning so that the welfare of the Members of Parliament remains high. (Applause) I want to add that when I was with the Parliament of Uganda in the Seventh Parliament, I was honoured to chair the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. That is a very important committee and we all know that during that time, I was able to steer three very important Bills in this House. 

Honourable members, I want to add that I have represented the Parliament of Uganda at the highest level of international acclamation. I am the President of the Global Parliamentarians on Habitats and I take pride in that because I am there as a Ugandan. 

At this juncture, I want to thank you very much as Members of the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments for sending me to the East African Legislative Assembly. I want to ask for a vote so that I go back. (Applause)  Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker, I want to associate myself with the achievements of the second EALA in Arusha. We have been able to legislate and enact over 35 Bills. It is a very important achievement. I have been able to support the motion, most importantly recognising that it is important that Uganda as a landlocked country, in order to physically integrate, must have the opportunity to have the infrastructure in place. 

Madam Speaker, I rely on the members. I am very sure that honourable members know that I stand firm because the women, the mothers of this country, are part of the integration. I stand firm to see to it that the women effectively get integrated. I have supported women in the business sector, I have supported women – (Applause) - As I stand before this august House, I know that most of you have given us the opportunity to relate with you. We have been with you for almost six months. For that matter, I want to thank you and I want to say that here I am before you again to continue carrying the flag of Uganda to EALA. Kindly give me your vote, I will not disappoint you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for listening to the candidates. All the 17 candidates have been able to present their programmes to you. We are now going to vote by alphabetical order. However, owing to the state protocol, I will invite the Vice-President to vote first. He will be followed by the Minister of State for Trade who is going to Arusha. After that, we will revert to the alphabetical arrangement.

I also hereby appoint the following ex-officio Members of Parliament as election monitors: hon. Agnes Akiror, hon. James Baba, hon. Simon D’Ujanga, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, hon. James Mutende, hon. Dr Nduhura, hon. Dr Ondoa, and hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. (Applause)

Honourable members, the ballot has the names of all the members. You will select out of the 17. If you select 10, that ballot paper will be invalidated, even 11 or 12. So, anything in excess of nine is not valid. So, you must select only nine. You will select one independent and the others from the political parties. 

The ballot boxes will be brought before the papers will be issued. After getting the paper, you will go into the lobby and vote before bringing the ballot paper into the box here. Please bring in the ballot papers now and as indicated, the Vice-President will vote first. We shall be calling in five members at a time to vote.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, in all the elections we have held, we have had monitors; the candidates bring in their agents because they have them. So, I am requesting that for purposes of moving procedurally well, the candidates should appoint agents to come in and monitor the voting.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am worried about congestion. We have 17 candidates and if each of them sends in an agent, really – Since I have appointed members in this House who do not vote as monitors, that should be okay. The agents can come in at the counting point. Let us start with H. E the Vice-President. Honourable members, please listen to your names.

(Voting by secret ballot.)
 
THE SPEAKER: That is the vote for hon. Safia Nalule. She is being assisted by the clerk.

(Voting continues)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can I invite hon. Gregory Matovu. He has come from hospital to vote. I want him to vote and return to the hospital.

(Voting continues)

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Rukia Nakadama who is going to do some other work somewhere to vote.

(Voting continues)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to repeat that there should be no interference with the voters. I understand people are really harassing the voters. Maybe the remaining voters should vote from behind my chair so that there is no interference. 

(Voting continues)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the members who voted are 281; 92 did not vote and there were no proxy votes. I will now permit the Clerk to go to the South Committee Room. Each candidate should appoint only one agent and so only 17 people will be allowed at the tallying centre together with the monitors -(Interjections)- You want to do it here? Okay, I think members want the counting to be done here. (Applause) Okay, let me suspend the House for one hour to allow the Clerk, monitors and the 17 agents to be present at the tallying and counting.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would just like to seek for your guidance, to establish whether there is an official closing time so that when we have closed and counting, nobody comes up to say that they need to vote.

THE SPEAKER: No. I have now closed the voting. The voting is closed now and anybody who has not voted has not voted.

DR NDUHUURA: I think, Madam Speaker, on the issue of the 17 people you are talking about, I have this advice: since we have parties represented, why don’t we have a party representative instead of representatives for individuals?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you. My view is that since you have accepted that the counting and tallying be done in this very big spacious area, it should then be counted in public and people should be allowed to be here. That is what I propose.

THE SPEAKER: So you do not need agents? There is no need for agents? No, honourable members –

MR TASHOBYA: We can have the agents but these members can stay around.

THE SPEAKER: I think we ask the party whips to be present. Let the party whips be present for the tallying and counting. Even the Independents have their coordinator.

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you very much. I will support hon. Tashobya. We are the voters and when we are being elected outside there, the counting is done in the presence of the voters. So we must stay here and they count when we are here. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: So long as you remain in your seats and do not interfere with counting. Remain in your seats and do not interfere with the Clerk.

COL. KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I suggest that facilities for tallying also be brought within the Chamber so that when that time for tallying comes, they can tally as we observe.  

THE SPEAKER: What facilities are you asking for?

COL. KATIRIMA: Something like a board where they will do the posting of the tallies.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether I have a blackboard in this Chamber. Honourable members, we have the tally sheets here but I do not have a blackboard. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support the original idea that 17 agents together with the observers do the tallying within that area while honourable members observe. There can be announcements per tally sheet so that those who are interested can check together with the clerks. It is important that the various candidates are represented while reading on the sheets so that the process is more transparent. We have enough space, here in the middle. 

THE SPEAKER: So, can I suggest that the clerk will read. I think when you present the ballot, you read out the name that is on the ballot. I think that is transparent. So, you will get the ballot, read out all the names and they are tallied immediately. Okay, let us have the 17 monitors, and members remain in your seats. Do not come near the tallying centre and no dancing, no beating, no fighting and no disrupting the process. I suspend the House up to 4.00 O’clock when we shall resume for the other business. 

(The House was suspended at 3.14 p.m.)

(On resumption at 6.28 p.m., the Speaker presiding _)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to call the House to order. I want to begin by thanking you all for carrying out your responsibility under the Treaty for East African Cooperation and electing representatives to the Third East African Legislative Assembly as we were required to do.

A total number of 281 ballot papers were issued. The total number of ballot papers found in the box were 279. Of these, four were invalid. So, these are the results: 
•	Nsubuga, one vote. 
•	Nuwagaba, four votes. 
•	Twinomugisha, seven votes. 
•	Babigumira, four votes. 
•	Kayondo, 11 votes. 
•	Niwabiine, 16 votes. 
•	Ben Wacha, 87 votes. 
•	Martin Wandera, 95 votes. 
•	Opoka, 233 votes. 
•	Nakawuki, 106 votes. 
•	Sebalu, 271 votes. 
•	Zziwa, 260 votes. 
•	Dora Byamukama, 268 votes. 
•	Dan Kidega, 273 votes. 
•	Bernard Mulengani, 272 votes. 
•	Nusura Tiperu, 266. 

I think everybody is accounted for now. - [Members: “Mbidde”] - Mbidde Mukasa got 247 votes.

So, honourable members, I now declare the following members duly elected: Dan Kidega, Bernard Mulengani, Kennedy Sebalu, Dora Byamukama, Nusura Tiperu, Margaret Zziwa, Mukasa Mbidde, Opoka Okumu and Susan Nakawuki.

I want to say that in this election we have managed to achieve a number of things. We have been able to get representation from several parties and the Independents; we have captured at least 40 percent for the women and also the youth. So I think Uganda is well represented - (Interjections) - The elderly? Who is elderly? (Applause)

Congratulations to those elected. We are sending you to Arusha as a team of Ugandans. We appeal to you to work as Ugandans and represent us effectively and with commitment.

I also want to inform the elected members that this is now the time for Uganda to take over the Chair of the Speaker of East African Legislative Assembly. By agreement, we begun with Tanzania, the next was Kenya, third is Uganda. Rwanda will follow and Burundi will come after. So our instructions are that you go and maintain that order of representation and rotation and respect it. Thank you very much.

I direct the Clerk to gazette the outcome of this election and transmit the results immediately to the Secretary-General of the East African Community for his further action.

6.55
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On this occasion, on behalf of the Government I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for a well organised, fair and transparent election of EALA, which has given us as a country excellent and mature representation. (Applause) If you review these people we have elected, they are very mature and clear in their heads. We are very grateful for that! 

These successful elections enhanced the credibility of the country that we can do our job well if we wanted. This election today has also proved that Government is actually in the lead. It is carefully driving the country - (Laughter) – with a strong Parliament behind it.

We also want to thank all the candidates who have participated and who have won and lost. I want to thank all of them for participating to begin with. For these who have won and those who have lost, we also want to thank them. Losing alone shows you where you are or how far can you go in deep waters so that you prepare next time.

I want to add to what Madam Speaker has said about this team that we have elected today. From now on, they are no longer going as individuals but they are going as a team of Ugandans to represent Ugandans and to hold the banner and flag of Uganda very high in Arusha. They should forget about their individual interests and party interests. They should go there as Ugandans. That is why we are sending them and we are not worried because we have chosen mature people.

I also want to thank all the Members of Parliament who turned into an electoral college; I am very grateful for your foresightedness. You can see that we have got the cream of Ugandans, and I thank you for your effort and calmness. In Kiswahili, it is said, “Haraka si muwendo”. When you rush, like some of our colleagues have been, you fail to cross the river. You have seen their boats broken down by strong winds and they have failed to cross the river, and now we have to rescue them from drowning in the deep water. (Laughter) 

I want to sincerely express – for this one, you will allow me do it without fear or favour – my sincere gratitude to the leadership and members of NRM for the spirit of maturity and inclusiveness. I say this because we were capable of taking all the nine seats if we wanted - (Laughter) - but we also recognise that we are not alone in this country, and to lead this country we need everybody aboard. That is why we are able to share with those who want to share. (Laughter) You cannot take a goat to water and force it to drink. If it does not drink, you should leave the water in the basin and bring the goat back. Maybe it will drink the water tomorrow. (Laughter) We are ready for those who are ready for us and we shall continue to move the country ahead.

Also, what has happened today is in accordance to Article 50 of the Treaty of the East African Community. For that reason, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, in person for your excellent leadership. (Applause) I also thank everybody and I must thank myself as well. (Laughter)

7.01
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Democracy means that even the minority must be heard and accommodated. So, on behalf of UPC and DP, which are part of the minority parties in this House, I want to thank the members of this House and you, Madam Speaker, for voting the minority parties to go to EALA for the first time. (Laughter) This clearly indicates that in our multiparty democracy, we are willing to accommodate even the minority voices. I wish to pledge, on behalf of UPC, that we will cooperate and work while putting the interests of Uganda first. (Applause) We shall not be guided by political consideration or our petty differences. Once you cross the border of Uganda, it is no longer the party but Uganda. (Applause) 

I congratulate all those who have been elected and I also congratulate the women of this country for having the four women back to EALA. (Applause) I also congratulate the youth for working very hard to make sure they are also represented. I thank the youth representatives in this House who told us not to speak on the slot of the independents because as youth, they were fighting for that slot. I congratulate Uganda and wish all those elected to EALA good deliberations. Thank you.

7.03
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Words are totally inadequate to express our innermost appreciation to you in particular, and to all honourable Members of Parliament in general, for the support you have given to all our nine candidates. We are humbled, Madam Speaker, that we have exercised our rights and I believe that we have made the best choice. 

I know that having elected the nine members who came in different vehicles, as we send them to Arusha they are going to represent Uganda. So, on behalf of the Democratic Party, we are humbled and very grateful that you have supported Mr Mukasa Mbidde. Thank you and wish all the best. (Applause)

7.05
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank this House for the peaceful exercise that has just taken place. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, not only for presiding over this election but also for steering it at the negotiation level up to the stage when we agreed that we should now come to the Floor of Parliament and invoke the involvement of Members of Parliament by way of voting. (Applause)  

I also thank the respective political parties which were involved in the negotiations. I confirm that negotiations took place and you, Madam Speaker, invited me to represent the Independents. Therefore, it is not true for anybody to say that negotiations did not take place. I want to confirm and associate myself with that. (Applause)

Democracy is very beautiful, and what we have done today has shown the world that we respect what the Treaty says. What we have done today has produced Uganda’s best. I congratulate all the candidates who were elected. As you go to Arusha, as the Speaker and my other colleagues have already said we implore you to fly our flag high. 

Madam Speaker, I want to report that the five of us who you sent to the Pan African Parliament are flying the flag high. Similarly, I encourage my colleagues who are going to Arusha to do the same. I congratulate those who lost for participating because if you had not participated, the democratic process would not have been thorough. Thank you and may God bless you! (Applause)

7.07
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for all that you have been doing since we resumed the second multiparty Parliament in Uganda. I want to thank the candidates, both the winners and losers, and especially the losers because it is not a very nice feeling to be a loser. I know some could have sobbed up and others would need counselling. We really need to thank them for participating.

Madam Speaker, I must say, the challenges we are seeing as the Ninth Parliament are part of the challenges we must live with as a country that has just returned to multiparty politics. It is just about six or seven years of multiparty politics. So, when we see these challenges emerge at this moment, we should instead test our capacity to get through the challenges than allow them to eat us. So whatever has happened has happened, but I see it in good faith that these are some of the challenges we have to go through until there is proper multiparty politics in Uganda. This goes to both sides of the House – (Interjection) - I want to thank hon. Bitekyerezo. This is a very precarious situation that I am addressing Parliament in. As I said earlier, if there is a bigger motor in front and a rapid propelled grenade behind – (Laughter) - I still have to try my best to be good. 

I would, lastly, want to say if God has planned anything, no man can stop it. (Applause) I am talking as an ex-seminarian. The fact that FDC boycotted could also have been God’s plan, and whatever the outcome of the boycott is also God’s plan. Whoever has won the election is also God’s plan. Whatever happens in future is God’s plan. So in the circumstances, I wish everyone well; no hard feelings.

Wherever you go and whatever you do in your endeavours, you should not forget that there is one time we, Members of Parliament, had to dance and sing for you people. We had to really bend the rules and become like those who brought us here. Wherever you go, you put the country first. For the other issues within the House, we shall as much as possible try, administratively, to see how we can come out stronger. They say to succeed in life you must double your rate of failures. If we have failed today, we shall try to double so that we learn from this kind of situations. I want to thank you so much and God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank all the leaders of the parties and the shades of opinion in this House for their comments on the election. Earlier in the morning, we had planned to conduct some business but after voting, the plenary became a counting and tallying centre, so we were not able to transact that business. However, let me hear from the Minister of Finance on what he has to say about item 6.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, just to follow what hon. Odongo Otto has just said, I want to say that everything is planned by God. I do not want to dilute the happiness and merry making of this evening and the good mood which this House has been in. 

These statements were supposed to be delivered to you today. However, I must report that when I went back, after promising that I will present them on Tuesday which eventually turned to today, I found that a little bit of consultation is yet to be done especially on the youth fund. I have not been able to get all the information that I wanted to bring to you from around the countryside. The flow of information has not been as fast. Therefore, I wish to beg you to be patient with me. I will deliver this statement at an appropriate time when we have all the information this side.

May I also take this opportunity, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, to congratulate those that have gone through. We look forward to working with you very closely within the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, all the items are for your ministry.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: As I said, Madam Speaker, on all the three items I still need a little more consultation. I am unable to deliver them now. The next time the House convenes, I will be here to deliver these statements.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would have been happy if the Ministry of Finance had made a commitment, especially on the issue of the schools that were meant to have benefited from the grants for USE. In my hands here is a petition from the schools that are helping Government to implement the programme. Some arrears to these schools date as far back as 2011 in the Teso region.

If we were to just highlight one school, - Light Secondary School - Government has not paid since 2011. The arrears are Shs 299 million. How do we expect such a school to proceed or even complete this term? There are a number of schools such as Amuria High School where an amount of Shs 107 million has not been paid since second term last year. There are a number of them here; I have about 10 schools on this petition.

I would have been happy if the minister committed himself to say that maybe in a week’s time, they would be able to release this money such that they are able to complete this second term. To just say “we are still consulting” leaves a lot to be desired, unless you are interested in failing the USE programme and the schools from completing the term.

In this document that I have, some of the schools have threatened to close by next week. So, Madam Speaker, we are uncomfortable, and this issue is not only limited to Teso. We have it in Makindye, Kabale, Arua, Busoga and Karamoja. How do you allow arrears to accumulate for two years when we have been passing money in this House? I have just been trying to look at the supplementary schedule II and I have not seen this issue addressed. I expected the minister to possibly say, in the supplementary schedule II these are the things we are addressing.
 
Madam Speaker, I think colleagues will agree with me that we are not comfortable with the response. I will ask the Third Deputy Prime Minister to take charge and help the country and those in the schools. They should ensure that money is paid and paid in totality to these schools that have not been paid. That is my appeal to Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issues members want to know about have to do with the Budget - the money for the census, the money for the schools. Can I direct you to bring a statement as soon as we return from the recess in the first week.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. As I said, the day this House resumes, I will be before this House with the full information on all this. 

THE SPEAKER: That is a government assurance. Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work we have done since the Ninth Parliament began. As of 28th May, we had passed 11 Bills, 40 resolutions, 23 reports have been considered and adopted, 20 petitions have been considered, 35 ministerial statements have been presented and debated, we have had 15 other statements and we have had seven questions for oral answers.

While the report of Parliament’s performance during the first session has been good, nevertheless I think we need to work harder and pass more Bills, which is one of our key tenets of the mandate of Parliament. We need to expeditiously handle all the Bills we have not been able to complete. I wish to take this opportunity to request for the cooperation of the Executive branch to ensure that Bills are presented in time, so that committees can consider them appropriately before reporting to Parliament. 

I also wish to request the chairpersons of the committees to ensure that they give priority to consideration of Bills in their committees and observe the 45-day requirement. Actually, apart from one or two committees, not many have reported on their failure to meet the 45-day requirement. This will require that members work harder in their committees, attend the meetings regularly and participate both in the plenary and otherwise.

I also wish to comment on the issue of quorum. The Constitution and the Rules of Procedure stipulate that quorum is required for taking decisions in Parliament and committees. I am really happy that today we have had more than enough quorum. The quorum that is laid down is one third of Members of Parliament or members of committees. However, many times I have observed that committees and Parliament could not complete business due to lack of quorum. 

In the next session, I am going to start coming to your committees without notice. I will be coming personally to take a census in your committees. I also have to inform you that I have analysed the record of each member’s attendance, both in plenary and in the committees. In the second session I am going to invoke my powers on all the errant members if we do not see any improvement in regard to the quorum.

I want also to state that in the Ninth Parliament, we established a parliamentary calendar which has been useful in guiding the work of Parliament and the members. We have majorly implemented it with minor adjustments, and this has been very helpful. So, I call on the Executive during the next session to provide early enough a detailed programme of the business they intend to bring to this House, the approximate dates and when that will be done, so that it can fit into our calendar. I will be convening the Business Committee meeting early in the second session, so I expect that by that time your business should be available to the House. 

I want to comment on the parliamentary outreach programme. It is our view that a Parliament that is not accessible to the people and which does not reach out is not effective. We have successfully held outreach programmes in Western Uganda and Eastern Uganda. I have personally been able to travel to many of your constituencies. I want to report that interaction with the population outside has enabled me to understand better the problems of the population, how we are planning for them and how we are legislating for them. It is my hope that we shall be able to roll out this programme more to other parts of the country.

I again want to thank the members for the work done in the Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly. It was really the highlight of our Ninth Parliament. We want to thank the President for his support not only in funding but in many other activities relating to the Assembly. I again thank the Members of Parliament and the organising committee, the staff, the public service, the armed forces and all the Ugandans who enabled us to make history as a country.

I am also aware that committees have been conducting field visits facilitated by the Parliamentary Commission. This is an important activity which should assist Government so that Parliament appropriates money for services to be provided to the people. However, the outcry we found is that all over the country, whereas Parliament appropriates funds for infrastructure, development and other services, the delivery leaves a lot to be desired. The complaints about late arrival of funds, return of funds to the Treasury at the end of the financial year, are things that we found everywhere we have gone. I think it is important that Government improves on this issue. 

In fact, in one of the outreaches, we were of the view that we should ring fence this money. If the money has been sent to Kyenjonjo District, we ring fence it so that it does not go back to the Treasury because it is money for Kyenjonjo. (Applause) When it goes back to the Consolidated Fund, we do not know where it goes but it is a lot of money! So, that is another area which I would encourage members and the government to take an interest in so that we really help our people. If we are giving the money, let us give it to them and it should be able to do their work.

I want to urge the parliamentary committees to maintain vigilance on the oversight so that our people receive the services for which they gave us their votes. I also propose that subject to the time constraint, we shall be given opportunity to discuss the reports of all these field visits because they are conducted using the funds of the taxpayer.

Honourable members, as I indicated to you, Parliament will be prorogued today but please be available for the 7th June for the State of the Nation Address. 

I also want to inform the honourable members that the Archbishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga has invited all Members of Parliament on the 1st June to go to Namugongo for Mass for the cause of canonization of the late Julius Kambarage Nyerere. I also want to remind you that Parliament has been supporting the Martyrs’ Day celebrations. So on 3rd June, Members should go to both the shrines, the Anglican shrine and the Catholic shrine, so that we support Uganda Martyrs.

I want to thank the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of Opposition, the Members of Parliament, the members of the Cabinet for the work we have done. I now want to prorogue the House, and this is my instrument:

“WHEREAS sub clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;

NOW THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by sub clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from 30 May 2012.

The pending business in the House or its committees is hereby saved.

Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House in Kampala this 30th day of May 2012.
Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament” (Applause)

Thank you very much. I also want to thank the Clerk and her team for the work done - Sergeant-at-Arms, our security people and all the staff for supporting us during the first session. Let us meet on the 7th June at the International Conference Centre, 2.00 p.m. for the State of the Nation Address. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 June 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
