Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.

Friday, 31 May 2019



Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting convened to pay tribute to the late honourable Prof. Apolo Robin Nsibambi, our former Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

I register our utmost condolences to his family and to the nation for losing such a great personality.

I recognise the members of the family, Mrs Esther Nsibambi and the children that are here on the treasury bench behind my seat. We shall continue to pray for the family and I know that our hearts will have room for them for a long time. 

In order to allow as many Members as possible to contribute, we shall just use three minutes. I also would like to advise that we should try to conclude this sitting by 4.00 p.m. because there are other arrangements for his lying in State at Makerere University. The body should be at the university by 5.00 p.m. We, therefore, need to be precise in our contributions. We should not be lugubrious, as he would have said. (Laughter).

We have received a number of messages from the East African Community, from the Members of the Uganda EALA Chapter. This is signed by George Steven Odongo, the Chairperson of the Chapter. “On behalf of the Legislative Assembly and the East African Community in general, we send our deepest condolences to Prof. Nsibambi’s family and to the Government at this difficult time.” 

We also have a condolence message from Dr Nduhura, Ambassador of Uganda to France, Spain and Portugal and permanent delegate to UNESCO. “It is with a lot of sorrow that I received the news of the passing of Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, former Prime Minister of Uganda. I had an opportunity to serve under the late Nsibambi for an uninterrupted period of 10 years from 2001 to 2011. May the Almighty God sustain Esther, his daughters and all the bereaved.”

We also have a message from the Office of the Secretary General, NRM Secretariat.
“I am saddened by the news of the passing of the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, which occurred on 28 May 2019. Prof. Nsibambi has been a true patriot who blended his expansive and diverse academic, political, technical and managerial skills and talent for the good of his country. 

Throughout his distinguished and illustrious career, he has been very candid, amiable and forthright with a well-groomed pleasant personality. He was an embodiment of the good values of respect, honesty and trustworthiness. He had a strong affinity for detail, coupled with an infectious penchant for management of time. 

He stayed true to his conscience, which is rare in Uganda today. 

May the Almighty God, whom Prof. Nsibambi served with all his heart and mind, rest his spirit in eternal peace.

Justine Lumumba, Secretary General.”

We also have a letter from Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, the National Chairperson of the NRM Women’s League. 

“To the bereaved family, you have lost a strong pillar at a time you probably needed his guidance the most.

Like all of us, I do not think you saw it coming. Please take heart at this trying moment. It is God who gave us Prof. Nsibambi, now the same God who has called him. 

It is my sincere prayer that God’s grace may comfort all of you at this moment of bereavement. 

As an old girl of Gayaza High School, I was honoured to sit at the feet of Prof. Nsibambi. I benefited from his parenting role, together with his late wife Rhoda, an old girl of Gayaza. We cherish with pride the role they played in the PTA and Board of Governors that benefited students.”

We also have a message from Mr Vali Jamal, one of the former Ugandan Asians who met him in 1991 at a public event and was very impressed by his contribution and since then has admired him. He also sent his condolences. 

Those are the messages I have for now. Thank you very much.

(Entrance of the late Rt Hon. Apolo Robin Nsibambi)

Uganda National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to read one message from hon. Elijah Okupa, the MP for Kasilo. 

“Today we celebrate the life of our departed colleague: a father, husband, brother, friend, politician and an illustrious academic. In his political life and public service, he served diligently. For a man with very many accomplishments in academics and other spheres of life, he remained down to earth, social and always the amiable peacemaker. 

The late Apolo Nsibambi was sunny, full of warmth and humour. He always kept time and took legislative business seriously. He considered late coming as a form of corruption and worked hard to impart positive values among public servants.

He took legislative business seriously and always had an officer noting comments from the MPs in the House. He responded to all concerns and questions from the Members and commanded respect from the technocrats, legislators and ministers.”

Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE RT HON. PROF. APOLO ROBIN NSIBAMBI, THE FORMER PRIME MINISTER OF UGANDA

2.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, the former Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, for his diligent service to the Republic of Uganda. 

I move this motion under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker,

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the death of the Rt Hon. Prof. Apolo Robin Nsibambi, a former Member of Parliament and the Eighth Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, which occurred on Tuesday, 28 May 2019 at his home in Bulange, Mengo in Kampala;

AWARE THAT the Rt Hon. Prof. Nsibambi has had a distinguished career spanning over many years, from an accomplished academician, transitioning with ease into an illustrious politician with a well-disciplined personality and a deep sense of selfless service;

RECOGNISING that the Rt Hon. Prof. Nsibambi served Uganda with distinction in several key responsibilities, including the following;

a) 	From 1978 to 1996, at Makerere University in various distinguished capacities; 
b) 	From 1994 to l995, as a Member of the Constituent Assembly that wrote the 1995 Constitution of Uganda;
c) 	From 1996 to l998, as the Minister of Public Service;
d)	From l998 to 1999, as Minister of Education and Sports;
e) 	From 1999 to 2011, as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament; and
f) 	From 2003 to 2007, as the first person, not being a head of State, to become Chancellor of Makerere University;

APPRECIATING that the Rt Hon. Prof. Nsibambi was a diligent leader who greatly contributed to shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to his wife, Esther, the children, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the tragic loss of this distinguished son of Uganda.

    2. That it takes cognisance of the dedicated service and tireless contribution that the late Rt Hon. Apolo Robin Nsibambi made in the course of his illustrious life.

    3. That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant the Rt Hon. Apolo Robin Nsibambi eternal rest.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded by all the Members of the House.

(Motion seconded)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Prof. Apolo Robin Nsibambi.

Madam Speaker, we are here to pay tribute to a great man who impacted the lives of many people in our country and beyond as a prolific academic and researcher, family man as well as diligent and patriotic leader.

Madam Speaker, Prof. Nsibambi, our Prime Minister Emeritus and former Minister of Education and Sports, and Public Service was a well-meaning person who spoke his mind and was always willing to advise and guide whenever and wherever the occasion demanded of him. 

Those who worked or interacted with Prof. Nsibambi in Government or at Makerere University, where he spent many years as a lecturer, dean and warden, will attest to his great attributes of an ordinary man who was very disciplined, professional and an ardent timekeeper.

The sad news of the passing of Prof. Nsibambi on Tuesday, 28 May 2019, left the country and all of us in deep sorrow. The outpouring messages of condolences and solidarity from many circles are further testimony to what a giant Prof. Nsibambi was. Madam Speaker, you have just read quite a number of them including someone who met him and was impressed by him.

When His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni heard about Prof. Nsibambi’s passing, he called the family and instructed Government to coordinate and ensure that the man lying before us is accorded a dignified and befitting send-off. We would like to, therefore, thank the family, the Kingdom of Buganda, Makerere University and the church for their cooperation in planning and ensuring that our elder statesman gets an orderly send-off just like the orderly life he lived.

As the longest serving Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi gave structure and proper institutionalisation to the Office of the Prime Minister. He provided a strong foundation on which, those of us who followed his footsteps are building. We indeed salute him.

Born on October 25 1940 to Semyoni Nsibambi and Eva Bakaluba, Prof. Nsibambi attended King's College Budo for his high school education and later attained a Bachelors Degree with honours of Economics from the Makerere University. He later joined the University of Chicago in the United States of America for a Masters Degree in Political Science. Prof. Nsibambi crowned his academic achievement with a PhD from the University of Nairobi. 

He served as the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business from April 1999 to March 2011. Earlier, he had served as the Minister of Education and Sports, where he developed the first Education Sector Strategic Investment Plan.

Prof. Nsibambi was also first Chancellor of Makerere University who was non-Head-of-State from 2003 to 2007. Between 1996 and 1998, he was Minister of Public Service and during his tenure, he advocated for better remuneration for civil servants. He particularly enforced the policy of paying salaries by the 28th of the month and introduced a performance oriented management system in a bid to make civil servants accountable to ensure that they always undertake their responsibilities with punctuality.

Prof. Nsibambi started his teaching career at Makerere University, where he rose through the academic ranks to the position of professor. No doubt, many Ugandans and East Africans and others including Members in this House went through Prof. Nsibambi’s hands.

He was Director of Makerere Institute of Social Research from 1994 to 1996. He headed the Department of Political Science from 1987 to 1990, having earlier served as Dean of the Faculty of Social Science from 1978 to 1983. From 1985 to 1987, he was also the warden of New Hall later renamed Nkrumah Hall, where I happen to have been a resident; he was my warden.

Madam Speaker, to put the history correct, it was a New Hall and during his time, the hall was renamed Nkrumah Hall. He oversaw the transition from New Hall to Nkrumah Hall.

Madam Speaker, it seems there have been some other christening ceremonies. It is, however, good to let colleagues know that during that period when he was warden, the student’s movement had problems with President Idi Amin, who was in power at that time. President Idi Amin burnt and evicted the headquarters of the National Union of Students from the government premises. It was Prof. Nsibambi, as warden of Nkrumah Hall who said, “Come, young people. I will provide accommodation for your headquarters in the hall.” It was a great action. 

This was the time when Idi Amin and his regime were responsible for the loss of many lives but Prof. Nsibambi was ready to stick his neck out to ensure that the students were protected, accommodated and normal student activities including student politics were going on normally.

Prof. Apolo Nsibambi is survived by his wife Esther and four daughters Rhoda, Lydia, Julie and Eseza. We extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, friends, the Buganda Kingdom, the church, Makerere University, the entire world of academia and the country at large on the passing of this great son of Africa. 

May the Almighty God rest the soul of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my staff worked a lot with Prof. Nsibambi and so, they are a bit overwhelmed. There is something we forgot to do; the laying of the wreaths.

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite the Leader of the Opposition.

2.50
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a great leader, a disciplinarian, an acclaimed academic, a firm administrator, an accomplished statesman, a distinguished people’s servant, a devout Christian, wise, witty and fearless personality, the Rt Hon. Prof Apolo Robin Nsibambi. 

I extend my sympathies and continued prayers for comfort to the wife, Esther and children upon the loss of a great man, husband, father and a friend. May the good Lord stand in the gap and guide you to emulate the work he accomplished and build on his legacy, specifically the children. I can confidently say that you are away beyond the level of falling back for he raised you into great men and women.

Madam Speaker, I wish to fondly remember Prof Nsibambi, the family man, who many people ought to emulate. It was a common sight on many occasions where Prof Nsibambi was in attendance to see him walk in with his wife, Esther. He treated her like a queen despite his high position. He equally spoke fondly of his children and grandchildren. His life was never limited to only academics and state’s duties. 

Madam Speaker, Prof Nsibambi has been a man whose trail grew and spoke loud. He was raised through a semblance of nobility, breastfed on the Anglican Revival Evangelism Crusade, attended prestigious schools and held high-end positions both in academia and political folds.

In spite of this, he never threw around a sense of entitlement. Whatever responsibility was laid on his table, he executed it with huge and enviable satisfaction of all. 
Prof Nsibambi’s record has been enumerated in details and to many people. His strictness to timekeeping comes at the fore. He was up to time both for start and end of meetings, programmes and functions. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to pay tribute to Prof Nsibambi, the open-minded free spirited administrator and later political player. He never feared to offer guidance that he felt was right and appropriate, including to his superiors. The most recent is from the interview aired on NTV where he was asked about the proposal amendment of the Constitution to remove the age limit on the candidature for the President. He was equivocal as he called on the Members of Parliament to respect the dictates of the Constitution and leave the age limit clause intact. He asked President Museveni to consider retiring after clocking 75 years and plan on giving fatherly advice from the side-line.

Madam Speaker, Prof Apolo Nsibambi was brought into politics on an appointment from the academic world but he never gave in to the temptation to delve full time into elective politics. He remained the technocrat Prime Minister as he fondly referred to himself and he infused into politics the professional governance that was a timely inclusion. 

It is no surprise that in 2011, he requested to be allowed to retire from active politics, and here, thereafter, lived a quiet elderly life, always sought after to guide, advise, mediate, mentor and speak to many. I do not understand the drive for the many here and beyond who look to collapsing in the political chairs they currently occupy. 
After all, it is possible that we can have non-elected leaders perform effectively in the Executive Arm of Government. It is probably time we originated the motion to have ministers as non-elected Members of this House. 

Madam Speaker, according to parliamentary records, Prof. Nsibambi is one of the few contemporary politicians who commanded a lot of respect among both Members of the ruling party and the Opposition. He maintained a good working relationship with Members of the Opposition, always listening to them and giving them respect, regardless of the difference in political incarnation and beliefs. 

He was moderate and non-partisan when debating issues. This was publically acknowledged by President Museveni at the former Prime Minister’s official send-off when the President referred to Prof Nsibambi’s endless effort to create and nurture harmony between the Government and the opposition side, within and outside Parliament. 
His moderateness is further reflected in the fact that he is one of the very few Government officials who came out publically to admit Government’s mistakes in the handling of the CHOGM funds. It was never strange for him to take criticism many times personally. 

Madam Speaker, as we mourn Prof. Apolo Nsibambi and pay tribute to him, may I re-echo our call for Government to recognise its people who have shaped the past and present while they are still alive. Let us be cautious enough at least to emulate these statesmen rather than just eulogise, get captured on the Hansard and forget. 
The little we can pick from this great man is to be Godly, principled, keep time and reach out to those we differ with politically. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Fare thee well, the lugubrious one. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition. As I invite the Dean of the Independents, I would like to announce the presence, in the VIP gallery, of a number of former ministers and Members of Parliaments: hon. Rose Okullo, now a Member of EALA, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, former minister also at EALA now; hon. Anthony Butele (Ten Point Programme), former minister and Member of Parliament; hon. Benard Mulengani, formerly here and also EALA; hon. Daudi Migereko, former minister and Member of Parliament; hon. Henry Kyemba, former minister and Member of Parliament; hon. Emmanuel Dombo, former Parliamentary Commissioner and Member of Parliament; hon. John Emily Otekat, former Member of Parliament; hon. Patrick Nakabale, former Member of Parliament and hon. Christine Aporu, former minister and Member of Parliament.

We also have, from the Judicial Service Commission, hon. Nyakikongoro, former Member of Parliament; hon. Ssemugaba, former Member of Parliament; hon. Sarah Kiyingi, former minister and Member of Parliament; hon. Lydia Wanyoto, formerly at EALA and now the Chairperson of the NRM Women’s League; Princess Elizabeth Bagaya, former minister; hon. Rukia Nakadama, former Member of Parliament and minister; hon. Kabakumba Matsiko, former Member of Parliament and minister; hon. Yahaya Gudoi, former Member of Parliament; hon. Grace Tibwita; all former Members of Parliament. Of course the galley is full of the friends for Prof. Nsibambi. Hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, chairperson of MPA, hon. Teete Chelangati, hon. Asumani Kiyingi former minister and Member of Parliament. You are all welcome.

3.01
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament and the family members of prof. Apolo Nsibambi, I join you to mourn and extraordinary countryman. 

The history of his life and service has been well articulated by the speakers before me and I fully associate with them with the well-deserved praises that have been heaped on the ex-premier. He was an amazing man that was preferred by many. I have been following discussions on social and mainstream media; they were all appraised with tributes, compliments, credits, praises and love for the man who served his country selflessly and diligently.

Correct me if I am wrong. However, I have searched the available information and I have not found a single record of him involved in any mischief; not as Prime Minister of Uganda of 1999-2011, chancellor Makerere University 2003-2007, not as the dean of the faculty of social science from 1978-1983 and certainly not in any other positions that he served in before. He was blemish-free in my opinion.

Yes, I have heard some talk about his limited supervision given the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) scandal that happened during his tenure as Prime Minister. However, overall, he was a committed servant for his country.

This is a character that many of us especially those who serve in the Public Service Sector need to emulate. It is absolutely important that for one to have a legacy in this world, at a ceremony such as this one where we are binding farewell to a fellow compatriot, we are presented with a good time for each and every one of us to reflect on what legacy we are building. What shall our family, neighbours, community, country and the world at large remember us for?

Prof. Nsibambi has been a true advocate for dialogue. He believed that there is no issue that cannot be resolved if the involved parties discuss through the impasse. Perhaps, this is an approach that is worth considering instead of boycotts and violence that has become the norm these days.

Prof. Nsibambi was a gentleman; a man of integrity, considerate and a sucker for time keeping. Whenever he was invited to an event, be sure that if you are not ready to start by the time you indicated to him, you would be embarrassed because Prof. Nsibambi would always be in or on time. This is a very good character trait; it shows that one respects others and values their time and function.

Again most of us have fallen short in this particular element especially us politicians. You are invited to officiate at an event, only to come toward the end. This usually disorganises the entire programme. It is high time we emulated Prof. Nsibambi although his pedestal is quite high. He has fought the good fight and finished the race and he has kept the faith; that is in 2 Timothy 4:7. May his soul rest in eternal peace?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to recognise hon. Nyakaisiki Byenkya, former Member of Parliament and now the chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission in the gallery there. (Applause) As I indicated, we do not have too much time. Therefore, it will be our usual three minutes and if you exceed you know what will happen.

3.07
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA- LATIGO (FDC, Agago North County, Agago): Madam Speaker, I drove from Agago to be here this morning. I would like to start by conveying my personal condolences and those of the people of Agago to Esther and the entire family of the late Rt Hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi and Leader of Government Business.

Madam Speaker, you are probably seeing me dressed like this for the first time. I am normally very conservative -

THE SPEAKER: You are actually very colourful. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA- LATIGO: Thank you. However, I did decide to wear this clothing because I am not here to mourn Prof. Nsibambi. I have come to celebrate his life and achievements. By the fate of history and the Will of God, I served as Leader of the Opposition in the Eighth Parliament when Prof. Apolo Nsibambi was serving as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and by coincidence; he was also the eighth Prime Minister of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, since we do not have time and our Parliament has a very high turnover, I would like to share with Members and the country a few things about Prime Minister Apolo Nsibambi as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament.

The Eighth Parliament that we served was the first multiparty Parliament under the 1995 Constitution. Therefore, for the first time a very long time we were a formal opposition after much fear of what opposition is supposed to be in Uganda and even sometimes demonisation of opposition.

Prof. Nsibambi and I recognised that faith had bestowed upon us the duty and responsibility to restore normalcy to our Parliament as a multiparty Parliament. Therefore, we resolved to use the things that God gave us like the intellect, maturity and calmness to serve this Parliament as a provision of example of what a multiparty Parliament is. (Applause.)

We faced many challenges. The one challenge that led us to walk out, the Prime Minister conveniently absented himself and the task of making the bad statement fell on the now Prime Minister; we responded and eventually walked out.

Apart from that, every time that we had challenges and Members were contributing - from the Government side and opposition side - we would sit there looking at each other; if we thought that the matter required us to dialogue over, we would signal each other and walk behind that door and agree.

Once we had agreed, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi would come and ask you that he would like to make a statement saying, “This is the Government position on this matter,” and you would ask me as the Leader of Opposition; I would rise and say; “I concur with the Government.” And the matter would end there.

The important thing about that is a poem that I was privileged to listen to when the Alliance for National Transformation was being launched. The children asked us politicians in that poem, saying; “What do you lose if you give us good education, peace.” So I ask of all of us; what do we lose if we work together for our country? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in the process of doing our duties we became friends and I can tell the Government side that many times when there were sensitive things to be discussed in the Cabinet, around 6.30 in the morning, I would get a call from the Prime Minister and as it was his nature, he would start by joking and then go to the issue that he called me for.

He would ask me for my opinion and I would give him very honest advice - that many Members are probably now aware. Simply because we believed in our responsibility to our country and we believed in the dignity of our Parliament, which we had made a commitment to uphold.

Madam Speaker, when Prof. Nsibambi at one time fell sick, he returned and addressed this House. I visited him and his dear wife Esther and we chatted over many things.

When I had an accident in 2009, in spite of being a Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi went to Kampala International Hospital to visit me. Whenever we met - we were very informal - because he was an elder, I would always call him “Prof. Nsibambi” but he would call me “Latigo” in private; in public he would call me “Prof. Latigo”. He told me that God had left me for a purpose and so I should watch out for what God wants me to do. I deeply appreciated that.

Madam Speaker, Prof. Nsibambi’s death to the family is naturally a difficult thing but I would like to urge the family not to look at his death but the legacy that he left behind. (Applause)

If you were very angry and you said that, “If I meet the Prime Minister, I am going to ‘kill’ him,” and then he would start with a broad smile and you would not know what to do next.

Whenever you engaged him, he was a listening man; he would listen to you in humility and then you would be completely disarmed. And you would deal with the issue and resolve it. 

That legacy is not common amongst us politicians, particularly now I see even ministers having lead cars; Prof Nsibambi was not comfortable with those kinds of things.

To the family, you have a great legacy in the life of Prof. Nsibambi. Look to that and thank God for the life that He gave him.

One time on this Floor, when another professor - Prof, Apollo Makubuya - was trying to explain a very difficult legal matter, I stood up to help - I am not a lawyer but an insect scientist - but I stood up to help. However, I also found out that I was not making any major impact. So I advised my good friend Prof. Apollo Makubuya to take it easy; that “they do not understand us professors sometimes”.

When the send-off of Prof. Nsibambi looks modest, do not worry because the journeys of great men are not sounded by trumpets but by the records they leave and the legacies they establish.

I would like to end by thanking the Good Lord for the life of Prof. Nsibambi for the work he did for this country, for the love he gave you his family and for mentoring me as his younger brother in politics. And so I say, “Thank you, Lord and fare thee well, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi.” Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I would like to welcome hon. Nantongo Zziwa, a former Member of this House, a former Member and Speaker of EALA. Welcome.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Madam Speaker, I am standing here to celebrate the life of the late Prof. Nsibambi. First of all, as his student, he always referred to me as “a student” even when I was the Minister in charge of General Duties working under him.

I would like to tell this House that last year, Prof. Nsibambi called me and told me that he was saved and asked me to forgive him for all that might not have gone well when we worked in the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Prof. Nsibambi allowed me to establish the coordination, monitoring and evaluating department under the Prime Minister’s Office. 

So I agree with Prof. Latigo that Prof. Nsibambi has left a legacy - including the Prime Minister - because he has testified that when he was a warden he stewarded him and now he is a Prime Minister. I can also say that I am what I am because of his contribution. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.20
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To Esther and family, on behalf of the people of Ndorwa West and Kabale, I offer my sympathies for the loss of a great life; we join your family in grief and celebration of a good man who did a lot of good to our country.

Madam Speaker, some souls are so distinctive that it is difficult to imagine that the life of Prof Nsibambi has ended. His voice was so clear on issues of national integration, practical politics, religion and politics. It is hard to think of his absence. I cannot imagine that his voice has stilled. 

I had a special relationship with him in this House. He mentored me in a different way. I used to be his bag-boy; he left his bag here when he was going out and he would say, “Mutabani gyirete” meaning, bring it, my son.

It will be to the astute of my feelings if I did not refer to him as “Prof Lugubrious.” He was a man with a code. He lived by a set of public ethics that brought purpose to his life and life to his country.

He was honest, both in mind and deeds. Once, I asked whether he had given his life to Jesus and he replied in his usual way that, “My salvation is hereditary. It is part of my DNA”. (Laughter)

Indeed, Madam Speaker, we should give credit to the family of Prof Nsibambi for nurturing and giving him the values that shaped his character and a character that will for ever inspire generations to come. We will remember him as he was; he was honest, incorruptible and unequalled.

We say bye to a friend and a professor, a man who inspired many of us in the House and in the country. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.22
MAJOR DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I first saw Prof Nsibambi in Makerere in 1980. There used to be academic intellectual clashes between him and Prof Mamdani; Prof Nsibambi stood for a capitalist outlook and Prof Mamdani for the Communist Socialist. We would enjoy their eloquence and levels of debate when we were students.

My second encounter was in the Constituent Assembly days in 1994 to 1995 when he was a chief negotiator for the Federal tendencies of Mengo. He was an extremely peaceful negotiator and he would meet you in the corridors –(Interjections)- I have said “Federal tendencies”; isn’t that an English statement? He advocated for the fusion of political power with the king under the guise of federal. You can call it “Monarchy”.

He would meet you in the corridor and speak in Luganda, “Gwe muserikale, mutuwe ebyaffe,” meaning, “You soldier, give us our things” but with a smile as hon. Latigo said. Later on, as a Minister for Public Service, then Minister of Education and Sports in Parliament. In all these cases, he was appointed. He was not a directly elected Member of Parliament; he was an ex-officio. 

As the Prime Minister said, he left a record but I think it is being broken - payment of public servants at the earliest time possible; we are now seeing a reversal. (Laughter)

He was a friendly man. Prof Nsibambi whose body lies here had a permanent smile on his face. One time I said to him in the lobby; he had put his reading glasses in the pocket and the flap of the coat was inside. I shouted, “Professor, Professor!” as if there was something huge to tell him. He stopped and I said, “You are not supposed to put anything in these pockets.” He retorted in Luganda; “Olina ebya Sandhurst bingi. Nvaako,” meaning, “You have a lot of Sandhurst in you.” He was an interesting person. He would sometimes come over to dine with us in the restaurant of course tactically, looking for stubborn Members of Parliament then; hon. Kazoora and I and others.

I do not know why you, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda are not coming up there to dine with us. (Laughter) We have a very good menu. (Laughter)

Once he asked why I looked extra-ordinarily tall. He wondered whether I was born in Ibanda. I told him, “No, I am a Mufuruki; a migrant.” I told him where I originate and he said, “Tata wange ye yaleeta sivilisation mukifo kyamwe,” implying, “My father brought civilisation in Rukungiri during the revival of Anglican of 1940s and 1950s.” 

He would call himself a technocratic Prime Minister. Those of you who were here, especially the ministers remember. When he was a Prime Minister, all portfolios would be represented in the House by ministers. Members of Parliament’s questions would find ready answers from responsible sectoral ministers. (Applause)

I would like to say that I would like to thank God that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Prof Nsibambi loved the Kabaka of Buganda. I once told him a story in 1985 when hon. Amanya Mushega and a few other soldiers left Kasese. King Mutebi, who was a prince then, was called by the present President. He jetted in from London to Bujumbura. National Resistance Army (NRA) soldiers went and picked him. He joined us in Kasese.

Around 1985, somewhere around September, October or November, King Mutebi was driven amidst heavy escort to areas of Kinoni-Masaka-Mbirizi; down in the bushes. We found a huge crowd. It was the first time I saw people falling down. I had never seen it. (Laughter)

I asked a soldier whose name I have forgotten, one of the chief escorts of hon. Amanya Mushega what was happening. He told me that they were greeting and falling before their king, respecting him. The ingarabi (drums) were sounding.  We drove back to Kasese. It was around November, 1985.

Therefore, Prime Minister Nsibambi loved his traditional leader, the Kabaka. I am extremely happy that he negotiated with Government peacefully. God has given him life to see the fruits of his negotiations. (Applause)

I would like to thank Government and you, Madam Speaker, for finding time on a non-parliamentary day to bring his body so that we can talk about him because he was indeed a good man. It is good to be good. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Please take three minutes. I hope my people downstairs are listening. 

3.30
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to express my condolences to the family and the entire fraternity of Makerere University. For those who grew up in Makerere, he always gave us fatherly attention.

I was lucky to have been in the Eighth Parliament, as a Member said, it was the first multi-party Parliament. I do not know why, at that time, there were lots of professors on the opposition side: Prof. Anokbonggo, and Prof. Latigo. As we struggled to debate from this side, Prof. Nsibambi called me and said, my son, be careful. When Prof. Anokbonggo speaks from the Opposition side, better be clever. Do not just stand up and debate. He always took time to counsel us when we were going to debate with those from the Opposition side. I do not know where the professors went. 

We also thank the President because he would choose technocrats on the Front Bench who had depth in Government workings, education and working with the general public. This was in order for answers to come easily. 

Prof. Nsibambi was a very strict person with time and with work. I remember my father used to complain a lot saying that the professor used to bother him very much. At one time he said, “I do not know whether he calls me his houseboy” because he would give him assignments from Monday to Friday to the extent that my first encounter with the professor was in Buloba. 

My father had sent me to go and help plant coffee in Buloba when the professor had just established that farm. He had given that assignment to the minister, Dr Israel Kibirige Ssebunya. My father said, “My son, can you go with a few people and supervise that plantation?” We went, supervised and planted coffee the whole morning. The professor woke up at around 10.00 a.m., got out of his house, thanked me and sent greetings to my father. He also asked me to tell him to appear in person the next time coffee was being – (Member timed out.) 

3.33
MS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to convey my deepest condolences to the family. I know that for the family, it is almost impossible to look beyond the sorrow at this moment but may the very beautiful memories that you have of the professor help you to look at tomorrow in a brighter way. 

Prof. Nsibambi stood tall in everything that he did. I am lucky that I interacted with him at Makerere University. He was a professor and I was a teaching assistant but we used to follow him. Some of the teaching assistants would say that this professor does not have posho for brains, he has true brains. He was very intelligent and stood tall in everything; academics, administration and in his faith. He was a good man by any standards and the lesson is, it pays to be good. 

His sense of humour was not cheap or uncouth and his jokes were always serious. He was very gender sensitive, not like some of the gentlemen these days. For example, you may ask, “Where is the gentleman?” and they will reply, “Check in the fiction section of the library.” He was genuine. 

At one time, there was a strike in Makerere and Prof. Nsibambi stood up – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: That is what I am talking about, Madam Speaker. Prof. Nsibambi stood up and said, there is some kind of academic selfishness on campus. He said that the chancellor, the vice chancellor, the university secretary, the academic registrar and the one in charge of finances were all men. Where were the women? From that time onwards, Makerere changed. Thank you, professor. You have left a very rich legacy. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, sometimes, it is a question of –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I now invite hon. Katuntu to take the Floor but in the meantime, I would like to welcome Justice Jotham Tumwesigye, a former Member of this House and a Judge of the Supreme Court. I do not know where he is seated. You are welcome.

I have a message from the Buganda caucus written in Luganda but the Hansard will not capture it in Luganda. The import is that they are committing the family to Psalms 23 to comfort them. They have also contributed Shs 1,000,000, which is not here. I think it will be delivered later.

3.37
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to pay tribute to an extraordinary man, a patriot and a statesman. 

I was reminded today by Mama Esther Nsibambi of the last time I talked to Prof. Nsibambi. He called me a couple of months ago and he asked me to go and see him. I promised to do so but I never turned up. It is a call that will haunt me because I did not know what he was going to tell me. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, there are very few people who have had influence over me but I would like to say it publically that the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi is one of them. It started in this House in the Seventh Parliament when he was submitting and was citing quite a number of books and great scholars. Of course, I was younger with a little bit of vigour. I stood up and shouted, “Order!” The then Speaker, now His Excellency the Vice President, gave me the opportunity and I said, “Is the Rt Hon. Nsibambi in order to turn this House into a lecture theatre?” The presiding officer said that this House is a learning place so he was in order. 

Three days later, he called me to his office and my politics was never to be the same after that meeting. I remember he told me that I had a choice to continue with politics of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KATUNTU: He said to me, “Young man, the reason I have called you is because I have watched you in the House and I do not think that you are stupid; you are a very intelligent man but you have a choice. You either choose the politics of decency or the opposite; you either choose the politics of unity or the opposite.” I can tell you that since that day, my politics changed. The gentleman lying there has been a decent man – (Applause) - and he had influence on multitudes of people –(Member timed out.)

3.40
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people of Arua Municipality and on my own behalf, to pay tribute to the late Prof. Apolo Nsibambi who fondly used to refer to me as his student. 

The late professor was a person who did not want controversy on the Floor of the House. I vividly recall when I was the Chief Opposition Whip in the Eighth Parliament and on the Government side we had hon. Daudi Migereko as the Government Chief Whip. This was at a time when we were going through a constitutional amendment and the amendment of both the Parliamentary and Presidential Election Acts.

There was a lot of controversy but given his wise leadership, he constituted a team of three from his side and he asked me to get an equal number from my side. This was for us to harmonise and agree on issues so that when we came back to the Floor of the House, we would not waste a lot of time; we would only tell Parliament that we had caucused on this and that and digested everything and this was the position. 

This spirit has long gone as far as what I see happening on the Floor of the Tenth Parliament is concerned. This is a challenge to you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and former UPC youth winger. (Laughter) I am saying this because if we really have to recollect what our fallen hero has done for this country, we certainly see that there is sense and a need for us to emulate him. 

The late professor, whom I got to know when I first joined the university in June 1978, was always a very humorous person. In 1992 when I was the regional officer for central, I had the opportunity to be agency supervisor for one of his daughters, Rhoda, who is seated there. She was my supervisee. As Makerere University would require, a supervisor would go and submit on every student that they supervised. When I went to the university, Prof. Nsibambi came to me and said, “I hope you have treated my daughter the way I…” -(Member timed out.)

3.44
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We knew Prof. Nsibambi in different ways. I knew him as my special constituent. In him, this country has lost a leader and an icon of opinion. 

I am very happy that I represent the community in which he lived. Prof. Nsibambi never hid from his community. As a professor and even a Prime Minister, he would get time to attend some of the village meetings in Bulange Zone where he resided till his death. He will greatly be missed by the people in the community. 

While he was still alive, the community recognised the good work he did. A resolution was unanimously passed by the division urban council to name a road after him. We can only ask Government to beautify that road in his honour. We have lost a great guide to the posterity of this nation.

Madam Speaker, I would like to mention two quotes I got from him. We went to the same church with him and as we were chatting one day, I asked him why he retired. He told me, “Young man, retiring is part of leadership and by that I believe I am still a leader.”

I would like to read verbatim the last advice the man lying before us gave as a guide to this country. I strongly believe that it should be honoured at this time. He said, “President Museveni should name his successor so that the country moves on well, so that he also gets time to advise as a grandfather.” 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 
 
3.47
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I also stand to support the motion. As a blackboard teacher and basically a primary school teacher, I should represent all the teachers outside there in appreciating the great work this man did for the education sector. When Prof. Nsibambi took up the position of Minister of Education and Sports, he worked on our issues and there were no strikes at that time. From Ministry of Public Service to Ministry of Education and Sports, life was just improving throughout.

Secondly, when I was teaching at Shimoni, we were told that Prof. Apolo Nsibambi would report to his office before his subjects and knock at each and everyone’s door to find out whether the civil servants were in office including his state ministers. I would like to ask the frontbench, “How many of you report to office before your subjects?” You can provide the answer when we are out of this sitting.

Madam Speaker, I happen to have a former Prime Minister in my constituency, the Rt Hon. Kintu Musoke. I would like to plead with the current Prime Minister to kindly cater for the benefits of these people when they leave office. One day, I met the former Prime Minister at Namirembe and he was driving an old Corsa car. These people have privileges and you should let them access these privileges during their lifetime so that they can enjoy them. One day, Ndungu and I will be in the same position and how will you enjoy your privileges? If you are giving them vehicles, let them have those vehicles. If you are giving them their salaries, let them have those salaries on time. 

When we meet these people outside, they are not enjoying their lives yet they served the country and more so the NRM party and Government. Mr Prime Minister, kindly pay attention to that because it is painful. I have seen the Rt Hon. Kintu Musoke in my constituency and I know what is happening to him. The vehicle is old; we have to push it and it sometimes it fails to start. However, I would like to thank you because recently, you gave him a vehicle though after a long time. 

As teachers, we have lost somebody and this nation has also lost somebody. When you educate a child, you educate a nation. This professor educated children and those he educated are the ones submitting here. I was very happy when I heard hon. Wadri talk about him as his supervisor. That is what we do as teachers. We are people who show others what to do but we remain like signposts. Our lives have never been improved. Can we as Parliament come out and –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the contribution of hon. Ssewungu has reminded me that we have also not dealt with the retirement benefits of the former chief justices of this country. We have not handled that.

3.50
MR ASUMAN BASSALIRWA (Justice Forum, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues and the entire country to mourn the death of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister emeritus. 

In 2000, I was elected Guild President of Makerere University. We identified key stakeholders at that time to go to for advice and counsel. I led a team of guild student leaders to the home of Prof. Nsibambi. Unfortunately, we did not have an appointment; we just decided to gatecrash his home. At that time, we did not have mobile phones as students so we could not call; making appointments was not very easy. 

At the time, he was already the Prime Minister and he was a bureaucratic man by nature. When we arrived at his home, he asked us what had taken us there. I identified myself as the Guild President of Makerere University and identified the guild team I had moved with. I told him that we had come to seek wise counsel from him as a leading educationist, a politician and a father. He did not chase us away. He listened to us, gave us the counsel that we wanted and we went back satisfied. The fact that Prof. Apolo Nsibambi was the Prime Minister, the fact that he had power and authority, never drove him into pomp, ostentation and pageantry the way we see it here. 

He was also a clear testimony that you can live a dignified life in retirement. We can say whatever we want to say but he lived a dignified life in retirement. So those who fear to retire for one reason or the other should pick a leaf from Prof. Nsibambi. Even in his retirement, he continued to give counsel. He was a member of the elders’ forum. As political party leaders, we met them several times and he kept giving guidance and advice to this country.

As we celebrate his life, we should not fear to retire because retiring does not in itself lead to suffering. Once you work very hard and live very well, you will go into retirement, be respected –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to pay tribute to the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, a dignified statesman.

Before us lies a good man. He represented the best of our country, Uganda. He represented decency, service and godliness. Even though he served under a regime that is marred with corruption, Prof. Nsibambi refused to be corrupted. His name was never heard in any corruption scandal. (Applause) 

Even though he served among colleagues who were power hungry, he was not power hungry. As we all remember, he told the President not to re-appoint him in 2011 because he believed that leaders must serve and then retire respectfully.

Even though he worked under a President that keeps neither time nor his word, Prof. Nsibambi always kept time, and yes, he always kept his word. He always meant what he said and he said what he meant. We all remember when he castigated the people that are always around the President but never tell him the truth. I believe many of those members are here today.

While he lies before us silent, never to say a word again, may his words cause us to reflect on our turn, when we lie silent before Parliament or wherever we shall be, and what kind of funeral we would like to get. May his soul rest in peace and may his legacy live on.

3.55
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The mother kingdom of Bunyoro, the people of Bugungu that I represent and all citizens who are proponents and advocates of national dialogue mourn and celebrate the life of our champion and hero of national dialogue. He has fought a good fight. It is no wonder that as we celebrate his life, the country has started listening to the lonely voices of national dialogue.

I met Prof. Nsibambi in 1988 when I was a fresher at Makerere University. He was first introduced to us as a professor of time management. This was because he was always exemplary in time management. It is no wonder that when he went into public service as a minister, he set the standard and changed the tradition and culture of civil servants reporting in time.

As it has already been said, he also implemented the timely payment of salaries. He asked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that if the wage bill is there, why shouldn’t they pay in time? He also wanted the senior citizens, the pensioners, to be paid automatically after retirement. We pray that that will be implemented during this Tenth Parliament.

At that time when we had challenges in financing the university, Prof. Nsibambi was the first person to articulate the point of cost sharing and private sponsored students in Makerere University. This was at a time when Makerere University Academic Staff Association (MUASA) was demanding for a living wage. I remember that time, the President appointed one of the economists who said that there was money in Government for a living wage and I remember Professor Banugire was appointed to be in charge of taxation. 

Prof. Nsibambi told us that he would not take an appointment at that time. His major interest was to negotiate “ebyaffe” and the restoration of the Kabakaship. He said that the only thing that would make him happy in life was to serve as the Katikkiro of Buganda –(Member timed out) 

3.59
BRIG. GEN. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mama Esther Nsibambi and the family, Members of Parliament. 

I first worked with Prof. Nsibambi in 1988 when I was appointed to represent students on the Makerere University Council. At the time, I was a young man and Prof. Nsibambi was one of the giants in the university. He was a true aristocrat and bureaucrat, and in order to convince him, you would have to be very articulate. I was humbled when at the end of our term, he observed that that time the student’s representation was formidable. 

I met him again in 1991 when he was heading the ebyaffe team and I was directed to provide them security wherever they went. I remember two occasions when at 2.00 a.m. Prof. Nsibambi and his team were seated, talking with the President over Buganda issues. Therefore, it was very disappointing for me when I later heard some voices in Buganda condemning Prof. Nsibambi, not knowing how much he had paid for the good of Buganda. However, God always pays and he pays the right way.

Prof. Nsibambi went to public service with discipline. Unfortunately, the discipline left with him because time management and delivery of services left with Prof. Nsibambi. What happened after that?

Madam Speaker, I am not mourning Prof. Nsibambi; I am praising God for his life and for the contributions he made to this country. He has left us a challenge to work with discipline, dedication, as well as meticulousness in executing duties and time management.

Prof. Nsibambi loved his country. The patriotism he showed should remain a challenge to all of us. That is the only way we can keep his legacy burning.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, when you accept Jesus Christ, you live in peace and rest in peace. He is already resting in peace. Fare thee well, Professor. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of my friends told me that in the mornings he did not have to look at his watch; when he saw Professor Nsibambi leaving home, he would know that it was seven o’clock. So, he did not need a watch. (Laughter)

4.02
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, allow me on behalf of the people of Ibanda South, my family and on my own behalf to extend my sincere condolences to the wife and family of Professor Nsibambi. 

I came to know Prof. Nsibambi in 2001 when I joined Parliament. By that time, he was a minister. In 2006, I became a state minister and worked with him. I had never seen Nsibambi annoyed; he was always smiling. It was only one day in Cabinet when Prof. Nsibambi lost his cool when one of us was disrupting the proceedings of Cabinet – to be specific, that was Kahinda Otafiire. Prof. Nsibambi banged his palm on the desk and the belt broke. However, it took less than a minute and Prof. Nsibambi was smiling again. He even told Kahinda Otafiire to contribute. That is who Prof. Nsibambi was - a special man.

I used to be a cantankerous Backbencher here. One day, he called me out at the lift as he was going to the canteen. He said, “You young man, what is wrong with you? Tame your tongue. If you want to be a great leader, tame your tongue. You look like a very nice guy.” Really, I started taming my tongue from that time. (Laughter)

We used to know Prof. Nsibambi as “Lugubrious” and that was his common name here and even in Cabinet. I am glad that I am one of the people who knew where his house was. He had another property in Ntinda and I also went there. He was such a friend and the country has really lost a great man.

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came here today, although I am still mourning, because of who Prof. Nsibambi was to me. 

I will talk about family. Prof. Nsibambi loved his family. I knew the late Rhoda Nsibambi and Mama Esther Nsibambi. Prof. Nsibambi did not have a boy. He treasured me and he had a guard called Isabirye, who became the boy in his life. I think he is there in the gallery. He can stand up, if you can allow, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: He was a long-time bodyguard of Prof. Nsibambi.

MR KIBUULE: He became his son. He would leave office to go for lunch every day at 12.45 p.m. I visited them. The day he and Mama Esther got married, he told the late Archbishop Nkoyoyo not to wait for the President. He said, “The President does not keep time. Let the wedding go on. He will join us.” It was a true story and the wedding went on.

He loved music and had his piano in the sitting room. He would play “Tukutendereza” whenever he was happy. He knew how to play that song on his piano.

I invited Prof. Nsibambi for a leavers’ party for Senior Four, without the knowledge of the school administration. He accepted and came. He came at 9.45 a.m. and the school could not believe it; they were not ready. He told the school he was coming for the Senior Four leavers’ party. Imagine such a down-to-earth Prime Minister. This is a true story. He told my administrators, “I was invited by the students.” He addressed us. The leaders of Mukono came late as the party was concluding and he cautioned them. He said, “The Prime Minister is here; where were you?”

As a negotiator, the former Prime Minister needs to be recognised for the return of many of our kingdom’s property. He enjoyed telling us from time to time what Buganda needed to develop. He said “ebyaffe is not enough if you cannot keep ebyaffe”. As a member of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus, I believe that we need to do much more and appreciate him for the return of –(Member timed out)                                                                                                                                                                           

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to say a few words regarding the relationship I had with the late Rt Hon. Nsibambi.

First of all, I started working with Prof. Nsibambi during the Constituent Assembly (CA) when he was a special nominee by the President to the assembly. He became an instant hit – all the Baganda delegates in the assembly galvanised behind him. Whenever he would stand to go out for consultation, literally all the Baganda CA delegates would follow him and he would come and articulate the issues of Buganda in the Constituent Assembly as if he was their natural leader.

I had an opportunity to serve as minister of state then and even now. Professor Nsibambi knew the Constitution by heart. In Cabinet, if you mentioned anything about the Constitution, before you finished he would tell you what Article of the Constitution it was. You would get amazed because some people who live by reading the Constitution are not able to accurately recite provisions of the Constitution.

Professor Nsibambi always sought for knowledge. He would call me wherever there was a matter that he thought I had expertise in and where he needed to be informed. He would say, “Dr Musumba, I want you to do some research for me on tax rates, taxation” - and things that he thought I had expertise in. I would tell him “Professor, I did not complete my doctoral studies”. He would say, “It does not matter, you are Dr Musumba”. I promise today I will complete my doctoral studies in respect to what Prof. Nsibambi wanted me to be -(Member timed out.)

4.11
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU, (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kibuku and my own behalf, I register my condolences to Mama Esther, the children and the entire country.

I had an opportunity to work with Prof. Nsibambi as the Minister of State for Water. At that time, the country had two major challenges: disarmament in Karamoja and settling our people from the Internally Displaced Camps in the north. Professor Nsibambi led a team of ministers to Karamoja and I was among them. We stayed there for more than one day. Professor was a man who had a sense of humour. In the evenings, he challenged all the ministers by jumping on the floor and dancing with the Karimojong girls. It was really exciting. He actually gave assurance to the people of Karamoja that Government cared for them.

Professor Nsibambi was a counsellor. He mentored many of us. I remember he told us that if someone annoys you, do not rush to speak to that person because you will say words that you will live to regret all your life. This has kept some of us not only in the political circles, but also in families and the country at large.

Professor was a very smart person. He was frank and honest. He was exemplary. We shall miss him as a country. All I can say is that as leaders and Ugandans, we can only emulate him. May God rest his soul in peace.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo, I also wish to extend my condolences to his dear wife, Esther, the children and the entire family.

Madam Speaker, I did not work with Prof. Nsibambi. However, at the time he served as the Prime Minister of this country, I was closer to getting into Parliament and therefore, I followed the parliamentary proceedings very closely. I would like to therefore state that Prof. Nsibambi was a true patriot. He was a man who meant well for this country. 

He was a man who lived his life as a true Rotarian who followed the Rotary norms. For Rotarians, in whatever you think, say or do, you must first ask: Is it the truth? Is it fair to all concerned? Will it build goodwill and better friendships? Will it be beneficial to all? He actually lived by that.

We are saying many good things about Prof. Nsibambi but we who hold offices today must emulate him. I am looking forward to seeing a corrupt person being brought here. I hope we shall not say good things about that person. Otherwise, I will stand up as one person to say the bad things. Therefore, when we hold public offices, we should ensure that we hold them in trust for the people.

One of the things that I remember Prof. Nsibambi said was that there are many public holidays in Uganda. He said “I wish one day we can reduce these public holidays by 50 per cent”. That is something that he has left with us. I hope that at some point, we shall sit and review these public holidays and see whether they are really relevant or not.

Lastly, Prof. Nsibambi was not well after he retired. I remember signing one of his clearance requests as he sought treatment abroad. I just want to say that the Government of Uganda supported him and paid for his treatment both in the country and abroad. Prof Nsibambi, you have done your part and you have left a legacy, which is something that we must all emulate. Rest in peace. Thank you.


4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA) (Mr Moses Kizige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I joined Makerere University in September 1983, commerce was a department in the Faculty of Social Sciences and Prof. Nsibambi was the Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences. This was at the time when Prof. Juma Waswa Balunywa returned to Uganda and was appointed lecture at Makerere University.

Prof. Balunywa mobilised the students of commerce to go and meet the Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences and put forward their argument. They told the dean that commerce has very little to do with social sciences and they asked for their own faculty. Prof. Nsibambi agreed and he started the process. Even though he was replaced shortly after that as the dean, within a year commerce had become a faculty with Prof. Atikoro as the pioneer Dean of the Faculty of Commerce.

Madam Speaker, that decision has revolutionised business education in this country. Today, we have Makerere University Business School which succeeded the Faculty of Commerce of Makerere University. It is the single largest institution of business education in East Africa presently. We are proud of the decision taken by Prof. Nsibambi at that time. Those who came after us in the faculty and at the business school will always remember his contribution to that effect.

I also had the privilege of serving in the Seventh Parliament and heading the National Resistance Movement secretariat during the 2006 general elections. Most political leaders went to contest in the elections and very few of us were left in Kampala including the Prime Minister at that time and the present Prime Minister. So, we had to take many decisions, which have seen this country make progress and continue to make steady progress.

On behalf of the members of the secretariat who can no longer be with us here because they are not active in politics, and a member of the Central Executive Committee (CEC), hon. Lydia Wanyoto, who is up there, we really celebrate his life and thank him for his contribution towards the success of the National Resistance Movement. We shall continue to prosper. May his soul rest in peace.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, in paying tribute to this handsome, brilliant and big-hearted Ugandan, I would like to say the following: I had the privilege of working directly under him from 2006 to 2011. When I arrived in Kampala from Amuria, I was new here. I had been in Amuria almost all my life, only to be told by President Museveni that I am the Minister of State in the Office of the Prime Minister, directly supervised by Prof. Nsibambi and my immediate senior colleague, Prof. Kabwegyere.

I would like to confess that from the onset, I was scared because I was going to be working with people of a high calibre. I did not know how to proceed. I did not go to the office in the first week; I only consulted. One of the people I consulted, among the many, – I would like to say this when Prof. Latigo is here – was an Old Boy (OB), who also happens to be a Professor in Makerere University now. We were together in Teso College Aloet together. I asked, “How do I navigate through the professors?” He told me, “it is very easy, Musa; for professors, always remind them how good they are intellectually. Tell them their brains are unique and you will always have your way.” (Laughter)

The next week, I went to Prof. Nsibambi’s office, knocked at his door and was ushered in. He said, “Young man, I am told you are the new minister in charge of disaster preparedness”. I said, “Yes sir and that is what has brought me to you; I have something to say.” He asked me what I had to say at that time. I answered, “Professor, I just want to try to guess what could have guided President Museveni to deploy me to work with you. I would like to believe President Museveni knows, like the rest of Ugandans, that you have such a big brain and big heart but you do not have the energy. I do not have the kind of brains or heart you have but I have surplus energy. Therefore, President Museveni has deployed me here so that you lend me your brain and I lend you my energy so that we can run this place.” Immediately I talked about that big brain of his, he jumped up and said –(Member timed out.)

4.28
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues, on behalf of the people of Ruhinda North and Mitooma District in general, to register our condolences to the family and the country at large.

I was a student leader at Makerere University and a stubborn one at that. We used to give Government a very big headache. I remember during one of the strikes, we demanded to meet Prof. Nsibambi. He gave us an appointment for 6.30 a.m. but because we had spent the night planning and striking, we woke up at around 9.00 a.m. so we reached at 10.00 a.m. When he arrived, he gave priority to the Makerere University team and we entered his office. He listened to us and later said, “if you have failed to come and pick the solutions that I had already thought about for you, which moral authority do you have to accuse management and Government for failing?” He gave us tea and lectured us. Of course, we were shy and guilty and we moved out peacefully. 

However, he gave us a big lecture. Since then, as student leaders, we learnt how to approach Government better. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, who has also continued to meet student leaders whenever they call on him.

Madam Speaker, I have attended many funerals and I have listened to colleagues today. The words today are flawless. I have attended funerals where you see people talking about big people and you see them struggling to look for words. Because of the lives we live, sometimes we force people to lie when they are eulogising us. When you live a very decent life like Prof. Nsibambi, people do not need to lie about you; the words are flawless. However, when you live lives that are very difficult, we will say that in Africa you do not dance on a dead man’s grave. We shall then start talking of how good you were when in our hearts we know we are lying. 

It is a challenge to us leaders to live decent lives so that people do not lie at our funerals and so that we do not push people into a corner. Prof. Nsibambi, especially at a time when we –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to join colleagues in appreciating the good life that Prof. Nsibambi lived. 

When I was Guild President in Makerere University, Prof. Nsibambi was the Chancellor of the university. As the Chancellor and Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi would listen to a student like he was listening to a fellow minister. One would call Prof. Nsibambi and he would take a few seconds to receive your call. When he received the call, he would ask, “Mr President, what is the problem?” I would tell him that I wished to meet him and he would say, “be at my office by 7.00 a.m.” and by 7.00 a.m. he would be there. He would tell me to sit down as he took a few minutes to study what I had come to tell him and then he would begin talking. 

On two occasions, at the time when the term limit was removed in 2005, I went and told Prof. Nsibambi, because he was the Chancellor, that we were aware that Parliament was going to amend the Constitution and students are set to strike. He invited me to his office as Guild President and we sat for a long period of time. I told him that I had heard him but it was not possible to bring all the students, who I was sure were set to strike. 

He asked me whether it was the right move. I told him, it is the only option we are remaining with. He asked if we were safe and I told him we were. He asked me to call him in the morning before students move out for the strike. I called him in the morning and told him that the students were marching to Parliament. He said he was observing. We marched to Parliament, demonstrated in town and there was teargas. We were sent away so we retreated. 

After a few days, we demonstrated again. Prof. Nsibambi called me and told me to ask students not to demonstrate. I told him that it is a culture of Makerere University to demonstrate –(Member timed out.)

4.29
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With deep sorrow, allow me to join the nation to say goodbye to a senior elder. In Butaleja, there is a saying that if you want to measure the height of a tree, you put it down and that is the only way you will know its height. The words Members have said about the fallen hero show how great and powerful he was.

Madam Speaker, in 1995, I was the best mathematician in the country. There used to be a Mathematics contests and we went to Makerere University for one. I was given a certificate. I did not know the gentleman but he came and greeted us. I only knew him when he came to Butaleja in 1995, by then we had the late hon. Kasajja Byakika – I think they had been together in the Constituency Assembly. We started politics slowly. He said, “I saw this man. This would be a bright man.” Indeed, his words came true. 

Hon. Namuyangu was the Minister of State for Water and Environment in 2007 when I was the best performing Water Officer in the country. Together with the Prime Minister, she gave me a scholarship to go to Denmark to do a course in Environmental Engineering and Climate Change. 

Madam Speaker, as a Member of the Seventh Day Adventist Church, the Bible says, “What will a man gain if he eats the whole world and loses his life?” The late Prime Minister here did not enjoy anything in this world because he knew his wealth was in heaven. He would have taken all the limousines and all wealth but he said, “no.” The Bible in Thessalonian says, we should not mourn as people who do not have hope. Because the deceased Prime Minister believed in Jesus Christ, I know we shall see him again. 

Honourable members, what will people say about you when you die? (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): On behalf of the people of Luweero, I register my sincere condolence to the family, Government of Uganda and the entire people of Uganda. When I joined the university, by then, it was a college, in 1970, bwana Nsibambi was a youth, if I could say. (Laughter) He was young and he was the warden. Those days, university education was free. Government would give money and there was always a balance they would give back to students. We used to call that money “boom.” What surprised me with hon. Nsibambi is that students would go there to borrow money before “the boom” and they would also abuse him. However, the calm and humble young man would just listen to them, yet, most people when they are young, they are very energetic; he would not hit back. The Rt Hon. Nsibambi was always very calm. 

I am very happy to have worked with him because when he was a warden, I was a minister in the hall. We worked very well. 

When I was in the Kampala City Council when the ebyaffe came up, a lot of it was in Kampala. I was on that committee that negotiated and found out; I found him very cooperative and knowledgeable. I really enjoyed working with him again.

A few years back, one of his brothers was very sick and he wanted money. Government had to pay money to him for the land it had taken for the road in his land. The man would ring me and talk very humbly, “Engineer, please, assist us so that we get this money to save my brother to go to the hospital.” He also had a structure in Luzira but he would talk very humbly. 

The gentleman laying here has been great. I admired his being a perfect timekeeper. Above all, he was a Godly man. He was a son of God and behaved very well. Apart from believing in God, he added actions. That means he has the right to go to heaven. Believing alone cannot take you to heaven but for him, it was believing plus action.

If you listen well to the people from Buloba, the way they were talking –(Member timed out.)

4.35
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to bid farewell to our beloved former Prime Minister. 

On behalf of the people of Igara County West - it was somewhere in mid-2006 or 2007, when the Prime Minister called a meeting of representatives of local governments and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Local Government. There was growing discontent among local Government leaders over poor pay following the abolition of Graduated Tax.

We prepared our notes very well. We were a team of 14 and we agreed on which question to ask which minister. We were ready for the fight. We went very early and said, “Let us take our seats early and be ready for these people.” By the time we reached the Prime Minister’s Boardroom, the Rt Hon. Nsibambi was already there. Not only was he early but he stood up and greeted us. He shook our hands, one by one with a smile. It was the ministers who were late.

In the meantime, the Prime Minister engaged us quite well. By the time the meeting started, we were totally disarmed. And indeed, in the budget that followed, we saw a budget line for salaries of district chairpersons and other local Government leaders. We learnt a lesson that the strength of public authority does not lie in mighty, arrogance or pomp; it lies in simplicity and respect for the people we lead. 

To the bereaved family, it is a sad moment but we mourn with you. Please, be consoled by the fact that your dad, husband and relative has left you a name on which you can actually build your own future. From henceforth, wherever you are in no corners of the world, you just have to say, “I am the son, I am the grandchild, I am the daughter or I am the relative of Prof. Nsibambi” and the world will give you the respect that we are giving you today. 

May his soul rest in peace and keep his family strong. Thank you.

4.38
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to pay my condolences to the family, this Parliament and the nation for the loss of a great man, a dear friend and a man who really kept his word and smartness at all times. 

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Dokolo, I would like to thank our dear friend who has departed for having visited Dokolo personally and advised us on how we could manage a young district, which had just started. We benefitted a lot from his advice. 

At a personal level, Prof. Nsibambi valued personal relationships and you all know that although he was the Prime Minister, he kept very close to the Opposition. He was a powerful lobbyist. He would not lobby openly but he would, in privacy and in confidence call and talk to you trying to explain the other side of the story. He indeed achieved a lot right from the Constituent Assembly.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate what he did to keep his personal relationship with some of us who in the early days of the NRM regime suffered what I would call isolation. If we were seen talking to some persons, they would be rebuked. However, professor enjoyed being identified with us and we appreciated that.

I would like to say that professor might have felt very disappointed with the performance of the Cabinet team in the Parliament. Because the participation of the Cabinet ministers in Parliament has been very poor and yet, we know that Professor was the one who came up with the new idea of evaluating the performance of every public servant by applying the new model of result oriented management. If the professor was to be here to do the evaluation of the performance of the Cabinet, I do not know what report would come out of it.

However, I definitely hope that now that the professor has gone and has not had time to talk to the Prime Minister and-(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send the condolences of the Uganda People’s Congress. We condole with the family, Buganda Kingdom, the Government and the citizens of Uganda.

I would like to share a brief experience I had my first opportunity to listen intently to Prof. Nsibambi on the 20 October 2005, when the first Prime Minister of Uganda was also brought here to be paid tribute to. My expectations on that day were a lot of uncertainty but I expected that maybe Prof. Nsibambi would use the opportunity in his grasp of the English language to maybe hit some points here and there. However, I can honestly say that what he spoke on that day, he was very balanced and earned my enduring respect.

Two and a half years later, I had the opportunity to test whether he believed in what he spoke on that day. This came about in the situation where we had the IDP camps closing down and the response from Government was somewhat lacking. Therefore, I had organised myself to come on the Floor of Parliament intent on embarrassing the Government for not handling the matter effectively.

The Rt hon. Edward Ssekandi advised me to first speak to the Prime Minister. I followed his advice and the interactions I had got us to a better position and had the matter resolved in a better way than if had I taken that opportunity and launched an attack with intent to embarrass the Government and not solving the problem.

From those interactions, I can safely say that we are going to miss the qualities of such leaders as the late Prof. Nsibambi and his dedication on service to both the nation and his own community. Therefore, as a staunch republican, I can say as he said on that day that there is a possibility and there is a way in which you can have a monarchy and republicanism coexisting. May the soul of Prof. Nsibambi rest in eternal peace.

4.44
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I speak as Member of Parliament representing Busiro County East where professor will be laid to rest and I have proudly been his Member of Parliament.

I am speaking about somebody I know and I can speak without any fear of contradiction that he was a good man and that is why we celebrate his life. We do not celebrate cosmetically for the sake of celebrating the life of a Prime Minister. There are many Prime Ministers, ministers, Presidents, Clergymen and Members of Parliament that we may not celebrate but we celebrate the qualities within those people. As we celebrate the life of Prof. Nsibambi, we celebrate decency, truthfulness and quality.

Many people have spoken about the kind of dedication with which he served. He did not only serve with dedication but also distinction and you know the two are different. There are those that are dedicated but cannot reach the level of the distinction. We would like to celebrate that distinction and thank you.

I vividly remember of two incidents when I had a discussion with him. One was when he survived an accident in Eastern Uganda in a plane crush. When I went to visit him, I found the current Prime Minister seated in his sitting room. He said, “you man, you have come to conduct a quarrel in my house” and I said, “no. I have come to say thank God you survived but stop moving in junk choppers.”

I said that I had also come to report the Minister of Internal Affairs who was Dr Ruhakana Rugunda because he was the Minister of Internal Affairs in 2008 when I was kidnapped. And I said I was reporting this man to him because he had kidnapped me. 

Therefore, he did not only sort me out with Dr Rugunda but also sorted himself with me because I also had a history with him. When I was serving in the Kingdom of Buganda as Minister for Information, we had an encounter that some people have spoken about and we sorted it out. I am the person who wrote the letter that returned and refunded his money because I was the responsible minister; we sorted it out that day.

However, this is the reason I gave it to him. I said, “you are our son and you are in the service of the Government of Uganda representing the kingdom. In Luganda we call it omusige  -you are dedicated and I said we do not want any doubt on you that is why we restrain you in time.”

The second thing that I celebrate about him and this is my last one, his father donated land to the people of Buloba but the title was never transferred. Prof. Nsibambi said, “I cannot transfer this title to the names of individuals I know.”

He called me and we agreed to register a trust and give that title to the people of Bulooba community. That Kitawuluzi where you will see us go to lay him to rest. He gave us the title and they have it; he kept his word.

We thank him for the service to the kingdom of Buganda, the church where we both went and the community and to this country where he represented us. He represented our brand truly. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, normally we have these tributes until nearly 6.00 p.m. but today we agreed with the family that they should be in Makerere University by 5.00 p.m. Of course, I have even exceeded the time I had planned because of the demand. However, let me ask the Prime Minister to say a concluding remark and then we can end this special sitting.

4.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To inform you colleagues in the House that the cause of death of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi as per the post-mortem report is pulmonary embolism, which in effect means a clot in the lungs that obstructs proper flow of oxygen and, therefore, leads to death. That was the cause of death.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 27 Members have contributed. I now put the question that a question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the Hansard and the tribute and give them to Prof. Nsibambi’s family. Thank you. 

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

Exit of the late Prof. Apolo Robin Nsibambi.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for this afternoon’s tribute to a distinguished person. I adjourn this special sitting. However, we shall reconvene in 10 minutes for the ordinary sitting because we need to prorogue the House and we cannot do it during the special sitting.

I adjourn this sitting and we resume in 10 minutes but I would like to welcome hon. Aggrey Awori, former Member of Parliament, former minister, former presidential candidate. Thank you for coming.

(House was adjourned at 4.55 p.m. for 10 minutes.) 









