
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 30 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to report that hon. Mary Kabanda is not able to attend the House today. She has been admitted since Monday 27 May 2019 at Bulamu Hospital in Masaka. We should pray for her for a quick recovery.

Secondly, honourable members, today is not a boycott. I authorised the accountability committees to go to Mbale District and do some work. I am sure the rest of us can do the work and conclude the business of the third session as we wait for the special sitting tomorrow.

Thirdly, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School, Banda. They are represented by hon. Micheal Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi Sempala. You are most welcome. They are here to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

Honourable members, last week on the 22 May 2019, I received a petition from the Women’s Movement concerning an issue of sexual harassment within the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I undertook to establish what was happening. 

Today, I had a meeting with the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development. The outcome is that there is a committee within the ministry established under the Employment Act, which is examining the complaint. I would like to ask the Members to await the outcome of that inquiry before we can take further action.

Thank you very much.
3.03
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance about the exercise on registration of persons, which ended last week. 

Government had extended this exercise in the different districts to have those services extended to the respective subcounties. However, at the closure of the exercise, many people in Mityana District missed out on the registration. The computers that were brought in the respective subcounties were slow. In a day, a computer would serve three or four people making many people bounce and return to their villages.

The registration forms were not enough and people would be told to go to another parish or Mityana District and yet, the services are in a subcounty. Therefore, the whole process was cumbersome and many people were not able to move to those respective distances.

Madam Speaker, the cards that were available had no data. They would tell people that they could see their cards but that they had no data.  They said the cards would be brought back to Kampala so that data could be recorded on them. Then, these cards would be returned to them at the sub county. (Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, hon. Nabakooba, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to add to this by saying that this is true. About two weeks ago, I was in Bugiri District during the exercise and in some areas, they were asking people to pay Shs 10,000 or Shs 20,000 depending on how one looked look like. These people could not afford that money and so, they missed out on the process. 

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleagues are telling me that it did not happen only in Mityana but that the whole country was affected in one way or another. 
Madam Speaker, we request that the exercise be extended so that people are given ample time and the process should be streamlined to make people who missed out to register again. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nabakooba, for bringing up that very important issue. Matters of national identity cards are very crucial because how will people be identified as Ugandans? There are two aspects; there were reports that the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) Kololo office takes money from applicants and it is very difficult to get your national identity card from there. We would like to get a statement from the minister about the performance of NIRA.

Secondly, the minister should also give us a statement about the countrywide registration exercise so that we can debate it here and you may find that he does not have that input from the officials. We shall ask him to come in the fourth session.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. This is a very burning issue. In Isingiro, if they targeted a 100 per cent, they only got about 35 per cent because of the many reasons as articulated by my honourable colleagues. There is also something worse; people who registered long ago have never received their cards, which are still at the headquarters. Somebody has to travel all the way from Mbarara or Isingiro to look for the card. It is a very terrible situation for one to come from Isingiro to get a card from Kololo. It is almost next to trying to see God. It is a very difficult exercise and it is high time we put our feet down and say, “let these cards be taken back to the regional centres where our people will easily get them.” 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the things that we need to look at is the delay. If one went to Kololo and they register, they may not get their card for even a month, yet they cannot even apply for a passport without that card. 

Further, when one is applying for a passport, they ask for the identity cards of parents. For example, my mother subscribes to a religion, which did not participate in the registration. She is in the village and she told me that I can never register her for any of those things. 

Will one deny me a passport because my mother cannot register for a national identify card? These are the things we need to look at critically. Why should it take a whole month for one to produce a national identity card yet in the budget, we prioritised this process?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is very important and urgent because if you do not have a national identity card you cannot join university, you cannot get the higher education scheme, you cannot get a loan, a job, a simcard and others. Some of the phones are off because people do not have a national identity card. The Minister of Internal Affairs should come in the first sitting of the fourth session immediately after the State of the Nation Address so that we can have a debate on this issue.

3.11
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you. Since you came home, Madam Speaker, I have not got the opportunity of welcoming you back to your Chair. I take this opportunity to welcome you to the House and to say that we missed you. We thank God for giving you a steady recovery. We thank you for serving your motherland diligently and faithfully. You are most welcome.

I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding two Ugandan teachers who died in South Sudan on Sunday. A dark cloud hovered over the mountains of Rwenzori when we lost two teachers of Mathematics and Physics, named Charles Kule Mitsagharu and Willis Binsiima from Bushenyi. 

The two teachers, after failing to get teaching jobs in Uganda, got posted with an organisation called Hope for Humanity International to South Sudan. The organisation works with the catholic Diocese of the Western Lake State where the school, Hope and Resurrection Secondary School, is. 

The two teachers went to the airport on Sunday to pick their head teacher who was coming to the school. On their way from the airport, they found a group of South Sudanese who stopped them. One was driving, the other in the co-driver’s seat and the head teacher was in the back seat. When they looked at their identity cards, they handcuffed the head teacher because he was South Sudanese and shot dead the two teachers that were in the car. Their reason was that they were tired of foreigners. 

Apparently, the morning before the shooting happened, a car with a foreign registration number had knocked dead a South Sudanese. The population became annoyed and decided to look for all foreigners and kill them. The two Ugandans became the unfortunate victims of this mob and they were lynched.

Madam Speaker, it hurts us that we are talking about Pan-Africanism, talking about sisterhood and brotherhood in the African continent and South Sudan is in the East African Community (EAC) and a yet, Ugandan can be called a foreigner there. 

Uganda is a host to over 800,000 South Sudanese that are staying here in our refugee camps. It is unfortunate that Willis and Charles met this unfortunate death to the extent that they could not access medical facilities. The bodies were treated in Kilembe Hospital. The organisation worked with the catholic diocese to fly the bodies here. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of East African Affairs take up this matter and find out how we shall continue living with our colleagues in the EAC while we still look at each other as foreigners. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is just a request to the Government.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, these killings of our citizens in South Sudan is not an isolated case. We have lost another Ugandan who was alleged to have smuggled food to Rwanda. Interestingly, their response was full of arrogance. They said that their professionalism does not require lectures from Uganda. This is awash in print and electronic media. 

Therefore, fast tracking the EAC with such happenings, it would be a matter of procedure that the line minister comes with a comprehensive report on the relationship we now have with the so called member partners of the EAC and whether we should even continue to promote the EAC. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are two things. One is the incident that happened on both sides of the Uganda border, which we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update the House on and what steps they are taking to ensure that this does not reoccur. 

The second one is the general state of our integration and corporation within the EAC and we shall ask the Minister for East African Affairs to come here and update the House on where we stand on this issue.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to let the Members know the enthusiasm that Kule went with when he was going to South Sudan. On his facebook page, when he was travelling, he wrote this, “Atiaba, I am coming to do my part of educating the future leaders of South Sudan”. He was at the airport. 

When I read this, I saw that he really went with passion. He went to do his part as a Pan-Africanist, as a person who believes in the integration of the EAC. 

I am glad, Madam Speaker, that you are telling the Minister of East African Affairs to come and brief us on the status. I look forward to listening to this status because Kule has left five children and Willis has left four children. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

3.19
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Nakaseke South send you greetings and thank God that you have recovered very well. They pray that God continues to strengthen you.

I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the state of Kapeeka Health Centre III where four of my constituents have passed on. They went there four days ago to be attended to but they found the doctors on strike. They were referred to Nakaseke hospital, only to find the same situation. The doctors narrated to me that they have taken almost four months without water. Any patient that is taken to Nakaseke Main Hospital has to carry a jerrican of water.

Secondly, the X-ray machine is not functioning and there are also no oxygen cylinders. Therefore, these people who were referred from Kapeeka Health Centre to Nakaseke Hospital were not attended to because doctors were planning to strike on Monday.

Madam Speaker, I am very grateful that you are one of my constituents and you will help to address that issue. I pray that the Government listens to the people of Nakaseke because it is a cradle land of the National Resistance Movement  Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometime back, hon. Najjuma raised the issue of Nakaseke and I do not know whether it has not been answered.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, it has not been answered. We have brought that issue more than three times. You can imagine a referral hospital that has no water supply. When you go there, you have to carry your own water and it is a hospital that covers more than seven districts. The excuse is that the pump is not functioning and the doctors are always narrating to us that there is nothing they can do. 

Even the ambulance is grounded because they do not have money for fuel. If you need to use the ambulance, you have to pay  for fuel.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I instructed the Clerk to write to all the ministers who have pending questions indicating by how many days they are behind our timelines so that they are obliged to come and answer. Again, I direct the Minister of Health to come and update us about what is happening at Kapeeka Health Centre and Nakaseke Hospital.

3.22
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern in Ngora, concerning Daniel Opio, who died in a cell in Usuk Police Station. Opio was arrested on Tuesday between 10 o’clock and 11 o’clock at a place called Aterai. The distance between Aterai and Usuk Police Station is about the distance between Kampala and Mukono. However, it took three hours before Opio arrived at the police station.

Yesterday morning, Opio was found dead, not in a police station but in the hospital. The police arrested and took him to the cells but on the following day, his body was found in the hospital and the police are the ones who took the body there. The police transported the body of Opio right from Katakwi to Ngora Freda Carr Hospital’s mortuary. 

We have said Opio will not be buried unless a postmortem examination report has been produced. The police in Katakwi are not willing to give this form so that a proper postmortem examination is done by the doctors at Ngora Hospital. They claimed that the man committed suicide yet the cell is actually a unipot. I wonder how somebody can commit suicide in a unipot. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that:

    1. The Government of Uganda should take full responsibility of burying Daniel Opio.
    2. The Ministry of Internal Affairs does the full investigation after the postmortem examination report has been produced.
    3. Everyone who was responsible for the death of Daniel Opio should be brought to book without delay.
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is instructed to examine and establish the circumstances under which Daniel Opio died and attend to the necessary procedures. He should update us in the first week of the fourth session.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON CONDUCTING ELECTIONS IN NEWLY CREATED DISTRICTS

3.25
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, you know what a pleasure it is for some of us to see you back in that chair. We welcome you back. (Applause)

You are aware that the Ninth Parliament, sitting on 3 September 2015, passed a resolution to create 23 new districts to be operationalised in a phased manner across four financial years from 2016/2017 to 2019/2020. Sixteen of the above districts have since taken effect and the last batch of seven new districts will take effect on 1 July 2019.

Since 2015, my ministry has continuously engaged the Independent Electoral Commission to conduct elections in the newly created districts in line with its mandate to organise, conduct and supervise elections of local councils as stipulated under section 101 of the Local Government Act.

The Independent Electoral Commission has accordingly conducted elections in most of the newly created districts. Where elections have not been conducted, we have been informed that the Commission is ready to conduct these elections as soon as requisite funds are availed for the exercise. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails the required funds to the Independent Electoral Commission so that elections are conducted in the remaining districts to enable full operationalisation and functionality of the new local governments. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable minister, the situation is grave because it involves people who went for primary elections more than one year ago. They do not know when the elections will be and they have difficulties keeping in touch with the population. You know sometimes Government comes here with supplementary requests. This issue of governance is a public right. In Bugweri, for example, there is even no interim administration and we are sending money there.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank the minister for the statement he has made in response to the issue that was raised by Members yesterday. I know the minister serves on the same Cabinet as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Members raised this issue aware that there is the Ministry of Local Government, which is in charge of creating local administrative units.

Based on the statement that the minister has given to this House, I wonder whether it is procedurally right for the honourable minister to give information and throw it back to the ministry of finance, planning and economic development and leave the House unsatisfied.

I think that Cabinet should sit down and analyse the performance of the different sectors and prioritise where funds should go. I, therefore, would like to know whether it is right for the minister to complain to the House and yet he is supposed to come and clarify to Parliament that Cabinet has decided on A, B, C and D, so that we know whether elections will be conducted or not in the newly created districts.

Secondly, I would like the minister to clarify on the administrative units they have created. I do not think it is just a matter of creating administrative units including the subcounties that were passed recently.
Madam Speaker, most of these administrative units –


THE SPEAKER: That is item 3. Let us first finish with the new districts.

3.30
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a causal way in which we are handling business in this country and in which our ministers are working.

When you talk about these elections – my constituency neighbours Bugweri District and different political parties conducted primaries and got candidates but politicking has been the order of the day. People do not go to gardens and there is a lot of anxiety and pressure. Actually, there is no business that is going on in this district.

Madam Speaker, for a minister to come here and causally say that when they give money – the Electoral Commission - I think that is very sad. We should handle business seriously and be serious when matters are being discussed because Government committed itself in this House when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave the Certificate of Financial Implication, confirming that there was availability of funds passed to the districts. What is the problem?

I think there is something we must handle seriously in this House so that we can sort out this issue once and for all – (Member timed out.)

3.36
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the senior minister but what he said is a statement that was made here a year ago on the same matter. The minister does not even know the impact of that statement.

Madam Speaker, if you read the report of the districts that are supposed to benefit from the construction of seed-secondary schools in the entire country – there is a district called Kapelebyong. When they assessed Kapelebyong District, the members who were there did not know what was needed. They are the only people who requested to be exempted from the construction of the seed secondary school in Kapelebyong and this is on the records of this House.

That kind of arrangement emanates from these kinds of answers and that is why I am concerned. The whole of Kapelebyong – my sister, the Member of Parliament for that district is here; the situation is not as good as we think. Actually, this is not only happening in Kapelebyong but in other places. That is why I would like the minister to be specific to Ugandans in his statement whether in his opinion, the ministry did some injustice or not by creating these districts. Otherwise, at this stage, we want answers and not stories because Ugandans are ready to vote. Actually, those who are contesting are wasting their time. Every day, people do not go to work, like my brother said.

I would like the minister to come out specifically and tell us whether or not we are going to organise elections. Tell us now such that we know and we relax and wait for 2021. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in March, I asked here the wisdom of continuously creating districts which will need chairpersons, members of Parliament and yet after one year, we will go for general elections and the people will be obliged to go through an election. The people who are campaigning now will have to go back for campaigns in 2021. Is that fair? I do not know whether you are not violating the rights of the candidates and the population. I think they should be put out of their agony and told to forget it and wait for 2021.

3.36
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vain, one wonders; it is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that issued the Certificate of Financial Implication before the motion was moved. The series of the loans and supplementaries we are passing here are going to certain areas. Hon. Amoding has raised something very important; how do we coordinate ministries in harmonising what is important for the nation? I think Cabinet is there to harmonise the needs especially what they present as business in this House.

Surprisingly, the minister is telling us that in the other corner, it has failed and now he is seeking remedy from this House. I think we need to do something especially tasking the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain why they deliberately suffocate the Ministry of Local Government.

Otherwise the minister is complaining and it seems the substantial Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also playing politics. He should have directed where the money should go because he is responsible for these elections. He is a politician and therefore, he should know that local government is the basis for service delivery.

Madam Speaker, I request you to call the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here to explain why he is suffocating the cardinal ministry, which is responsible for delivery of services to local governments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Simeo Nsubuga, as you come, I would like to report that the minister authorised the Ministry of Works and Transport to allow you to use the equipment. (Laughter)
 
3.38
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring greetings from the people of Kassanda South Constituency; they are extremely happy that you have recovered very well and you are back on duty. They wish you a better life.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Kassanda District is one of the districts which were created on 1 July 2018. As leaders of the district, we do not have an answer to give to the people. After the creation of the district, different parties have conducted primaries and we have flag bearers waiting for elections. However, every now and then, we have been getting promises, which have not turned out to be effective. 

The minister has just made a statement but I expected that as representative of Cabinet, he should have been very convincing to us that we are going to have an election on such a day.

Madam Speaker, for your information, on 1 July 2019, 30 days from now, another six districts are coming on board. We are actually, going to have 12 districts waiting for elections. I would like, therefore, to request the minister to be frank to this House. Are we going to have elections in these 12 districts before 2021 or are they going to wait for 2021? That is the answer we need from the minister. 

If we get that answer, we will go and tell our people to prepare for 2021. Between now and 2021, we are not going to have elections Madam Speaker, that is what we need the minister to tell this House so that we go and explain to our people. Otherwise, in Kassanda and other districts, there is a problem.

As leaders from there, we do not have an answer to the problem. They ask us every now and then when the elections are. The minister is here; let him explain to the House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, the clarification I seek from the minister is about the creation of these new districts. Creation of a district is a process, which is well programmed, not an event.

Yesterday, I read that even the ministers – during their sitting – proposed to borrow €20 million for the mapping of Karamoja. I will not be surprised if Government soon starts borrowing for the creation of new districts.

Every day, you read about borrowing. These districts are not demanded for by people. They are created because of politics. These are the same people who promise our voters that when they give them districts, they will get services. However, I have not seen any new district with better services. Everyone is yawning. I have even seen some districts where the district chairpersons are housed in shabby places. You then wonder how they came to create such a district when the Government is not ready.

Therefore, the point of clarification I am seeking from the minister is whether we are soon borrowing for the creation of new districts. If so, what will Government do because constituents are being deceived that the more they create districts, the better the services? However, the situation is almost the same. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think our position is that either you reassure the country that elections will take place or put the people out of agony. The candidates are suffering; the flag bearers are finished and worn out. 

3.42
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, the reason we phased the creation of districts was for purposes of funds. They said that in this financial year, as a country, we can ably finance this. Districts like Bugweri, Kassanda and Kapelebyong are supposed to be functional now. They are supposed to have been budgeted for as they were in the Budget. 

Therefore, for the minister to come here and read from the book of Lamentations, when we should have had these districts operational, is unfortunate. Every day they go to Cabinet and we think that they are harmonising positions. I thought the Minister of Local Government was coming here to tell us that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has finally released the funds for the elections.

Madam Speaker, when you say that the minister should make it clear whether the elections will happen or not, I think that is the only way to go. However, they should also know that there is a constitutional issue that we are handling here. The Constitution provides that when there is a vacancy for a Member of Parliament, elections must take place within a specific period of time.

Now that we created these districts, there is a vacancy for a Member of Parliament, especially the Woman MP. The fact that we have not had elections for the Women members of Parliament means we are breaching the Constitution. Therefore, I am of the view that we put a complete halt to the creation of new districts. 

Two, since people are coming in a year or two before elections, we allow them to serve for five years because these are not coming in a by-election so that their elections happen after five years. Otherwise, as a country, we are going to waste money, time and resources in a bid to solve political problems. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you.

3.50
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I am not going to come here and lie to Parliament. I have to tell Parliament what exactly the situation is. These districts were phased by the Ninth Parliament, not the 10th Parliament. This Parliament has not created any new districts. All these districts were phased and created by the Ninth Parliament, where the Rt Hon. Speaker was chairing.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, I was not - (Laughter) - Check the Hansard.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, you know very well that I was not a Member of the Ninth Parliament - (Laughter) - I am a Member of the 10th Parliament. You also know that the mandate of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs includes elections because that is their responsibility; to organise elections.

The Ministry of Local Government creates districts through Parliament. Therefore, as hon. Kiiza has said, these districts were phased. Every 1 July, districts take effect. I do not have to come here to ask Parliament to ratify the taking of effect of a certain district; they are automatic. After nine months, the baby comes out, isn’t it? On 1 July, the district emerges and they will continue emerging until – new cities will also automatically take effect on 1 July.

I do not think that we are about to borrow money for operationalisation of the new districts. Therefore, I have no authority to give orders to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because this is known. Every year, there should be a budget for those particular districts to automatically be funded, operationalised and take effect.

However, this matter has been as hot in Cabinet as it is in Parliament; about funds for the operationalisation of districts, sub-counties and town councils. There is now a committee, which is chaired by the First Deputy Prime Minister. We are going to have a rigorous, protracted discussion between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government, chaired by the First Deputy Prime Minister, to solve this problem of non-operationalisation of town councils, sub-counties and districts. I hope that when this discussion is finalised, I will come back here and report to the House. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any idea when the exercise will be completed; the timeframe? 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: The Attorney-General has advised that in three weeks, we should be able to give that answer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we look forward to your update because sometimes you may be attending an innocent function and people are demanding for their districts and town councils. 

In June, we will expect an answer from the Ministry of Local Government. However, since we have also touched both items 3(i) and 3(iii), let us go to Item 3(ii) on Yumbe and Arua Districts’ contested borders.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE DELAYED RESPONSE ON THE OUTSTANDING CONTESTED BORDER BETWEEN YUMBE AND ARUA DISTRICT AT EWANGA

3.50
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, you are aware that the local government system in Uganda is based on the district as a unit under which there are lower local governments and administrative units as centres for service delivery, under decentralisation.

Proper description of administrative boundaries, therefore, enables effective planning for service delivery and the reverse is true. It is important to note that my ministry, working together with Government surveyors, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and land surveyors from that ministry reopened the boundary on the contested stretch of 17.5 kilometres in 2004. However, the surveyors’ findings were contested by one of the parties in the dispute; that is Arua District and Yumbe District.

We are now organising the second round to conduct another joint intervention to resolve the matter before the end of this financial year. I call upon all the leaders in the two districts to support the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to resolve this matter once and for all. 

Madam Speaker, districts become districts when they had earlier been counties. This has been the basis. Of late, though, when a county is elevated to a district, political leaders think that county can acquire a territory over another county. That is not possible. These are counties known for time immemorial. Right from the time of colonialism, counties were known as counties. For instance, Masaka had always been Masaka County. When you create Lwengo District, you do not assume new boundaries from the county’s earlier boundaries because you have just become a district; it does not happen. You keep in your county even if it becomes a district. 

Even this debate here about the counties in West Nile; these counties are known. There should really be no dispute between Aringa County and another county in West Nile. Therefore, I do not want to begin a controversy debate here because the boundaries are known. We shall just go and reaffirm the boundaries of Aringa County and the neighbouring counties and that will also be the boundary between Yumbe and Arua districts. That is all.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $45 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO SUPPORT THE TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING (TVET) SUPPORT PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: The mover of the motion is not here. Is there any other minister willing to rescue this motion because we believe that Cabinet sat and agreed on it? Hon. Bakabulindi, can you move the motion? 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also add my voice in welcoming and wishing you a better life. 

I beg to move a motion for this House to adopt the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion has been seconded. 

Motion seconded.

THE SPEAKER: What is the justification? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This motion was moved because currently we are in the process of skilling Uganda and making sure the youth in this country are equipped with skills in order to be self-sustaining. 

As we move, a lot of instructions and areas need to be upgraded with Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) institutions and because of that need, we moved this motion to borrow that money. That is why it was passed to the Committee on National Economy to justify our reasons for the loan. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want the House to do?

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, since this motion was moved and subjected to the Committee on National Economy for scrutiny and the committee has completed its report, I would like to move that this House listens, considers and debates the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to give us his report? 

3.58
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Support Project.

Before I do so, I beg to lay on Table the following documents which the committee considered or accessed in consideration of the loan request. One is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $45million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the project. It is duly signed by majority of the members of the committee.

I would also like to lay on Table;

The minutes of the meetings held by the Committee on National Economy to consider this request by Government to borrow, the Certificate of Financial Implications for the proposal of Government to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the Technical and Vocational Education and Training Support Project.

The brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic development bank to support the Technical and Vocational Education and Training and negotiations, meetings, minutes between IDB and the Republic of Uganda for the Financing of the Technical and Vocational Education and Training.

Minutes of the meetings between the Government of Uganda and IDB for the appraisal of the TVET support project phase III; Project completion report for phase I of the Uganda National Education Support project, project progress brief from UNES project phase II, project to disbursement schedules of the said project financing. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I would like to proceed to what this project is about rather than going through the background. This project aims at contributing towards transforming the TVET Sub-Sector into a comprehensive system of skills development for employment, enhanced productivity and growth. Specifically, the project aims at enhancing the acquisition of relevant employable skills and competencies that match the labour market and workplace needs through;

    1. Expanding access to BTVET in Uganda, due to its potential for higher social rates of return, in view of the growing number of youth emerging from the country's basic education levels. 

    2. Improving the quality and relevance of service delivery, through curricular reviews and development, instructor training, provision of teaching and learning materials and student apprenticeships in industry.

    3.  Institutional management capacity building, establishing of a BTVET Management Information System, user training on data collection, analysis and reporting, as well as advocacy and private sector partnership building.

Project location

The project will be located in nine districts; Masaka and Sembabule in central, Busia and Mayuge in the East, Kabale and Kakumiro in West, Oyam and Moyo in North and Napak in Karamoja. The nine technical institutes located in nine districts that will benefit from this project are shown are indicted in table 2 which - I hope it is uploaded. 

They include the following; 

    1. Kitovu Technical Institute in Masaka for electronics and telecommunications. 
    2. Lutungu Technical Institute in Ssembabule for agriculture value addition including animal husbandry.
    3. Nalwire Technical Institute in Busia for agriculture value addition, including textile development. 
    4. Nkoko Technical Institute in Mayuge for construction trades; specifically roads. 
    5. Kabale Technical Institute in Kabale for construction trades building.
    6. Birembo Technical Institute in Kakumiro for agricultural mechanisation including mini irrigation.
    7. Minakulu Technical Institute in Oyam for construction trades building.
    8. Moyo Technical Institute in Moyo for light manufacturing including ornaments.
    9. Moroto Technical Institute in Napak for tourism, hospitality and mineral development.

I will skip the - which I beg the colleagues to read in the interest of time.

Project Components 

The Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Support project will be implemented under the framework of the following four components;
    1. Construction of new infrastructure and acquisition of equipment and furniture.
    2. Improving the quality of service delivery. 
    3. BTVET institutional & management capacity building. 

The details are available under each of the components. I beg to proceed to project cost and financing. 

The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Support project is estimated to cost a total of $51.14 million, of which 88 per cent will be financed by the IDB loan amounting to $45 million while the Government of Uganda will finance the remaining 12 per cent equivalent to $6.14 million to cover part of the civil works costs for the nine institutes, curricular and distribution of curricular materials and project operational costs and taxes. The details are in table 5. I don’t think I should read all those.

Still on project planning - (Interjection) - maybe that suffices because I have said $45 million borrowed; $51.14 million, total cost and shared between Government of Uganda and borrowing from IDB.

Loan terms and budgetary implications:

The IDB will make available $45 million for financing the Technical and Vocational Education and Training Support Project, through a blended combination of a loan amount of ID 7.13 million approximately equivalent to $10 million and an Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development loan amount of $10 million approximately equivalent to ID7.13 million, and an Instalment Sale amounting to $25 million approximately equivalent to ID 17.83 million.

The terms of the loan are as follows;

Loan amount ID7.13 the first component we talked about, the loan period is 25 years including a seven year grace period and the payment period is 18 years’ service fee not exceeding 1.5 per annum of the loan amount. ISFD loan terms - because I had told you that there are three components: Loan Amount $10 million; loan period 30 years, including a 10-year grace period, repayment period, 20 years; service fee not exceeding 0.75 per annum of the loan amount.

IDB Instalment Sale Loan Terms

Loan Amount: $25 million, loan period, 17 years, including a three-year grace period, repayment period 14 years, service charge; tentative 4.5 per cent US$ 10-year mid-swap rate currently is approximately 2.84 per cent.

Level of concessionality of the IDB & ISFD loans: We are comparing the IDB and ISFD; maturity is 25 years for IDB and 30 years for ISFD; grace period is seven years; for ISFD is 10 years. Reference can be made on table 10 and I do give the explanation:

 
From table 10, the present discounted values of the IDB and ISFD loans are smaller than the nominal values of the loans contracted. 

This implies that the total future repayment of the loans is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in present terms.

The total future repayment of the IDB loan will amount to about $ 10.5 million after the loan period of 25 years. Similarly, the total future repayment of the ISFD will amount to $10.5 million after the loan period of 30 years. 

Observations and Recommendations

Technical, Vocational and Education Training Policy: The committee noted that the Skilling Uganda Strategic Plan is the driving force behind the national commitment to transform TVET. 

Government is in the process of finalising a new TVET policy, under which the legal mandate of the TVET Council as the apex body for the Skilling of Uganda Programme will be established.

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of finalising the Technical Vocational and Education Training (TVET) policy that will guide the TVET responsiveness and relevance to the labour market needs.

Fulfilment of Loan Conditions 

The committee observed that Government has been slow in fulfilment of loan effectiveness conditioned upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt-financed projects in the education sector. 

The committee recommends that Government ensures the speedy fulfilment of effectiveness conditions of the financing agreement for this loan, in order for the committed funds to be released by the IDB on time to guarantee the timely implementation of this project. 

Great effort should be made by the Ministry of Education and Sports to reduce transaction costs, improving utilisation and absorption of project funds.

Project Readiness

The committee notes that the project did not comply with the procurement indicator, which is a key indicator of the parliamentary guidelines that demonstrates project readiness. 

The committee recommends that Government expedites the procurement-related activities of the project as stipulated in the guidelines issued by the committee to all accounting officers, specifically, the terms of reference for the design and supervision, consultancy services should be prepared and ready for the launching to ensure the consultancy firms are recruited before project’s effectiveness.

Inadequate facilities 

The committee noted that majority of existing technical institutes are overcrowded and cannot train students in an appropriate manner. Practical training is constrained by the lack of appropriate training equipment and the inadequate professional and pedagogical ski1ls of the instructors in critical skills. A major challenge across the BTVET system is the lack of practical competencies of graduates. 

The number of institutions and enrolment of students has increased in the recent years but limited attention has been given to upgrading the training facilities and modernising the equipment. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government prioritises furnishing of existing and newly constructed BTVET institutions with the required equipment, furniture and other supplies in order to improve the facilities in these institutions.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports institutes a comprehensive policy to cater for and operationalise other redundant technical institutes that are not included in the project, especially, Kaberamaido Technical Institute and Basoga Nsadhu Memorial Technical Institute.

Lack of relevance and poor quality of training 
The committee noted the little emphasis that is put on the needs of the labour market and the training is generally not aligned to the socio-economic realities, including local potential. 

The range of occupations for which BTVET programmes are offered is rather narrow. According to employer surveys, this is especially pronounced at higher qualification levels, indicating the need for considerably more practically-oriented education and training at this level.

Soft skills necessary to perform well in modern work environments are underdeveloped among the Ugandan workforce, and they are not appropriately taken into account in training programmes. These include communication, computer literacy, customer care, problem solving, work attitude and ethics.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should institutionalise a BTVET framework that will ensure alignment of course objectives with corresponding job qualifications, as well as credible assessment and satisfaction of occupational competences for learners.

The Ministry of Education and Sports obliges training providers in both public and private institutions to meet the sectoral objectives and standards of BTVET.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should design and implement collaborative mechanisms among MDAs in the provision of BTVET.

Inadequate private sector involvement 

The committee observed that there is limited multi-stakeholder engagement in skills development. 

In particular, there is no permanent and regularly-updated labour market information system, as a key to generate information and statistics on national employment and labour market characteristics, employment activities and employment levels disaggregated by sector, age group and gender. 

The committee recommends that Government explores providing matching grants to deserving private providers of BTVET in order to increase access and equity of BTVET. Government should strengthen BTVET public-private partnerships in the provision of skills training.

Recruitment and retaining of qualified and competent instructors:

The committee noted that part of the proceeds of this loan will target the training of at least 250 Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) trainers, selected from all over TVET institutions through in-service skills upgrading and pedagogical training in the targeted areas by the end of 2021.

The trainers will also benefit from in-service industrial attachment training to relate the institute-based training to the world of work in order to enhance the relevance and delivery of their services at the training institutes by the end of 2021.

The loan funds will also target training of 13 master trainers out of which, at least three are female in Masters Degrees abroad in reputable international universities or specialised training institutions by the year 2022. 

The project is, in addition, targeting training of seven master trainers out of which, at least two are female in PhD Degrees training abroad in reputable international universities or specialised training institutions by the end of 2023. 

There is a risk that Government might not have the ability to retain these trained TVET trainers. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports develops a methodology to retain and utilise the trained personnel to avoid brain drain.

Local content

The committee noted that international competitive bidding will be used to procure the provision of civil works under this project because there are many locally registered contractors established in Uganda that are contributing to the local economy.

Packaging of civil works to attract international companies had been structured in such a manner as to retain sufficiently large contract packages in order to attract international firms elsewhere.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports ensures the participation of national companies through joint ventures arrangement, with the national or international companies in the civil works implementation of this project to enable its tangible contribution to the local economy.

Performance of the skills programme in Uganda

The committee observed low disbursement rates among the skills development programme projects financed by the external debt. They include skills development project under World Bank funding, Albertine Development Project under World Bank funding, the BTVET project under the Saudi and OPEC funds. 

The low average disbursement, 30.9 per cent, of skills development programme to projects financed by external debt are attributed to poor project preparedness, delays in Government counterpart funding among others.

The committee therefore recommends that Government expedites the execution all on-going skills development projects approved by Parliament without recourse to additional financing in order to meet their respective project objectives including enhancing skills development of the country.

Public investment management reforms make it mandatory for all public projects to undergo a project assessment tool that demonstrates adequate project preparedness prior to its financing.

In conclusion, the development of the BTVET sector is the best opportunity to tap and impact skills to Ugandans towards improving the incomes and providing the country with a desired employable labour force for economic growth through enhanced labour productivity.

The committee therefore, recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the Technical and Vocational Education Training support project be approved by Parliament subject to these recommendations. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and your committee for the work done. Honourable members, the report is signed by 23 out of 38 members so it is eligible for debate. 

Before I allow members to contribute, I have three areas of concern. I am concerned that for the master trainers’ programme where you have already said that three women will be given the opportunity, you will find that they will just make those three and not five or six. Why don’t you bring them nearer to parity? You are perpetuating the impression that women will not be available for these courses. 

For the PhD programme, you say it should be two out of seven; why two women? When you say “At least”, they will just give those two. That is the first area of concern.
 
The second one is that I would like to get assurance that the institutions have facilities for both boys and girls. In my constituency, in Nawanyago, we have a technical institute, which has no facilities for girls. Despite our pleading with the President it has not been done. 

There is also one in Lwengo. I think there are three other places where the girls have no dormitories but there are those for the boys.

Therefore, the thinking is that these are boys courses. Honourable minister, I would like to get that assurance that in the design, that has been handled.

The third one is, we have been talking about going into the computer age but when you look at the list of courses, we have remained on bricks. (Applause) Roads – do you know “ekyitiiyo” (Spade)? Is that what we are going to train our people? Where is the innovation hub? Just look at this. The usual things; you are not promoting this country to move. That is what I would say for now but let me allow other members to contribute.

4.26
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, we have been approving so many loans in this place that are non-operational. I do not know where we are heading as a country.

It pains my heart that we shall be counted for passing these loans, which are not doing anything to benefit this country. At the end of it all, our children and grandchildren will be the ones to pay these loans.

Madam Speaker, we have built so many of these institutions. I happen to be a member of the Committee on Education and also the Committee on National Economy where we looked at these BVET institutions. We have structures that have not even reached the period of handover to the Government but with so many cracks. I do not know what the parent ministry of these institutions is doing to carry out the supervisory work to see that we have work where we have value for money.

Secondly, many of these institutions are undersubscribed. I think the loan we should be taking should be for equipping them. I had an opportunity to visit Kachukiro in Kigali. They have stimulators and the work they are doing is practical. However, when you go to our institutions in Uganda - we happened to visit Nakaseke. We did not even have any equipment that would benefit the learners. Besides, we do not want to recruit the qualified personnel to teach these learners.

Therefore, why are we continuing to get this money and spend where we are not benefiting? To me, it looks like it is now a fashion to get money in Uganda. Every ministry wants to come with a loan request to this Parliament. Our Parliament committee has almost become a committee of loan sharks because we approve loans that are not benefitting Ugandans. If you go to other ministries, you will notice that loans are lying redundant and there is no work done. Therefore, we do not see any impact of this money. 

I do not want to be party to this kind of approval and for that matter, I am not in support of this loan, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much. 

4.29
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming you back. I will not say that the people of Maracha have also conveyed messages because I have not been to Maracha so I will be truthful to myself. I wish you very good health. 

I listened very attentively to the vice chairperson of the committee. In principle, I agree that we need this loan to support this sector but I would like to pick up from where you made your contribution, Madam Speaker, on the question of matching skills with the labour market. The committee has rightly observed that we have not been doing regular studies in relation to this. 

Madam Speaker, I sit on the ICT Committee where we are only handling about Shs 40 billion, as the available budget. We do not have money for innovation funds. We have young people who like to practise and improve their skills in the ICT sector but there is no money. 

As you said, we are here borrowing money for the usual business. Do we think that our youth only want to do carpentry? Do we think that our youth are only interested in brick laying and concrete practice? Is that all they can do? Couldn’t we divert this money into the innovation fund so that we establish better ICT innovation centres, where we can have youth who will have better skills that will match the labour market? That is where I fundamentally disagree with this borrowing; I think it is not necessarily achieving the objective of trying to match skills with the labour market. This is my first observation. 

The second concern I have is in relation to the previous loans we borrowed, particularly for this Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) sector. This is not the first time we have borrowed money to improve vocational skills and training but this report does not tell us how we have used the previous monies. We should be doing things in an incremental manner; illustrating how the previous money has improved this particular sector and if we add more money, where is it going to take us. There is no illustration or linkage. These are different loans. We have not been shown accountability for the previous ones, particularly for this sector. 

In my opinion, the committee should first bring a comprehensive report on how the previous loans have been utilised, particularly for this sector. I am not talking about all the loans. This is a very critical observation, Madam Speaker. 

Thirdly, I entirely agree that the observation of working with the private sector should not just be a statement. It must become real and implemented because we have so many community based technical schools. For example, in my constituency, there are two technical schools that were founded by the Catholic Church but they are really struggling. There is no input from Government. If we cannot support such technical schools and we are going back to the old institutions like Moyo Technical, and doing the same things, I do not know how this is really going to help the youth address the problem of unemployment. 

Finally, is the question of joint ventures, particularly local content. Whereas it is important to push local content, it is also important to bear in mind that whatever we do must have quality and be durable. We do not want this arrangement like for the school facility grants where almost all the classrooms are collapsing before the Government of the day hands over power. We really want quality. If it means going for international standards – (Interjections) – Please, can you speak through the Rt Hon. Speaker? They are distracting me and it is very unfair. 

Madam Speaker, the point I was making is, as we observe the question of local content, we do not want these companies that do substandard work. We want high quality and durable work to be done as far as these technical institutions are concerned. I thank you for this opportunity.

4.35
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had congratulated you but I have just received a message from my voter saying, I have not congratulated you on the Floor of this House. Madam Speaker, I would like to be representative of Kinkizi West in form and quality and we congratulate you and welcome you here as we had welcomed you before. 

I do not want to seem to be a voice that would fight against Business Technical Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) because, Madam Speaker, I know your passion towards it. However, like other honourable colleagues have alluded, this is about Shs 170 billion, which is going to nine districts. When you divide this money among the nine districts, each institution takes about Shs 18 billion. 

In this financial year, we have allocated the health sector a budget of Shs 500 million to each health centre III to be upgraded by constructing a maternity ward, an outpatient department (OPD) and other issues. We have given the education sector Shs 500 million to each seed school this financial year. However, we are giving Shs 18 billion to an institution in this loan. That is very critical, Madam Speaker. 

As the honourable member from Amuria has said, we have become a rubberstamp to ratify monies here and afterwards, they find their own way somewhere. 

Madam Speaker, we are going to borrow Shs 800 million for curricular review. I think last April, the Ministry of Education and Sports launched a curriculum. Which curriculum did you launch? Which one is this of Shs 800 million that is going to be reviewed? 

We are going to borrow Shs 250 million for benchmarking and familiarisation. I do not know who is going to benchmark but this loan has Shs 250 million for familiarisation.

Madam Speaker, I would like the ministry to come up - and especially the committee - to tell us what each will take and the performance of the previous loans such that we pass the loan when we know that it is going to be actualised. We are not going to suffocate BTVET but we want accountability. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.39
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for this report. It is an eye opener but I would like to say that the Asians have developed because of practical skills. In Africa, when you tell someone to write an essay about a mango, he or she can even write 20 pages in one hour. However, in Asia, they can write only two pages because they are not interested in the essay but in turning that mango into juice and preserve it for one year. That is what we need.

Therefore, when borrowing any money, we should identify our priority development pathways. Did we do any assessment to find out which skills we need in 2019 and beyond? That is the priority development areas we need to identify. 

I agree that we should skill our people but what is the multiplier effect if you take the nine institutions? Our target is that there are many young people overall the country that need skilling. However, these nine institutions cannot absorb them. What will happen to other institutions? I have a technical school in Ora and Zombo but it is not included here. How do we skill those people as we fight the problem of unemployment? It is very important that we identify our development pathways and priority development paths we follow to take us forward. 

Secondly, if one went to Silicon Valley, they will realize that people are developing apps in our phones because we need technology. In Uganda we are still going to make bricks and send people to go for PhD to learn how to make bricks. In this country, we have PhD holders with 40 years’ experience in woodwork and technology but they cannot use bamboo from Mt Elgon to make toothpicks. We need skills that are needed from 2019 and beyond.

I would like to say that the minister should come up with very comprehensive information and give us the assessment that we really need these skills for us to support this loan. I agree that we need to skill our people. Thank you very much.

4.42
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support that the loan be approved. Looking at the objective of this loan, it is imperative for us as a country to identify this as a priority. When one looks at the employment opportunities, which will be created afterwards, they are reasons for us to support this loan. 

However, there are other factors which we need to improve on so that next time we move on systematically. One of them is the feedback as mentioned by my colleagues. There is very poor feedback on what happens to the monies that we borrow. We borrow but we do not hear what happens afterwards and that is a great weakness. We should know what happens to every loan that we borrow. For example, what were the success, challenges and whether the targets were meant? We need to advise strongly about this. 

Madam Speaker, I remember one day you instructed the Clerk to give us comprehensive information on how far we have gone with these loans. What is the total number of the loans we have approved to date and what have we paid? As we get new loans, we would like to know what has happened before and how much is left unpaid. We should not just borrow because we have problems. Looking at these objectives, I am compelled to say that we should accept it. Let us accept this loan because it is going to support our country in what we demand as our requirements.

Furthermore, I would like to advise the committees that next time they should be meticulous about analysing the targets of any loan that we may want to borrow and those will be the requirements and qualifications for a loan. Otherwise, let us support this loan and pass it. I support the loan. Thank you.

4.45
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to start with a quote from the late President Nelson Mandela. He said: “God made enough resources for everyone in the world to live on decently but the problem is those in charge of the resources.” I now stand to question the motive of this loan. 

The problem of the Ministry of Education and Sports is not lack of technical schools. What is the capacity of the existing technical schools? I have a technical school in my district that was started by Government but they have chronic problems and Government is not getting value for money. There are no qualified teachers in that school. There is equipment that I came to know about it last year; heavy equipment purchased in millions of shillings lying idle and uninstalled.
 
I carried that report to the Ministry of Education and Sports when we met as Bukedi caucus.  To date, nothing has been done.

I also wrote a letter to the concerned ministry to – (Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important motion that was moved by the minister but who has conspicuously absented himself. Okay, he has now come back. That was the procedural point I was raising. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister was just in the neighbourhood. (Laughter)

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, for the information. As I was saying, I wrote a letter to the concerned ministry to ensure that power with the right watts is installed in that place to enable the technical institute to install the machines. To date, nothing has been done. I am also aware that the little funding that goes to the institution is mismanaged. There is a problem of supervision.

Madam Speaker, I stand to concur with colleagues that we need to prioritise the expenditure in this country. What are our priorities? The other week, I was going to the east and around the junction at Nakawa, a truck had fallen and we could not go through. There was a diversion to Kyambogo – (Member timed out.)

4.48
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened, read and understood the report. Unfortunately, the report is discriminatory in terms of the distribution. It is not inclusive, because there is not even one in Teso out of the nine institutions. I am even worried; it is only Nalwire, which is on the other side and not where Kamuli is located -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought the committee ought to have first given an update of the others which are available, including the ones I have told you about in Kamuli, Lyantonde and Lwengo. You should have included them and said that they are covered and these are now new ones. Some Members do not know about the others.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I was getting to. In the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Manifesto, they said that they are going to construct about 47 technical schools in Uganda. When you read this, however, they are going to spend US$ 45 million on building the capacity of only nine institutions in nine districts yet we have over 120 districts in Uganda. They are going to spend US$ 45 million on only nine districts and the others are left “to whom it may concern”. That is where my concern lies. As a Member of Parliament, I do not support this. The NRM Manifesto says that they will construct 47 technical schools but according to this report, they are not going to construct any.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you said that we should get a report on the performance of all the loans we have procured in this country. Unfortunately, to date, we have not been given that update. That is where the big problem is.

I would like to read from point No. 6.3 in the report, which is on project outcomes. The second point under 6.3 says, “2,600 students (out of which 22 per cent are girls) accessing better quality…” – It is only 2,600 students who are going to benefit from $45 million by 2023. 

This is why we talk about prioritisation. At the beginning, we said that there are so many unfunded priorities, but at this stage I do not support this loan request because this loan will not benefit this country at all.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Government, we have listened to the sentiments on the Floor and we would like to carry out further consultation. We have listened to you, Madam Speaker. We would like to carry out further “surgery” on this motion before – (Applause) - Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The owner of the motion has said that they need to improve on their presentation. Let us just complete the debate. We shall not take a vote but let us hear your sentiments so that as they go to review, they consider them.

4.53
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The objective of the loan would have persuaded many, including myself, especially when it comes to acquisition of the relevant employable skills by our graduates. We have many universities and tertiary institutions that are churning out many graduates who are lacking in the aspect of employable skills. 

However, this particular project, even merely by the recommendations of the committee, could not comply with the procurement indicators and guidelines. Even the guidelines that were issued by the committee to the accounting officers were actually disregarded. I stand to oppose the approval of such a loan request. When it comes to national character, if you subject all these districts that are going to benefit to scrutiny, these technical institutes are merely gifts to ministers, apart from the one in Napak.

When it comes to the cost, under the point on project financing in the report, we see US$ 1.6 million by the Government. He has not specified whether this is counterpart funding. This ministry has been particularly notorious for lacking in the aspect of absorption capacity. The unspent balances in the previous financial year almost cost this country the donations that we normally get. For that reason, therefore, I stand to oppose the motion.

4.55
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometimes some of us wonder where it all starts from. Since I came to this Parliament, we have been taking on loan requests and previously, the Ninth Parliament also approved loans for vocational institutions. 

There is a vocational institution that this Parliament borrowed money for in my constituency. It is located in Nongo Parish, Muterere Subcounty. Even after taking the loan, to date the place is dilapidated, the structures are not complete, grass has grown everywhere and the whole project is dead. Today, the minister is here to ask for another loan without giving accountability. We need to sometimes be honest with ourselves. We need to reorganise ourselves so that we bring something that is neat, that we can stand and defend. 

Even as the minister has withdrawn the motion, we need him to also include some districts that are in dire need of vocational institutions. Follow up, complete the old ones, include districts that are in dire need of vocational institutions and then come back to this House with something that is very comprehensive. 

I will not stand to support such a loan request. It would be unfair to Ugandans and everyone because the whole thing is messy. It was very wise of the minister to withdraw the motion and go back to do further consultations because we are not going to support such a loan request.

4.58
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to commend the minister for thinking it wise to withdraw this motion. I was not going to support such a motion because of the different shortfalls that it has.

Madam Speaker, as the minister goes back to look at what to bring to Parliament, I would like to bring to the attention of Parliament that two years ago, a Member raised an issue of national importance regarding the newly created districts and the Ministry of Education and Sports informed Parliament that they were going to request for our support. They said that they would present to Parliament a request to have one technical school for all those districts that became operational before 2017, as per the policy of Government.

This motion is wanting. As a representative of the people of Ngora, I do not see Ngora in this motion and I do not see Serere in this motion. The whole of Teso Sub-region has only one technical school. Therefore, I will not be party to such a motion.

Secondly, whereas our loan debt is high now – all our great grandchildren will be paying – it is important that if we have to get a loan, it has to serve the interest of the common person. Here, we are looking at a loan that is going to be for benchmarking! Benchmarking has no direct impact on a local person, especially when we are talking about skilling Ugandans. 

We are also emphasising Agenda 2040 as a country and Uganda is a signatory to Agenda 2063 of the African Union that looks at improvement of skills education through innovation. I think “business as usual” will not help these least developed countries. We need to move ahead and look at other strategies on how we can win over the young people by, for example, making agriculture smart and having technical schools that can attract young people into agriculture instead of just brick-laying. Thank you.

5.01
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for according the opportunity to Members to debate this proposal because I do not know what short-cut the minister was trying to take. This is an opportunity for this House to inform the minister about where there are gaps. Honourable minister, if you find that the debate is heating up and you want to run away from it, you are going to bring us back to the same kind of debate, which is not helpful and will be a waste of our time and emotions.

Madam Speaker, this loan is supposed to be about Shs 170 billion. From what hon. Kaberuka said, the question I would like to ask is: What are we going to do with an average of Shs 17 billion in one institution? I was told that at one point all those structures at Soroti University had been constructed at Shs 13 billion but here we are talking about Shs 17 billion. 

I was at Makerere University a while ago when we were receiving a report of the World Bank on the education sector. One of the things recommended is simple construction but with maximum impact. Are we going for the four-star type of buildings that we normally talk about with this Shs 17 billion?

Hon. Amede mentioned cases of institutions with uninstalled or unusable equipment because structures were built and equipment procured but they cannot be installed and used because there is no power which is compatible with the capacity of such equipment. In principle, I support the loan request but a lot has to be improved to make sure that this loan is useful to Ugandans and the general taxpayers, who will have to pay back the money.

Madam Speaker, I keep wondering why we do not work as a House. I am also surprised that maybe the committee –

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t they invite you?

MR OPOLOT: No; the Committee on National Economy did not find the Committee on Education and Sports useful in making an input in this process of coming up with this report. I believe that we would have made a contribution and maybe we could have shaped the final outcome and recommendations of this committee.

In principle, I support the loan request but I urge the committee chairperson and the minister to make sure that the concerns expressed by the Members are adequately addressed before they come back here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.05
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Just like other Members have expressed, as the chairperson read the report, there were issues coming out and I saw no reason to support this loan request.

First, I am not against skilling Ugandans. I am very interested in seeing a Uganda that has a labour force that is commensurate with the education that people have acquired. However, like the Member said, we passed borrowed money for the reviewing of the curriculum, but what comes first? 

I thought that we should do the review of the curriculum, including the review of our institutions which we now want to borrow money for. It is after putting the curriculum in place that we should go into borrowing money, knowing what curriculum our learners are going to be subjected to.

Secondly, we are also borrowing for benchmarking and familiarisation. Really, do we borrow money to go and learn how to do our skilling better? This should have been one of the benchmarking activities that we should have had first. We would then say that out of the benchmarking and familiarisation tours that we have had, we think we can take this approach to let Uganda have a skilled labour force.

Madam Speaker, it should also be important to note that our loan performance is worrying. We acquire loans before we are even sure about the counterpart funding. As a result, we find money lying idle while Ugandans are paying the interest rates on the loans. 

In the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Budget Committee was informed that there are projects where we are spending close to Shs 280 million daily. We were informed that we put contractors on site and we do not pay them the money because we have not committed ourselves on the counterpart funding. Since the contractors’ materials are on site, we are made to pay for the equipment. Close to Shs 280 million is being spent on fulfilling our obligation as a country, yet if we did first things first, we would be in a position to even service these loans and acquire them at a better time. 

Let us not have the appetite to borrow – (Member timed out.) 

5.08
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not support the loan request but I want to let you know why I do not support it.

I am a Rotarian and normally when we begin our fellowships, we start with the four-way test of the things we say or do: Is it the truth? Is it fair to all concerned? Will it build good and better friendship? Will it be beneficial to all concerned? People who are always requesting for loans should think about those things. 

I am very passionate about Skilling Uganda and as a teacher, I have been following it. Skilling Uganda started in 2012 with very good objectives. The people who wrote those project documents were very smart; they wanted to create employment for the young generation. However, up today, we are sending our energetic youth out of the country to work for others and we are borrowing money to construct buildings, which remain empty and irrelevant to our country. On top of that, we are paying back loans, which will also be paid for by our great grandchildren.

If these people could come here with a report that says that since we started Skilling Uganda, we have these number of people in circulation, these ones are working here – Today we are saying, “Buy Ugandan, Build Uganda” but if you go to the factories within the country, you will not find Ugandans and yet we have these institutions.

Parents have sold their land and cows fending for students in university but when they finish, we meet them on the streets. There is no Member of Parliament who does not receive calls from people every day asking for jobs yet our key word is “skilling Uganda”. What are we skilling? Where are we now since 2012? Where are the people from those institutions?

THE SPEAKER: I want to confirm what hon. Bamukwatsa has said. I went to Lyantonde and there is a brand new technical institute but it has less than 100 students.

5.11
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to throw my weight behind the mood in the House and congratulate you for coming back to your Chair. As a Christian, I thank God in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports but I am very disappointed that the chairperson of the committee, hon. Opolot, is not aware of the motion concerning education. There is no input from the Committee on Education and Sports and this is a very big disappointment.

We have been visiting these technical institutions, including your technical institution, and we found machines just lying idle. Therefore, for the minister and his committee to write a report requesting for approval of a loan that involves technical institutions without the input of the relevant committee is a very big blunder.

Secondly, a motion to do with Skilling Uganda should not have any opposition in this House. I am actually writing a book in which I am proposing that we should move from looking for jobs to looking for work. You can look for work when you have the skills. This is a good motion and getting a loan is good, but because of the gaps as you have heard from Members, I think the minister needs to go back and work on those gaps and coordinate with the relevant committees so that you can come up with a very comprehensive and meaningful report.

Finally, in the NRM Manifesto, it is stated clearly that there will be a technical institution in every constituency. I do not know whether this process has started. Actually, I do not know what the criterion was in selecting these districts. Hon. Abala talked about Teso region and I am hearing Kabale. I think the minister should go back and do some good homework and come back here and convince Members.

We support the –(Member timed out.)

5.14
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to start by saying that I support the loan but it is very conservative in nature. This is an indicator that our minister is not aware of the population of the youth in this country. He is also not aware of those who drop out after senior 4 and senior 6 and cannot proceed anywhere. The only solution is through Skilling Uganda. However, when you talk of nine districts out of 120, the sample is not representative of Uganda. Actually, there is no benchmark - As of now, where are we, so that we can demand for a loan to either improve the existing institutions or create more?

When you look at Karamoja region, in terms of education indicators we are the lowest yet you are only talking of Napak District out of the eight districts. All these districts send children to school and the region is poor in nature. They cannot afford university education - (Interruption)- Yes, we have our minerals but they are yet to be –

Madam Speaker, I concur with other speakers and request that the ministry goes and does a thorough analysis. This should have been the biggest loan - not only $45 million. It should be more because there are many Ugandans who need life skills in order to earn income. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the minister has indicated, the resolution on this will be deferred until comprehensive consultations are made. However, I would like to note a few issues for the committee. 

The methodology of the committee shows that they only held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of State for Higher Education and officials from the ministry. Where are the people? Did you discuss with the managers of other institutions to get a feel of what is happening?  Please, do not stop in Kampala; you should get out and consult other stakeholders. That is what the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports was complaining about. Please, take up that matter up.

Secondly, I would like to know whether the Committee on National Economy goes out to check on the impact of the loans. You will tell us. 

Thirdly, I have now confirmed that the Minister of Education and Sports discriminates against girls. If you look at the plans on page 8, there are 2,600 students out of which 22 per cent are girls. He has already determined how many should go there. That is why there are no dormitories. The next one says, out of 600 annually enrolled, 30 per cent are girls. Why? How do you determine that they should be 30 per cent? This is discrimination. It shows you the thinking in the ministry.

Honourable members, I think we have done a lot of work for today and we need to prepare for tomorrow. Therefore, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. when we will receive the body of the former Prime Minister. There will be a special sitting in the afternoon. Thank you very much and have a good evening.

(The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 31 May 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)





