Tuesday, 3 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I hope you had a peaceful and enjoyable weekend. I have noticed a problem relating to our children, especially those who are candidates, be it at O’ Level, A’ Level and even at PLE. 

The problem that I have detected - and I do not know which relevant committee will be handling it - is about administrators of certain schools defrauding our children by taking their money under the pretence that they have registered them for exams with index numbers, when this has not been done. The victims get to know of this fraud when exams are supposed to be done. I do not know what we can do? This is happening to candidates of A’ Level, down to PLE candidates. Should we leave that situation to continue like that? 

Today in the newspapers there is a story that a headmaster who was supposed to have brought candidates to sit exams only took them to see skyscrapers in Kampala. What do we do? I would like to ask the relevant committee or you as individuals, to take it up so that this matter stops. 

We need to find a way of how to work with UNEB so that candidates get to know their index numbers and centres of exams, a month or two in advance. This will help in curing any problems that may arise as a result of, for instance, registration. Otherwise, if a candidate gets to know of this problem on the examination day, what happens? That is the concern I thought I should air out to you, honourable members.

2.49
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for being concerned about this issue, which has been around the country for quite some time. But I would like to say that it is not only about headmasters, some of us Members in this House are proprietors of secondary schools. 

In the newspaper stories, some of the names have been mentioned for failing senior four candidates to sit exams for non-payment of examination fees. The example I can give is the situation that happened in one of districts of Busoga region where parents got rowdy.

Having said that, I would like to add that we need to emphasise the urgency and the need for the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry of Education and Sports to be vigilant. The examination timetable is set ahead of time. School authorities know when exams are set. Therefore, it should be incumbent upon the Ministry of Education and Sports, especially the Inspectorate Department, to ensure such kind of things are averted. 

It is not the first time students have been told that their respective school administration did not forward their examination fees, and that they would not sit exams. This has happened many times, but the problem is, parents are burdened with paying schools for repetition of a class that is not in their making. 

I think in such instances, Ministry of Education and Sports should be seen to be concerned so that such pupils do not suffer double injury; first, they will have missed exams; and secondly, they will be compelled to pay schools fees for a fault that is not their own. 

So, can Ministry of Education and Sports, as a matter of policy, get vigilant to ensure students and pupils that may have been affected by negligence on the part of the school administration do not suffer double injury? They should be allowed to repeat the following year without paying any school fees. We need to hear from Government on that issue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Nsubuga is a appropriator of a school. Do you want to say something?

2.52
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have raised a pertinent issue that is rampant in Uganda. I would like to add my voice to that of Hon. Kassiano Wadri’s in regard to what he has just said. It is good the said Member of Parliament who owns that school comes from the Eastern region.

I would like to say the Education District Inspectorate Service needs to be revamped. We all know that last financial year we increased the budget for Ministry of Education and Sports. Immediately after the infernos, there were many inspections in schools, but these inspections died out later, yet there are many schools that were advised to close, but which still operate. 

For example, if a headmaster does not register students, who is supposed to be the culprit? Can’t Ministry of Education, on top of closing the school, dismiss the headmaster and cancel his/her license? Why not de-register them and publish their names warning the public that they are not supposed to head any school(s)? 

As a country, we need to protect the lives of our students and their future. Most of the parents to these children are poor, but after they have managed to mobilise fees up to P.7, their children do not sit exams, and the same thing applies to students in senior four. 

I would advise that Ministry of Education and Sports directs that - because these things happen in schools that do not have examination centres for either PLE, O’ Level or A’ Level - all schools without centres are not supposed to have candidate classes. 

I am saying this because these headmasters purport that students can be registered to sit exams in school x in the event where that headmaster’s school does not have a centre number, but by the time students verify that, it is already time for exams. 

It would be good if this information is published in newspapers, although as you know, very few people access them. Even if you said the information be broadcast, still, on which radio station; we have over 100 radio stations. That is why I would love to have a directive that no school should run a candidate class when that school does not hold a centre number for PLE, O’ Level and A’ Level exams.  District Inspectorate of Schools departments need to be a little bit more serious. Why should we work using fire fighting methods? 

I would like to urge government to use the money that was allocated to Ministry of Education and Sports to revamp the district inspectorate departments so that they can do their work to safeguard the future of our children. I thank you.

2.56
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is so disheartening to learn that to date, such a thing is happening to our children.

I just want to tell this Parliament my experience. In 1997, I was supposed to join Makerere University. By then, the headmaster, who is now a Member of Parliament, did not submit our Joint Admission Board Forms -(Laughter)– and -(Interruption)– Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected. It was so disheartening after working so hard in the school –(Interjection)

MR OCULA: I thank you for giving me way. Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Arua has made a statement, which she has left hanging –(Laughter)– because she says that the person who did not submit their forms is now an honourable Member of Parliament; that is not enough. I think she should go on to mention that it is so and so because this House has so many former headmasters –(Laughter)– we may think it was Hon. Aggrey Awori –(Laughter)– or hon. Otekat. So, can she really help by clarifying who the Member is?

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I left following in that school, and so I am not about to mention any name in this House. However, I would like to repeat that it was a very saddening moment. I had actually been the head girl, and having sacrificed my entire zeal to bring student order I was paid through such a nasty experience. When the admission lists were released I got to realise I had not been admitted to any public university, despite the fact that I had passed with flying colours. 

So I had to write an intention to sue the school. At that time, I had approached Ayume and Jogo Advocates. I knew I would win the case – even efforts and attempts to speak to the head teacher were fruitless until I promised the administration that given the zeal that I had, I would do everything and anything humanly possible to roast the school. But before I got into that, I was told that I had been admitted to Makerere University. 

What I would like to say is that the admission did not come just like that. We had used another strategy. We, the students, with our disappointed parents belatedly wrote to Makerere University to request that we be reconsidered with belated admission to us. That is how we got admissions to Makerere University.

The issue is, if it happened to me that time, and I am now a Member of Parliament, yet then, the number of private schools was not as high as it is today, it means that apart from even just failing to sit exams, there are worse things happening as far as joint admissions are concerned.

Mr Speaker, I find this very serious. I would like to say that it takes seriousness on the part of the Ministry of Education and Sports. As Hon. Kassiano Wadri and other colleagues have said, if you look at the Inspectorate budget of that ministry, you would wonder whether, for once, we can be a serious country. 

Today, if over 100 pupils have not sat their PLE exams, then you should be able to project how many are likely to miss admissions to higher institutions of learning in the next two levels of the school system. 

I am saying this because, what we have as a 7-4-2 system has got stages of movement. So, if at this level we are talking about more than 100, what is happening at senior four and A’ Level? With our 7-4-2 system, the ministry needs to get serious to establish what is happening. Otherwise, this is very unfortunate and if the minister is here - these are licensed schools; we would like to know how they get licensed, and what they have for these students. 

Is there a possibility that if we take a step to punish the head teachers, we can have special exams for these children? I am saying this because, for the girl child, one year lost in preparation for another year could mean a pregnancy; it could mean a total dropout and hence disturbed future. I thank you.

3.02
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for raising this important matter that regards the very future of our children. My thinking is that the problem is bigger than it looks. These students pay exam fees on top of paying for transport to take them to the purported exam centre. They also pay for subsistence while they are at that centre. So, when they miss the exam due to non-remittance of exam fees, they repeat the following year. That is a loss to the parent.

I would like to say, the problem is the unregulated emergence of private schools. In my constituency, for instance, there are 617 schools, but of those, only 17 are government schools; the remaining 600 are private schools. This is happening because of the privatisation that has encouraged private individuals to step in and provide services to the people – some schools are in rented garages, others are in people’s boys’ quarters and others in people’s kitchens. 

It is appalling, Mr Speaker. What is happening is that a school dropout, who did not get a job, rents a garage somewhere and it becomes a school. When all this happens, with this person who has no credibility - nobody knows where he comes from - he/she runs away and you do not have anywhere to find him.

My point is that this unregulated emergence of private schools is serious and raises the question of regulation of schools. Mr Speaker, we need to pay a lot of attention to it. We need to ask, if 17 schools out of 617 are the government schools, it means to the people of Lubaga that there is no USE; it is only two percent that is available to the people. The rest are left at the mercy of unscrupulous business people. So –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGWA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I just want to inform the House through the honourable member that it is not only private schools. In Masaka, about two years ago, there was a government school where the headmaster cheated exams; he encouraged students to cheat, and as a result, the examinations were cancelled. 

So when we are addressing these issues, it should not be private vs. government. The problems are vast and many institutions are affected. I would like to appeal to the House to come up with a solution in as far as the students affected this year are concerned.

MS KAMYA: Thank you honourable colleague for that very useful information. As I wind up my submission, I think we must all agree that the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry of Education must be strengthened; otherwise, we are leaving our children and parents at the risk of –(Member timed out­_)

3.07
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, you have raised this matter at the time when children are sitting their exams. Unfortunately, we have no representation from the Ministry of Education. 

We have a very elaborate education management system. We have the Education Standard Agency; we have the Teacher Development and Management System, where in every sub-county, we have a coordinating centre with a coordinating centre tutor who reports to the District Education Officer and coordinates with the district inspector of schools. 

It is very surprising that with all these organs in place, we can still have children missing examinations. I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that this matter should be considered by the relevant committee of this Parliament. 

I would like to recommend that UNEB should endeavours to publish the list of all candidates who are going to sit, in good time, so that parents –(Interjection)- I am not aware if they did it. 

Secondly, we would like to recommend that the Ministry of Education emphasises the coordination between the coordinating centre tutors and the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry of Education. Sometimes the tutors in the coordinating centres are ignored and the inspectors deal directly with schools, and they miss all the useful information in the coordinating centres.

Finally, I would like to strongly recommend that the Ministry of Education endeavours to find out what goes on in the Inspectorate department in the districts. Recently, we had a budget of about Shs 4 million per Inspector to run the activities of education in the district throughout the year. I wonder how an Inspector can run Inspectorate activities in the district for a year with Shs 4 million. Unless we increase the budgeting in this department, I think we are going to have more problems. I thank you.

3.10
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you. The matter we are discussing is a very important matter. Having heard what my colleagues have said, I would like to add only a few things. The Ministry of Education should inform the district inspectors to put emphasis on inspecting even private schools. 

I will give you an example of my own district, Soroti. Most of the time inspectors inspect only Government schools and they seem to forget inspecting private schools, and yet most of these matters arise from private schools. So, the Ministry of Education should also write to the inspectors at that level to ensure that private schools are equally inspected. (Interruption) 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you colleague for accepting this information. The information I want to give is in the contrary. Of recent, Government is putting a lot of emphasis on inspecting private schools and when they produce the list of schools to be closed, they leave out Government schools that do not even have facilities at all to continue operating. So, we want to urge Government to be fair because some of these Government schools do not have facilities to run as schools -(Interjection)- we do not want to mention names here. 

MR OTEKAT: Thank you colleague for that information, but that varies from area to area. In some areas, inspectors put more emphasis on government schools and in some areas they put more emphasis on private schools. 

To add on to what my colleague, hon. Johnson Malinga said, we gave a substantial amount of the budget towards inspection of schools; we are now in November, but when you go to see what is happening on the ground, you do not seem to see anything. So, again, the Ministry of Education needs to put emphasis on inspection of schools at primary, secondary and even beyond that level, because we have put in a lot of money towards inspection, but there is nothing on the ground. 

Finally, when you go to many districts, the Inspectorate department does not have transport. Most of them have motorcycles, but they do not have a vehicle which they can use. The vehicles that they could have used are being controlled by the DEO; sometimes just one vehicle is available. So, the Ministry of Education should also ensure that the Inspectorate department has enough vehicles to enable them inspect all schools in the district. Thank you.

3.13
MR EDWARD KASOLE (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for raising this very important matter. Education has been commercialised. Non-professionals have started schools; they do not, therefore, know what to do. They are only interested in getting money from students. Many of them do not even know their students. Some of them take months or years without visiting the schools. All that they are interested in is money on their accounts in the banks. 

You cannot run a school when you are not there; you cannot run a school properly when you do not have professionals to do that work. Those who have professionals to do that work, do not pay them adequately. Not until the so-called Education Standards Agency plays its role to scrutinise founders of schools - people who want to start schools; the qualifications they have; facilities they have; and the interests they have.  

Secondly, lack of professionalism. Many teachers today or in many schools do not know what to do with children. Children are looked at like goods in a shop. You can go to a school where your child has been studying for years and the head teacher does not know the student. There is no way you can love the student when you do not know him or her. 

Our teacher training colleges are half baked. The tutors or lecturers are poorly paid; teachers come out when they are not fully trained; therefore, what do you expect? 

In my committee, the Socials Services committee, we have been telling the government to rehabilitate teacher training colleges and institutions. When you look at the teacher training colleges, you cannot believe what you see. 

Inspectors are not doing their work, mainly because they themselves were not good teachers and now they are supposed to advise teachers. You find an Inspector who was the worst teacher in a certain school now being the Inspector of schools, and this is a person who is supposed to advise teachers. What would you expect out of this? 

They are also poorly facilitated. An Inspector goes to the headmaster to get money for fuel so that he can go to inspect the school. Now, what sort of report would you expect? 

Only recently, I talked to my inspectors in Mubende in Buwekula and they said that all motorcycles broke down in the second term, and the CAO allowed them to use their own money to repair them and buy fuel. Now they have run out of money and cannot do their work during this most critical time. I talked with the Minister of Education over this matter last week. How can we afford to have inspectors seated in their offices when exams are going on? This is a very critical time.

Lastly, I think the government is overwhelmed. They only wanted four children but we gave them all the children we had in Uganda and now they can no longer manage. (Applause and Laughter) Government is overwhelmed. (Mr Gagawala rose_) Hon. Gagawala, I am not talking about industries. I am talking about schools and education. (Laughter) We need to go back to the drawing board and see how to manage things. UPE and USE were good ventures but we need to go back to the drawing board. It may not be the government’s mistake because the government only wanted four children, but we gave them all the children that we had, and government could not say no. Government wanted to encourage parents to take children to school, but it is now overwhelmed. We need to go back to the drawing board, look at the issues, and see how we can move forward. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems the issue is much more serious; it is a policy matter which we cannot finish today. We expect a probe and a fully fledged debate. I think we should stop here and ask the minister and the Government Chief Whip to inform us on the actions. We shall continue with the debate when the matter is probed.   

3.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for raising this very important matter, and I would like to thank Members for the observations and concerns raised. 

I want to note that the immediate problem that we have to deal with, arising out of the case you have put before the House, is one of fraud. There is fraud and it has to be dealt with. As such, I am going to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to take up this case as an immediate measure. 

The other issues are to do with the Ministry of Education, and it revolves around inspection, regulation and institutional capacity arrangements. These will require a bit of time. But I will communicate to the Minister of Education so that we can be in a position to find a comprehensive solution to this problem, so that the future of our children is not impaired or threatened; and so that we do not loose brains, like hon. Bako Christine pointed out, that as a country we nearly lost her. 

I do not know what would have happened to the villages in Arua, but the fact of the matter is that we need to find a comprehensive solution to this problem, and I will communicate accordingly. 

3.22
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you. I listened to the Government Chief Whip and I am concerned that he has reduced it to a matter of only fraud. This is more immediate than fraud. We thought that Government should explore ways of redeeming these children’s future. 

Is there a possibility that they can have a special examination arranged for them? Because they are going to lose one year; it is ten times bigger than a case of fraud. If someone takes your Shs 100,000, you might as well get Shs 110,000 next week and the damage is not as much. But the damage in this case is so much and we are inviting Government to find out ways that these students can be given an opportunity so that they do not lose a whole year. That is our invitation to government, and we want government to consider it as very important. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think in this case, the victims must be those of PLE because A’ Level have not started exams. At least something can be done for the candidates of A’ Level, so that they do not fall victims like their counterparts in O’ Level and PLE. 

3.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Secretary-General of FDC for that constructive observation. When communicating to the Ministry of Education, I will make sure that I bring out the fact that we need an immediate solution for this programme so that those who are likely to be affected or who are affected can find redress. Thank you.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

3.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” be read for the first time. 

Mr Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications is attached. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for scrutiny and report to Parliament. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2001/2002

3.25
THE CHAIRMAN, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Johnson Malinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. The report of the Local Government Accounts Committee is presented to this august House in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution, Rules 133 and 155 of our Rules of Procedure, and the report covers financial years 2001/02 and votes 501–506, which constitute the district local governments of Uganda. 

The report is structured in two parts: 
1.	The general observations and conclusions on prominent policy matters related to financial management in the district local governments; and

2.	An analysis of vote by vote or district by district. 

For the purpose of this report, I am only going to present the executive summary. The copies of this report were given to Members; they were put in each of our pigeon holes.  

The committee’s report is guided by Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure; the Local Government Act, 1997 as amended; the Local Government Financial Regulations; the Audit Manual and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Act, 2003; and all other related regulations which impact on public finance management and discipline. 

Methodology

The committee received and examined the Auditor-General’s report on Local Governments submitted under Article 163(4) of the Constitution, together with the report of the district public accounts committees as laid before Parliament under Section 897 of the Local Government Act, 1997. In carrying out its work, technical officers from the Auditor-General’s Office, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and CID PAC squad assisted the committee. 

The committee also summoned accounting officers and their technical teams and held series of meetings to address the queries raised by the Auditor-General and the district public accounts committees. 

The committee appreciates the efforts of the Office of the Auditor-General that was represented at all times of the meetings, and assisted in interpreting and explaining the queries raised where necessary; and also in verification of documents; and the CID, who diligently attended the meetings and offered the necessary support. The committee also commends some accounting officers who were very organised and responded well in time. 

I would like to thank the members of the committee who have been sitting from Monday to Friday, including in the recess, for the past two and half years, in order to clear the backlog. Most especially, I would like to thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, who was the then chairman of this committee.   

General Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that nearly all accounting officers who appeared before it failed to respond to the queries adequately, claiming that they were new in stations. This could be true since the Ministry of Local Government recently reshuffled the accounting officers. However, the committee noted that this cannot be used as an excuse for accounting officers to fail to respond to queries since they are supposed to inherit the liabilities and queries, of the office according to the law. 

It was also reported that some accounting officers have refused to cooperate with the in-coming ones, hence the committee’s decision to hold the accounting officers who flouted the financial regulations to make good, according to the laws, where necessary. 

At the onset, the committee recognises that the number of queries have been declining from 2000/05. The cause of this is yet to be established, but the general trend is that districts have progressively employed more competent people, especially in the financial section.

The committee noted that some districts did not have competent staff, especially in the finance department. This, coupled with poor documentation, has led to loss of documents and poor financial management. There was also poor stores management at the districts as a result of poor procurement procedures. 

There were also cases of negligence of duty by accounting officers, despite the technical qualifications most of them exhibited. There was equally weak supervision by the district executive committees, and laxity by management, to address issues raised in the management letters and audit reports. 

The following were some of the audit queries that constituted poor financial management:

1.	Embezzlement of public funds

The committee observed that there are some cases of outright theft of funds by officers. The committee noted that much as such cases are reported to Police, prosecution and witnesses are not always there to defend the case. The end product is that the culprits are released and Government funds are lost. The cases in point are Tororo, Pallisa and Bundibugyo districts among others. The committee recommends that in such instances, the state attorneys in the districts should be brought aboard to handle the matter, and the district officials should always be available to witness the case. The accounting officers who fail to take up the case should take responsibility. 

2.	 Administrative and personal advances 

This is the most abused financial regulation as evidenced by the growing queries on this particular item. Financial regulations require imprest and/or advances to be returned within three months. The committee observed that the advances and the imprest funds remain unaccounted for by the end of the accounting period. These advances are sometimes written off as bad debts without following the requisite procedures. Or, some staff passed away without accounting for the advances in the stipulated time. This situation is further compounded by the lack of necessary documents and advance ledgers not properly maintained, which makes follow-up impossible. The committee observed that arising from the queries, a total sum of Shs 4,596,641,911 was queried and recommended recovery of 3,136,768,305. A total of Shs 1,115,242,002 was recovered and the balance of Shs 344,631,604 was properly written off. 

3. 	Incompletely vouched or un-vouched expenditures

The committee observed that the above item was either deliberately done to defraud public funds or due to incompetence in some districts which had a skeleton staff. During the submission, it was noted and reported that some of the vouchers were either incomplete or misplaced, and others were deliberately destroyed or unavailable. The committee recommends that such irregularity and negligence should be addressed by the district through disciplinary actions and re-tooling the staff to adhere and follow the financial transactions to their logical conclusions. Persistence of the above queries should be perceived as failure of the accounting officer and chief financial officer to train and discipline the staff and, therefore, should be held liable.  A total sum of Shs 1,112,882,324 was queried by the Office of the Auditor-General as either un-vouched or incompletely vouched; of which Shs 312,281,337 was recovered. The committee recommends that Parliament clears the Shs 370,597,604 having been satisfied with the documents submitted and verified; while Shs 430,003,383 be recovered. 

4. 	Non-remission of statutory deductions

A total sum of approximately Shs 666 million was not remitted to the respective authorities; URA and NSSF. The committee, however, noted that remittances and deductions to NSSF were stopped in 1996. A number of accounting officers presented authentic URA receipts to the effect of clearing and also claimed that the evidence was availed at the time of audit. The committee advised URA to enter into a star-guard payment system with other districts, based on the concerns Parliament raised concerning URA freezing of district accounts. The major excuse given by most accounting officers was that the district revenue bases are low and, therefore, some obligations cannot be met at one go. The committee recommends that since these are deductions not meant for the districts, they should be remitted as soon as they are collected. The committee also recommends that the contractors who do not meet their obligations in remitting tax obligations like VAT, should be black-listed and made to pay the arrears. 

5. 	Un-authorised transfer of funds

It was noted that the practice of illegal transfer of funds from the collection accounts to the operational account, was common in most districts, and the most affected is usually the conditional fund, especially UPE. In most cases, the transfers finance urgent administrative undertakings, including allowances to councillors. The committee noted that this practice affects programmes in the districts and the transfers are done without any authority. To make it worse, there are no activity reports for the expenditures to justify the urgency. The committee recommends that this practice should be stopped and disciplinary action instituted to the perpetrators of the practice. 

6.	 Irregular procurement

Although the PPDA came into force in 2003, the district tender boards failed to adhere to the guidelines and to manage the process leading to the enactment of the PPDA Act in 2003. It was, however, noted that since PPDA came into force, cases of this nature have reduced, although the ones which have come up are of big magnitude. There were numerous cases of influence peddling, collusion, and conflict of interest in the management of procurement. The bidding process was flouted in many areas, especially of maintenance and construction sectors. It was also noted that there are many cases of goods not taken to charge. This means that the purchases were made, but not delivered, since there were no goods-received, notes or store releases, and in other cases no stores at all. The excuse of lack of personnel to manage the stores was a lame one because at least, the usage should have been documented. The committee strongly recommends improvement in stores recording, and adherence to PPDA and regulations thereof.
 
7. 	Capacity and competence of some local government staff

The committee noted with concern that some districts do not have competent and adequate staff, justifying mismanagement. Despite government’s effort to train staff in the local government, these officials do not honour the bond agreement. The committee recommends that members of staff who do not honour the bond should refund the money. There was reported segregation in recruitment where some district councils want the native persons to be recruited yet some do not have such personnel. Districts like Kotido and Nakapiripirit have nearly all staff in acting capacity yet they are qualified, but not confirmed in the posts. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service should urgently work together to address and fill local government structures to facilitate proper service delivery.

8.	Un-authorised expenditure

The total amount spent un-authorised is Shs 10,122,091,144 for all the districts during the period under review. Members noted that this may be a deliberate move by accounting officers to carry out unplanned activities, which most likely benefit them. In most cases, the funds spent without authority are in billions, and there are usually no activity reports and accountability is not available, which raises concern. This is compounded by the fact that the council sometimes approves the supplementary budget without due consideration of what was done. The committee recommends that authority should always be sought before public funds are committed for transfer and accountability. Any accounting officer who violates the provisions should be held personally responsible.

9.	 Poor revenue performance

The committee noted that most districts did not realise the budget and this was attributed to unrealistic budgeting, epidemics like foot and mouth disease, insurgency in some parts of the country, late and inadequate releases from the centre and donors. It is also due to poor performance by illegally contracted revenue collectors. The committee recommends that professionalism in budgeting should be upheld and all departments involved. It is further recommended that the allowances for councillors be a function of what has been realised in implementing the budget and not on budgeted figures. The council should authorise the activity reports before approving excess expenditure and revising budgets, because this is a source of abuse of public resources.

10.	 District Public Accounts Committee sittings

The committee noted that in some of the districts, the DPAC irregularly sits. This is irregular because it renders the whole accountability at the local level porous. This happens and yet there is always a budget for their sittings. The committee recommends that DPACs which draw allowances and do not conduct business should refund the money, and the accounting officer should report the matter to the council. 

11.	 Board of Surveys reports

Whereas part 15 of the Local Government Finance Accounting Regulations requires the appointment of the Board of Surveys at the end of every financial year, this requirement is not adhered to in most districts. The committee recommends that districts which do not put in place the Board of Surveys, should be penalised for incompetence, and the accounting officer specifically, personally held responsible. 

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the above general comments are substantiated by vote analysis, which follows in the main body of this report. It should, however, be noted that most of the general concerns run through all the financial years and still persist. I beg to report and request this august House to adopt the report and the recommendations therein.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman, for the report. Hon. Members, you are now free to debate the report. 

3.44
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you. I would also wish to thank members of the committee for this wonderful work and for putting in extra effort to make sure that these reports –(Interjections)- are at least presented.

THE SPEAKER: You mean he is thanking himself? 

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. I have noted that.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: My main concern about this report is the enforcement and implementation. There is a very big problem, and if you looked at this report - the issues that cut across - you find that there is impunity to the extent that as this report is being presented here, some of the culprits are now Members of Parliament. There are problems encountered and even in the process of making the report and carrying out the investigations, the subject touches individuals who are already here, and this has created a very big problem. Some of the people - who are not here as Members of Parliament - were even promoted elsewhere. 

It is very unfortunate that we are coming up with a report of the Financial Year 2001/02 and we are considering it in the year 2009; almost a decade after. It is very unfortunate. So, I wish to get a commitment from government that these recommendations are going to be taken seriously. 

In their conclusion, the chairman has brought it out that the concerns raised by the committee cut across through the years – the subsequent financial years. So, where is the commitment on the part of government to ensure that the culprits mentioned in this report are brought to book? You will hardly hear of any prosecutions or recoveries of the monies which are misappropriated by the accounting officers. The accounting officers are now larger than life people at that level and they are untouchable. 

As I wind up, I seriously raise this as a matter of concern; that we need commitment from Government; that they are going to implement this and deal with the culprits in accordance with the law. I thank you.

3.48
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you. I want to thank the Members of the Local Government Accounts Committee for this report. My observation is similar to hon. Lukwago’s. Scanning through this report, I see that some of the people from whom this money is supposed to be recovered may even have died or left service. I really feel bad because I think this committee of Parliament has done such a wonderful job and yet it may come to nothing. How can government be able to follow, ten years down the road, people who are no longer holding those offices and who may have disappeared? 

I want to know, when this Parliament adopts a report like this, who makes it their business to make sure that the recommendations of Parliament are followed up? How do we get to know that these recommendations we have adopted are actually carried out? Shall we be able to get a feedback from government? Will they be able to come back to this House and tell us that, “On this recommendation, this accounting officer of this district who had misappropriated so much money was dealt with like this and that”? At what point does Parliament get to know what steps government took and the results of the steps they took? 

Some of the things we have been debating like lack of inspections in the districts and children missing examinations are a result of some of the activities reported here. As I was looking through, I saw the observation that some funds are transferred from one account. These UPE funds are conditional but in this report, we find that local governments actually divert UPE funds. As a result, you find that the schools do not get the funds that they are supposed to get and therefore do not do the job they are supposed to do. 

You find that districts do not show a lot of concern for education and, therefore, people like inspectors who are supposed to get funds for inspecting schools do not inspect schools. You also find that in the districts, there are schools which should not even exist because they do not meet the minimum standards required for a school before they can be a school or an examination centre. This all comes from lack of accountability and impunity. People out there seem to think government funds are for enriching themselves, so when the funds go they just sit in a cocoon and devise ways of stealing the money and the whole country suffers the consequences. 

I want assurance that when we adopt a report like this, action is taken and not only taken but that Parliament gets a feedback on what action government has taken. Only in that way shall we be able to really ensure that the funds are used for the work they are supposed to be used for. Otherwise, I have great fear that if we are going to look at a report ten years down the road, it may not make a lot of sense because so many things may have changed by that time. I thank you.

3.52
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you for the opportunity, and I want to thank the members of this committee for trying to do their work. Before I can discuss this report, I am very disturbed because I had been seeing these things happen in the countryside and eight years down the road as an institution, we are coming to debate and give a report. I have seen in the report the name of the late Dan Odwedo who was the CAO of Lira District. He died six to seven years ago and this report is recommending that the monies that disappeared during his tenure in office should be recovered. Fundamentally, what method are we going to use to recover these funds? 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The issue you are raising is an issue of recovery against the estate of a deceased person. There are laws in this country to that effect. No matter whether you died a century ago, as long as you still have an estate that can be traced, we can always proceed against the same, against your grand children. The law is very clear and I am not about to lecture you –(Laughter)- Hon. Adolf Mwesige, you are aware of this. (Laughter)  I thank you.

MR YIGA: I would like to inform my colleague that he should not worry because once Parliament has adopted this report, then it should be the responsibility of the Minister of Finance to take it up and come and inform Parliament that she has failed to recover those monies wherever Parliament recommends recovery. So do not worry and give the minister time; let her do her work because she will come back and inform Parliament on the treasury memorandum and what they have done to implement what Parliament has recommended. Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: The honourable member of the opposite bench is right, but you should remember that government is a conglomeration of various institutions. These reports you are looking at are the result of the work of the Auditor-General and as you know, Cabinet does not control the Auditor-General’s speed of work. 

We are looking at audit reports of 2001/02. If there were audits of yesterday, then you would hold my colleague, hon. Mwesige, responsible. However, the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Finance do not control the speed at which the Auditor-General produces his reports. We discuss these reports as and when they are availed by the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General also works in consonance with the manpower at his disposal, which is in turn determined by the resource envelope. Therefore, it is a vicious circle and you should stop lamenting.  

MR OTTO ISHAA: Mr Speaker, when I am in this House, I do not rise up to lament but I rise up to raise fundamental issues, otherwise I sit and listen just like I was listening to this information which was being provided. If a government minister who was even once the Minister of Local Government can rise up and give me information on the failure by the Auditor-General because of the failure of the resource envelope, then there is a serious fundamental question that should be answered by government. It is our duty as government and even the duty of this Parliament to provide the necessary resources to make the Auditor-General do his work. How can a minister stand up to say that the Auditor-General took eight years to bring the report to Parliament because he had no facilitation and he considers himself not to be lamenting? 

Mr Speaker, we have a big challenge in this country and most especially in this Parliament when we bring up issues that can affect people of this country and we take them for a joke. We want to provide information that we know and yet we are the ones who have actively failed the system, which some of us are not comfortable with because we are not used to this kind of mess. 

I am asking myself what the significance of this report is. Do we have the capacity to recover these monies that have been lost? The learned lawyer informed me that there are laws that we can follow to recover money even from the deceased. I want to know whether it would be easier to get people who would stand as witnesses ever since this person died -(Interruption) 

MS LAGADA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member and the House that some of these things we are talking about in this report are of criminal nature and I believe in cases of criminal nature, people are personally liable. I do not think the estate of a deceased CEO can take responsibility for the crimes committed by the dead person. Thank you.

MR OTTO ISHAA: I want to thank my colleague for the information because it helps me and also helps many ordinary citizens that are out there.  

I have not found any serious thing to discuss in this report apart from asking commitment of government to follow up reports and recommendations of Parliament. I have seen reports that we have passed here but I do not see any serious step by the Executive to follow up these reports. It is not common here, and that is why we even find ourselves very comfortable to debate an eight-year report and we say it is okay. How I would wish this Parliament would design a new strategy of handling these cases aggressively within the shortest possible time so that we dispose of them. This strategy would help Uganda and also help the image of Parliament and would mean that we have an attached value. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.02
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also thank the committee for the good report. However, we have a lot of problems in this country because when you look at the opening points of the report, the report tells us very clearly that almost all the accounting officers failed to respond. What are we doing as a country? 

When you go further on the same point, it says that some of the outgoing officers were not willing to co-operate, but you find that these colleagues have been promoted. They are still on this planet earth and in this country and they have been shifted from a station to another. It is as if there is no government in place because people cannot behave like that. 

It has been reported that there is a lot of negligence on the part of the accounting officers. If the accounting officers are so negligent in this country, then how are we moving? It is reported that in some cases there are outright theft cases and the witnesses do not appear. Who are these witnesses? I think most of them are civil servants and I think they should be in a way forced to come by the committee.

I gather some people take personal allowances but when they later leave the district service, they fail to pay. Does leaving the district service mean that you cannot pay? Because once you have taken that money and more especially when you are still living, you must pay. I am really disturbed.

The hon. Minister, Kahinda Otafiire, has brought up another serious issue, which has dismayed me. If the Auditor-General decided not to give any report and not do anything, this would mean that government would stand still because the Auditor-General cannot be forced to do anything. So on the part of government, we should admit that this is failure and I think that is all. Otherwise, it is unbecoming. Thank you.

4.05
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am making reference to point No. 1.6.9, page VIII, the last paragraph, where it is said that the committee recommended that the allowances for councillors be a function of what has been realised in implementing the budget and not on budgeted figures. I want to get convinced of this. I have not been convinced as to why we would want to recommend like this. All other organs of the state make budgets. They do not necessarily realise these budgets. They do not fulfill, as a matter of fact, what they lay down but they receive their allowances. I want us to be fair to everyone. Why are we recommending like this? 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Kyanjo, for giving way. In a situation where there is a shortfall and you base the allowances on the budget not on the actual budget outturn or the remittances, would you wish to see councillors claiming allowances in arrears yet we are talking about sitting allowances? Would you wish to claim these allowances in arrears? If it is based on these speculative figures in the budget and not on the actual remittances, then you are likely to have a situation where those allowances would fall into arrears. Would you wish to see them claim allowances in arrears? Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, if the allowances were claimed without sittings, I would succumb to the argument of the honourable member. However, if the members went and sat, we cannot sit here and say we curtail their allowances and peg them to the realisation of their budgets.

This is the disease that we suffer across the board, right from the Government of Uganda down to the local governments. I do not want to go to the public and fail to explain why we receive allowances even without realising what we want as Parliament, and then we curtail the allowances of councillors because they are not here to defend their dues. So, I think this is an unfair recommendation. It should be given second thought.

4.08
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also thank the committee. I really want to ask what one does in a situation where people who are no longer employees of government or the district have caused a loss and the report says the loss should be made good. I have an example, which is very interesting. It is in respect of Kalangala District, page 46, and the heading is “Conflict of Interest”. The amount involved is Shs 304,611,863. 

The query was the that the district tender board awarded tenders worth Shs 304.6 million for construction of a health centre, teachers’ houses and the grading of a road to a private construction agency in which the chairperson of the board was a shareholder and a director. This indicated that there was vested interest in awarding the above tenders. This might have contributed to the failure to complete grading sections of the road measuring one and a half kilometres from Mulabana-Kalangala Road, which was contracted to the agency. 

The accounting officer’s explanation is very interesting because it says, “The AO responded that RS Kizza General Agencies had been on the approved list of the District Tender Board as a contractor for many years before Mrs Sarah Kizza became chairperson of the District Tender Board. The business enterprise was the sole proprietorship before it was registered as a limited liability company with Sarah Kizza as one of the directors together with her husband. It was therefore an oversight not to notice this change. She further established that Shs 124 million was paid to a contractor but by the time of the audit, the said section of 1.5 had not been completed. It was completed later to the satisfaction of the management.” 

“The committee observed that the contract agreement, certificate of completion and payment vouchers were not submitted and the committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the money or make good the loss.” Surely, in a situation like that one, is that good enough? What about the people who are involved in this shoddy transaction? Should they be left scot-free? What lessons should be learnt from this kind of thing to be able to prevent this kind of action from occurring again? 

This is a matter, which I think should be investigated by the IGG, or even criminal investigations should take place in this kind of situation. If you make it such an easy recommendation, surely you are letting matters go off. My suggestion is that this matter should be investigated by the IGG and if necessary, criminal investigations should be taken up in the matter.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. John Kawanga for yielding the Floor. My own experience in government transaction work is that if it is of a construction nature, like the case at hand, then there are a number of parties that are involved. Once a tender is awarded by the contracts committee, which of course now replaced the central tender board, when work commences the whole amount is not paid at a go. Money is paid as the work progresses, at every stage, and there is a certificate issued against which payment is effected. Before payment is effected, it involves very many actors: the chief administrative officer as the accounting officer and then the internal auditor who should be able to verify and ascertain that this portion of work which has been done deserves this kind of payment. 

It is, therefore, not a one man’s decision; a payment voucher is raised; it is taken on charge, it is put in the books then thereafter a cheque is written and signed. It is a system. Therefore, for such a colossal sum of money to have been just given before work is completed, actually many heads should have rolled - the accounting officer himself whom I believe is a signatory to the district accounts, and I am sure he is not a signatory alone but there must be another co-signatory; there must also be the chairperson of the contracts committee let alone the overall political supervisor. When this work is being undertaken, it is usually supervised by the political leadership. In this particular case, the chairperson of the technical committee was there to act on behalf of the people of Kalangala, to be their overseer, to represent them and ensure that they have value for money. 

If all these action systems closed eyes and over Shs 300 million was paid out before even completion of work, then there was foul play. Rightly, all those in the system in as far as the transaction is concerned should have helped the people of Kalangala by answering questions from the office of the IGG. Even the person who was supposed to use a green pen to audit let down the people of Kalangala. 

I would, therefore, agree with my colleague that we as a Parliament should actually refer this matter to the IGG so that heads can roll. We should not just leave it like that. There are many people who certainly benefited from this shoddy transaction. I am cocksure there were kickbacks and all those who had a say in the whole transaction should be able to vomit the money and make good what they did wrong. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

4.15
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me first of all apologise for having stood up because I think I am incompetent to discuss this report. (Laughter) 

I got a copy of this report this morning and it is discussing an entire budget for local governments. Therefore, I really feel a little bit uncomfortable given the issues that have been raised by colleagues on the observations vis-à-vis the report. As such, I take it as a serious matter that when we are given a report like this, we need some time to read it and see how we can internalise it and discuss it properly. This is because it is affecting our performance, and the entire budget of the country is based on local government accounts. 

Mr Speaker, I am saying this after seeing that even your constituency, Bukoto Central, has got a big query. I do not know whether you saw it, Sir -(Laughter)- and I am also affected; this is really from my sub-county. I am sorry to mention you but I want to emphasise the need for us to be given time to internalise such a report and discuss it when we are comfortable. I thank you.

4.16
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for this eight-year-old report. In addition to what my colleague across the hall, the hon. Member for Masaka, has said, my concern is about two observations: one where the committee notes that districts have unrealistic budgeting. There is a comment on unrealistic budgeting. If you look at VII, 1.6.4 on non-remission of statutory deductions, the committee notes that districts are not able to send their deductions because of low revenue bases and therefore they are not able to meet their obligations at a go.

My concern is that we are calling it unrealistic budgeting when in reality it should be unfair or low budget allocation to the districts. If you look at this year alone - and this is the practice down the years - out of a budget of Shs 7.3 trillion we are planning to send back to the districts Shs 1.7 trillion and to keep at the centre Shs 5.6 trillion. It means that out of the total national budget, we are sending back to the district for services 20 percent of the money collected out of the districts. 

Giving an example of Lubaga Division with which I am very familiar, we estimate that Lubaga Division has about half a million people. If you estimate that the lowest consumer spends maybe about Shs 2,000 on everything - food, soap, water, transportation - and that only Shs 1,000 of that goes to taxes, out of a year of 365 days you will find that about Shs 108 billion is collected out of consumer taxes from Lubaga Division alone. However, at the end of this financial year, only Shs 0.8 billion will be sent back to the district. This means that we get about Shs 150 billion out of Lubaga in taxes but send back only less than Shs 1 billion. With less than Shs 1 billion, we are supposed to collect garbage, light the streets, pay teachers, buy medicine and repair roads. It is impossible for services to be provided when government is sending back only 20 percent of the amount of money collected in taxes.

My main concern is that we need to review, like my sister was saying, the amount of money that is sent back to the district. It is impossible to provide services adequately, it is impossible even to budget -(Interjection)– is that information, Mr Minister?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, my honourable colleague. I seek clarification. I have been listening carefully and I would like to know how Lubaga Division buys medicine because I do not understand this. The medicine is provided by government and the money is specific. How do they do it? Maybe I can get interested because this is my sector. Could I know how they buy medicine?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I meant insecticides for mosquitoes. 

The point though is that only 20 percent of the amount of money collected in this country goes back to the people. I think as representatives of the people, we should recognise that this is why services are not reaching the people. There is just no money to provide services. 

We have difficulties as politicians. You stand up and promise roads, street lighting and garbage collection. Tell me how you can collect garbage with Shs 1 billion a year when actually Shs 150 billion is taken out of you. I would like to suggest that we review the structure of the budget so that more money goes to the local governments and less money is retained at the centre. That will actually help in fighting corruption. There is actually too much money at the centre to be misused and abused. I thank you.

MS BOONA: Can I provide information, Mr Speaker, as a member of this committee? I am a member of this committee and I would like to give more information. My sister has mentioned that little money is sent to the districts and I wish to agree with her but the essence of this report was to look at the money that is being sent to the districts and how it was managed. Even if it is little money, what were the accounting officers doing with that money? She has given an example of Lubaga Division and garbage collection. We recently learnt that there is better management in Lubaga with the money that they are given now than they were previously given. 

It was largely mismanagement of these funds that was the need of this report. Even if it is little money, what was happening with that money? Therefore, I want to support my sister from Masaka that this report took us several months as a committee to produce. We sat with the districts about four times to come up with recommendations. I feel it would be unfair for us to sit here within two hours and create recommendations. One member has ably looked at Kalangala, but he has not looked at Bushenyi, Adjumani, he does not know what happened in Mbarara and I wish to ask this Parliament to give this report the seriousness it deserves because much of monies that the government sends to the districts were discovered to be mismanaged. Money meant for UPE went to allowances. 

In some instances, money for classrooms, you would hear the contractor disappeared with the money; he had been paid all the money before he started work and I think within these three hours we shall not be able to get those details and change recommendations and observations, which deserve to be looked into by the IGG or even the police, those that the committee may not have recommended in that order.

I wish to support my sister that we give this report more time. The Members should internalise and even change the recommendations where the committee was soft or maybe created some oversights.

MS KAMYA: Thank you hon. Boona for your information. I do admit that there are visible improvements in the management of Lubaga particularly on roads and garbage collection but I also want to say that it is largely due to the ingenuity of Pastor Ssematimba who goes around begging for support from other people outside the formal revenue base of government. He goes to business people through his ingenuity.

Finally, responding to a comment and an observation in the report which mentioned the problem as being unrealistic budgeting; it is an observation of this report, just as low revenue is.

4.27
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Following Members’ contributions on this report, just like hon. Ishaa Otto said, I also do not see the significance of debating this report basing on the fact that it has really overstayed. There has been a concern which almost all Members have agreed on, and this concern is that the biggest backlog we are facing today is coming from the Auditor-General’s office and we have not yet got a solution to this.

As a Parliament that decides for this country, I would request that somebody helps this House and this country at large because I can see on the Order Paper sometime after this report we are going to have the same report of 2002/03, 03/04; I have not seen 2005.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what you should understand is that for many years we have had this backlog because as you may appreciate what we are considering today ought to have been considered by the Seventh Parliament but it is being considered by the Eighth Parliament and what happened to the Sixth Parliament is that it considered matters that should have been considered by NRC. 

There was a time when it was suggested that we should forget; that was not our work and we should deal with reports falling within our time. The advice was that we should never leave anything behind. This is why we are considering things that ought to have been considered earlier. 

I must say that the Office of the Auditor-General has many reports and I think it is up-to-date. It is up to us to handle the backlog before handling the current. If it had been agreed that we handle the current, maybe we would have no work. We would have completed our assignment. That is the explanation I want to give you.

MR ODIT: The dilemma that we have is also provided for in the Constitution. Article 164 is very specific on how those who have held public offices, effective from the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution will be brought to account for their actions. As long as these reports are within the 1995 Constitution, we should not attack the Auditor-General at all. Maybe we should change the Constitution and do away with that provision. But we should not give up. We should pursue these fellows wherever they are and bring them to book and call them to account.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: I would like to inform the House that the office of the Auditor-General is up to date on local governments. Today, we have a financial report of 2007/2008. It is up to us Parliament really to consider these reports and we shall be up to date.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance and the information from my honourable colleague. What I was trying to suggest is that if Parliament could gazette some time - I remember there was a time we had a Business Committee meeting and agreed that we would make sure that this entire backlog is handled because Parliament should not be seen to be doing nothing. We should not be seen to be idle and disorderly. But I also think that the Executive -(Interruption)

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I feel very offended by the language used by our colleague. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to say that Parliament is idle and disorderly yet we are here from Monday to Friday doing business for this country? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Is that what she has said? That is not what she has said. I thought she said “as if”. That is different.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, you know sometimes people have ears but they cannot hear. Finally, the point I am driving at is that we should make time so that we do not carry the burden to the next Parliament. Let us handle everything within this period of time so that the next Parliament takes on what comes in the years to come. Thank you. (Hon. Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Members, when we are debating these reports, it is not as if we are debating the budget allocation of funds. Here we are considering whether the funds, be it little or much, were properly utilised. That is the gist of this report. It is not whether it is adequate or not and I think it is time that I put the question because we have many reports. The question is to adopt the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2001/2002.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

(Full text of the report to be found in Appendix I of Issue 32)

THE SPEAKER: Let us clear this so that next time we have the luxury of having more time. (Mr Okupa rose_) You came late, hon. Okupa.

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): That is why I am contributing after you have put the question. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am part of those serving in the accountability committees. We have made reports here in this House and my appeal is for the Executive to implement the recommendations that we make here. 

The issue of saying when these reports must be debated – there is no time frame in debating these reports as there will always be an overlap. So the request is to the government or Executive arm to help us enforce and make recoveries of the monies. It is very disheartening because I remember in the last Local Government Accounts report we had here, it was recommended that some of our colleagues in this House refund the money they used when they served in public offices in the Local Government. I still see them seated in this House, they have never recovered the money and some of them were even made chairpersons. It is very embarrassing. The Executive must make sure that recoveries of this money are made and the people responsible held accountable.

THE SPEAKER: You see the danger of referring to those seated here is that when they have work to do, it may be seen as if it is blackmail for them not to talk. I quite appreciate that but when you refer to people in front of you -(Laughter)- it will be counter-productive. However, you have made the point.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2002/2003

4.37
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Johnson Malinga): Mr Speaker, as I pointed out in the conclusion of the other report, the concerns that I raised in the other report ran through this report. I seek your permission so that we respond to the issues that Members have raised and I am sure that the minister would be interested in giving a response to some of those issues.

THE SPEAKER: So what you are saying is that what happened in the previous year was repeated?

MR MALINGA: Yes, almost. It is the same except in the details of the reports in the different districts.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a pattern?

MR MALINGA: Yes. Mr Speaker, Members have raised a number of issues that I expect them to also raise in this report as well and I think it would be fair to respond to some of them. 

THE SPEAKER: To respond to what; in the previous report? No, the report was adopted.

MR MALINGA: In that case, Mr Speaker, may I move that the new report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the District Local Governments for the Financial Year 2002/2003 be adopted by this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think taking into consideration the comments made by hon. Sauda Mugerwa, let us give them this evening to go and read the executive summary and go to the details if they want to so that tomorrow – otherwise, adopting it without tabling it is not fair. Is that acceptable? So go and religiously read the executive summary and make close reference with the details then tomorrow we can start the debate. I think it is better that way.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION FROM THE TRADERS OF KAMPALA ON TRADE LICENCE FEES

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have got a note from the committee that they prefer presenting their report tomorrow as they are not here but they sent somebody. So, if you have a copy of their report, take time if you are interested, to read through so that we consider the two reports tomorrow. Get copies. It is a small report.

4.40
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, sorry but for record purposes, I would like to inform the House that members of KACITA; the petitioners are here in the gallery.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have members of KACITA. You are welcome. (Laughter) He is doing his work as a member. Then this means we are going to have an early adjournment to enable you go and study the two reports. 

I thank you. It was impressive you turned up in big numbers although last time we adjourned when the situation here was not good. I have been advised that now we are okay. We have a constant supply of water, so we feel comfortable and we can even sit for long hours.

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House adjourned to tomorrow, Wednesday, at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)


