Tuesday, 8 November 2011 

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I would like to apologise for the delay in starting the proceedings. Since yesterday, we have been carrying out our constitutional duty of vetting presidential appointments, and because we wanted them to quickly go and do their work, they took a good part of our time. But we are here. 

I want you to join me in welcoming Mr Tadesse Ayalew, a political analyst from the British Embassy in Addis Ababa, and Christine Kyasimire, a political officer at the British High Commission. They have come to observe our proceedings. Also in the gallery, we have a team from AECOM, a USAID contract specialised in democracy and good governance. They are also here to observe the proceedings. 

Hon. Members, I bring you greetings from the new Speaker of the National Assembly of Zambia, Dr Justice Matibini, I was invited to go and speak to the 11th National Assembly of Zambia at their institution on Sunday. So, I made a visit there, spoke to them and came back. He is looking forward to fruitful relations with this Parliament. 

While there, I took the opportunity to visit the parliamentary radio station which I had informed you about. They have a radio station within their premises and it broadcasts to all the provinces of Zambia. This is something that I would like to interest the Parliamentary Commission in considering so that some time, we may have our own dedicated radio station so that people in Arua, Kisoro, Kamuli, Kasese and everywhere follow proceedings on a day-to-day basis. 

The second matter that I learnt in that short time is that there is something the Government of Zambia has done to empower citizens to do business by an Act of Parliament called the Citizens Economic Empowerment Act. They have set up a commission, which facilitates indigenous people to do business, including funding them. I am sure that would be something welcome; but as we were travelling, one of our bags disappeared. When it comes, I will lay the Act tomorrow on the Table so that Members can take a look at it, because I found it very exciting. 

I also want to remind the Executive that when you have statements to present to this House, documents should be submitted to the Speaker and the Clerk by 11 O’clock of the day on which you intend that the matters be discussed. Additionally, you are expected to present 380 copies of your statement for the benefit of the Members so that they can prepare. I have said this before and will keep on saying it because it disturbs the work of this House when by 1 O’clock there is nothing which has been brought either to the Clerk or to the Speaker. So, I do hope that you will adhere to that arrangement. 

There is also another matter that I wanted to remind the Members of this House of and it is about communication, which is important. Yesterday, as I was travelling via Nairobi, I met officials of the Uganda High Commission and they wanted to know from me whether I had allowed Members of this House to go to Dadaab Refugee Camp at the border of Kenya and Somalia. First of all, I was surprised. I said, “No, I haven’t sent anybody to go to the refugee camp.” Secondly, there is no resolution of the House requiring anyone to go to Dadaab Refugee Camp and I do not know whether there are Ugandans in that camp. 

So, I said I was not aware of it. But worse still, they were alarmed because Dadaab is the place where there is fighting at the moment and they said, “Madam, we cannot guarantee the security of your Members.” But I said that I had not allowed them to go. So, Members, I just want to remind you that you need to have my consent; I must know where you are going; it must be related to the work of your committee and it must be justifiable. I told them that I did not allow anybody to go to Dadaab. 

I just wanted to remind you of that and also when you are travelling, the letter that I give you is your protection in case you are taken to court for absenting yourself. You can say, “No, the Speaker knows I was away and this is the letter.” That is why, although it is tedious, I do sit and write all those letters either clearing you or telling you that you can go for one week and not three weeks. That is the importance of that correspondence, and it is a matter which is under the Constitution. So, please, adhere to it.

As I said, the security situation at that camp is not good and, therefore, it is not safe for Members. So, let none of you try to go there unless we have instructed you, as a House. 

I also want to inform the Chairperson of the Committee On Rules, Discipline and Privileges, who I understand is about to conclude his work, that if there are still Members who wish to present their business, they should do so by 9th  November - that is tomorrow - in Room 013 on the Ground Floor, so that your views can be incorporated. The rules are important because we have been talking about them and we need to have a session where we have their report and then discuss the changes that we want. If there are still those with amendments, please go to that room, present your views there so that they can be incorporated into the report, which will be coming to this House. 

Between yesterday and today, there were some Members who said they had issues of national importance – hon. Mawanda and hon. Abia, hon. Katuntu, hon. Tinkasiimire and then hon. Oboth. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek guidance emanating from your communication regarding individuals who went ahead to visit sensitive areas in other countries without your knowledge. I thought this was a more serious matter, and being a member on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, I would have expected to know, partly, about this visit instead of hearing it being rumoured around in broad perspectives out there. I would beg that if it was not so painful, they would give us a lead into which individuals took bold steps ahead of your authorisation.

THE SPEAKER: No, they did not go. They had written to the High Commissioner asking her to arrange for the visit. 

3.01
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am rising on a point of national importance, and the point I am raising is the failure by the Minister of Finance to appoint the board for the Microfinance Support Centre. The Microfinance Support Centre is an institution of Government that extends cheap loans with better terms to various microfinance institutions, SACCOS and co-operative societies in this country. The absence of this effective board affects the performance of this institution. 

Before the disbandment of this board, there were pending loans that had been approved by management to be sent to the board for approval and onward disbursement to these various SACCOS and co-operative societies. These co-operative societies and SACCOS have been frequenting the centre to know the fate of their loans, but they are being told that they do not have an effective board in place.

Secondly, development partners who are dealing with the Microfinance Support Centre, are threatening to withdraw their support to this institution, citing inadequacies in respect to governance issues. It would be very terrible if we lost one of these development partners well aware that the Prosperity-for-All programme is being channelled through this Microfinance Support Centre.

Thirdly, the cost that these institutions are incurring to follow up these loans, is becoming a very big expense to these institutions.

So, we are requesting that the Minister of Finance comes to this august House and tells us when she is going to appoint the board for this institution, to enable us tell our SACCOS and co-operative societies the way forward on what they are able to do. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.04
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last month, the Minister of Energy was in Arua District, specifically in the West Nile Region. Prior to her coming, the President was in the region on International Youth Day, and pledged to the people of the region that by December this year, he would be switching on Nyagak. At the moment, the good Minister of Energy, who the people of West Nile believe would be the right person to deliver them from darkness for eternity, has pledged to the region that she is changing the deadline. The President had fully pledged and said, “I am coming to West Nile to commission Nyagak in December.” 

My constituents have been calling me since morning and sending me messages and some are threatening me that I should never make a mistake of going to Arua with the Minister of Energy should her ministry, together with the President, fail to switch on Nyagak this December. Why does this arise?

Madam Speaker, the last pledge that the President made was the 15th deadline and I have invited the minister to come with me to see the state of affairs in the regional referral hospital where mothers are being asked to pay about Shs 400,000 before they can be taken to the theatre for operation. I would like to know from the minister, who in this case is telling the people of the region lies? Is it the President who is lying or is it you, in your capacity as the minister, who has usurped the powers of the President, and  that you are going to switch on Nyagak come January?

Secondly, to the Minister of Finance, the Arua District Local Government budget is less by slightly more than Shs 600 million. Why does this arise? You know very well that in this Parliament, at one point, there was Terego/Maracha District, but Terego was brought back to Arua. That budget mainly targeting service provision in the agricultural sector, specifically NAADS, is less for six sub-counties, meaning the entire constituency of Terego. Last financial year, that was corrected. This financial year, we never thought it would recur. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance what they have done - whether they are releasing monies to Arua District to service the people of Terego. Otherwise, we will take this as continued political sabotage.  Thank you.

3.07
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of late, the Inspectorate of Government has arraigned a number of senior leaders in court on criminal charges. However, last week, the Inspectorate of Government withdrew some charges against the former Vice President and former Member of Parliament for Busiro North. But there had been some background to this for which Ugandans would need an explanation from Government and we, as Parliament, would need a response from the Leader of Government Business. Why at this stage? 

I am aware that there are still charges in court and we do not have to go into that because of the rules of subjudice. But for a senior leader, a former Vice President, to be arraigned in court, incarcerated in Luzira and charges are dropped without even a single witness testifying, calls for two possibilities. One, is that this particular senior leader was arraigned in court without sufficient evidence or that there was evidence, but the Inspectorate bowed to political pressure. Why am I saying political pressure? I watched His Excellency the President, while he was addressing the nation some three weeks back, and he categorically said that the charges against hon. Gilbert Bukenya were trumped up charges and I am reminded of article 227 of the Constitution. “The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority...”

May we, therefore, know from the Leader of Government Business, under which circumstances these charges were withdrawn from hon. Gilbert Bukenya? Alternatively, if trumped up charges were brought and tarnished the name of Prof. Bukenya, what will Government do to remedy this situation, given not only the senior position of hon. Bukenya, but that of any other Ugandan. 

MR SSEGONA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member, for giving way. In the midst of those events, we saw the Inspector General of Government issuing a press release, among other things saying, “We are going to wait for the civil case instituted by Spear Motors to be concluded and then from that we will take the next action.” One would ask a question as to whether Government prosecutions depend on civil matters between private individuals. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for giving way. This is very serious information I would wish to give to hon. Katuntu and the House. Actually, the President of this country, who is the fountain of honour, said to this nation: “His Excellency Bukenya was being witch-hunted politically.” Now, this is serious in the sense that we do not know who is witch-hunting him and for what reasons he is being witch-hunted. I would like to put it to the Minister in Charge of the Presidency that it is necessary for the air to be cleared on this matter.  We have previously heard about mafias in Government - could it be these mafias who continue to politically witch-hunt His Excellency Gilbert Bukenya? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you colleagues for the information. However, the point I would like to make, Madam Speaker, is that we have leaders who are in court.  The Government Chief Whip is not here with us because he has been arraigned in court by the same institution.  The Minister of Foreign Affairs is not here; he has been arraigned in court by the same institution. The Minister of State for Labour is not here; are we seeing trumped up charges being laid against these leaders and tomorrow we would hear that the IGG has withdrawn these cases? 

So, we are talking about people’s names being tarnished; we are talking about the integrity of Members of this House being put to test. How do you arraign people before proper investigations? How?  

Ugandans have started having confidence in this institution; everybody is running to the IGG. But the IGG continues to act like he is not the one mandated by the Constitution. It seems he is no longer performing the duties of the Inspectorate as envisaged by the Constitution. I have heard and the –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member. Actually, while seated here, I have been hearing hon. Abdu Katuntu and other colleagues raising this issue and I have tried to recollect the series of events. When Prof. Bukenya was arraigned in court by the IGG, the IGG himself and a couple of his staff addressed a press conference which I remember watching on the various TV stations and he said they had the full evidence and were ready to prosecute.
 
There was uproar by the population and Members of Parliament that there was selective prosecution of him alone whereas this House mentioned other persons. After a couple of days, there was another conference addressed and the IGG said, “The purpose for prosecuting and charging Prof. Bukenya was because investigations were complete and there were others that were coming.”
 
A couple of days later, another three Members of Parliament who are ministers mentioned here were summoned.  Madam Speaker, it is perturbing that any of us here, be it a minister or any other could be summoned, incarcerated and then released at will. It is not only perturbing but scary –(Interjections)- yes, because I could be called and taken to Luzira, spend a couple of days there, and then at the whim of an individual, they say there is no case.  

I would like to beg this august House that, one, the responsible minister - I think it is the Minister of Ethics and Integrity - explains the trend of events or a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry be put in place to find out whether it is witch-hunting because it is scary; it can happen to any of us. And Members you know this saying that: “When they came for the Jews, he said, ‘I am not a Jew.’ When they came for the Muyindi, he said, ‘I am not a Muyindi.’ When they came for the Catholic, he said, ‘I am not a Catholic.’ And when they came for you, there was no one to yell for you.” 

Therefore, hon. Members, it is not a laughing matter, but a really serious issue that we need to take into consideration as a House, and request that rather than us just relying on the whims of an individual, let there be substantial evidence.

MR KATUNTU: I think the point is being made, Madam Speaker. If it can happen to Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, the former Vice President, it can happen to anybody in this House. And all these political leaders have gone to court crying foul; Prof. Gilbert Bukenya cried foul; hon. Sam Kutesa cried foul; hon. Nasasira has cried foul; so is hon. Rukutana. All of them are pleading witch-hunting and now, we see the IGG just withdrawing charges without any explanation.  The attempted explanation is actually very absurd; it is just alien to the law that a criminal matter can give way to a civil action. It has never been heard of; it is alien to the legal system. In fact, the reverse is true. 

If there are two cases based on the same facts and transactions in court - and I will give you an example - if I have been accused of murdering somebody, X, the family of the deceased may bring a civil case against me. But the criminal case against me takes precedence over the civil action. You cannot say, “We have withdrawn the charges to give way to civil proceedings.” It is alien to the law. 

We have heard, as I conclude, that there is another case involving officers of  Quality Chemicals, where there was a note that somebody managed to steal from the Inspectorate - the people at the Inspectorate were saying, “There is no case but let us charge them for purposes of embarrassment.” The minister should check this out because these are facts. If the IGG is being used to embarrass people, then there is a big problem in this country. I pray that the Leader of Government Business, the Ministry in Charge of the Presidency and the Ministry in charge of Ethics and Integrity, come up with a statement to explain what is going on in the Inspectorate, because tomorrow it could be hon. Nsereko. (Laughter)

3.20
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. We very much appreciate the leadership you are offering this Parliament, especially at the international level, and given your recent invitation to the Zambian Parliament and what you have just communicated to us, we are really so grateful.

However, this Parliament as an institution cannot act in isolation of the international community. There are several activities that involve travel of Members of Parliament outside this country, which in many cases happen with your full blessing and authority.

However, in this Ninth Parliament, I have noted with concern that letters authorising release of foreign exchange - because there is a law, the Finance Institutions Act, which was drafted during the colonial times when the foreign exchange regime was not liberalised, and where if you needed to purchase foreign exchange, you had to request the permission of the powers that be and in this case, it is the Prime Minister.

But we have noted with concern that Members of Parliament who have been authorised to travel to do international assignments, have failed to get the letter of authorisation and the subsequent financing from the Prime Minister’s office. As I talk today, out of 57 requests for travel, only 17 have been signed. The Government Assurances Committee, for example, travelled to the House of Commons on official business a month ago and up to today, we have knocked at all offices and they tell us that the letter from the Prime Minister’s office, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, has not yet come.

These things used not to happen when Prof. Apolo Nsibambi was the Prime Minister. To the extent that one Member of Parliament told me today that you lawyers are bad managers. So, I am rising to -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Odonga Otto that in the month of June, the Leader of the Opposition and I, were invited for the East African Association of Public Accounts Committee conference in Nairobi. We were told that we should use our own money and that the letter from the Prime Minister’s office had not come. Right now, that letter has never come and I have never been paid.

As if that is not enough, three weeks back, some Members of Parliament were sent to witness the arbitration case in London. They were again sent on the understanding that they should use their own money and that Parliament would pay them on coming back and on receipt of the letter from the Prime Minister’s office.

To date, that letter has not come. You will want to appreciate that many times, these Members, because of the abruptness and non-preparedness, go to private money lenders to get this money and they are heavily taxed in terms of interest, which, therefore, makes honourable members financially embarrassed as they move on the streets of Kampala.

I wanted to inform hon. Odonga Otto that he is not alone. Many of us in this Chamber have suffered under the hands of my very good friend the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi who has not been giving us these letters. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this Parliament has the power to amend the laws so that we do not require the signature of the Prime Minister, but that would be eating the bitter pill when we have other options. I have Members of Parliament from both sides of the House who have travelled on credit, courtesy of the inefficiencies in the Prime Minister’s Office.

I want the Prime Minister to explain, now that we even have the committee investigating corruption in the Oil Sector, and if those who even have nothing to do with him like my Committee of Government Assurances have failed to get our per diem, if this committee investigating oil may want to go to Dubai, I think it will take them years before they can be facilitated, and yet you gave them three months.

The simple clarification I am asking is: What is the problem with the Prime Minister’s Office?  Every day it has to be the Prime Minister. The other day, it was corruption allegations. Today, it is inefficiency in releasing per diem for Members of Parliament. What is the problem with that office? Is someone just overwhelmed? That is the simple clarification I want to seek.

3.26
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that concerns the importance of the ad hoc committee investigating the Energy Sector. This is in relation to electricity or power. 

I am the chairperson of that ad hoc committee. We have done investigations and we are still doing them. We are yet to prepare a report to submit to this august House.
In my hand, I hold a letter of invitation dated 5 October 2011, inviting members of the Committee on National Economy and those of the Natural Resources Committee to the first joint Government of Uganda/development partners’ Energy and Mineral Sector review between 10 and 11 November 2011 at Hotel Africana.

As you are aware, this ad hoc committee is investigating some of the issues that are going to be discussed, and resolutions are going to be made. It is our prayer and concern that this seminar, though well intended, may be pre-emptive of the report that we are yet to submit to this House.

I believe that this Parliament has a name and image to protect and it would be disheartening to find that at the end of our investigations, we submit a report which would be nugatory, and which would have been overtaken by the reviewed resolutions of the workshop.

It is our humble prayer that you direct that Members of Parliament do not attend this workshop. 

MS ABIA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Actually, when you look at the same invitation; on the last page where the programme is, from 4.00 p.m. to 4.30 p.m., there is an item about signing of agreed minutes. Which workshops are these where you go and sign agreed minutes? And before the meeting has even started, you have already agreed on certain minutes. So, what kind of workshop is this, if it is not sabotaging the work that you intended to do?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happened to be a member of the ad hoc committee and one of the striking things is that in our terms of reference, we are investigating this sector. Now it is this same sector which is inviting us to dine and wine with them. In the history of this Parliament, Madam Speaker, you have guided that we should avoid such issues that may lead us into a conflict of interest, especially without clearing with this House. We have had a committee of this Parliament – the Budget Committee to be specific – which was invited into a hotel paid for by the Ministry of Finance, which was itself under review. 

So, my fear is that if we fall into this trap and temptation, the outcome of the committee may be as questionable. There is also fear that as we work as a committee towards finding a solution, some people are somewhere plotting to overtake – and remember these are people who are endowed with resources and are technocrats paid by the government. As we speak, press releases have been issued by Umeme, for example, which is also under scrutiny - “setting the record straight” - as though someone had messed up their record. So, it is becoming a habit that as we try to do some kind of work, the people under scrutiny come out using Government resources to circumvent or forestall whatever could be the outcome. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you. In addition to that, this being the very first of such workshops, it is the concern of this committee that it is either a coincidence or God’s incidence that such a workshop is planned and organised at a time when there is an investigation? And the players – there will be six thematic papers to be presented –are all possible witnesses during the investigations. The energy ministry is inviting us to accept statements and presentations made outside Parliament and at the end, we append our signatures; there will actually be memoranda. 

That would be a challenge, unprecedented in this Parliament that if we took ourselves as a committee, we would be taking voluntary information, calculated and intended to mislead the investigators. It is our humble prayer, therefore, that you direct that we turn down this very good invitation from the energy ministry. The second one is that Umeme stops pre-empting – as a company, Umeme knows how it got the contract and what it is doing to this country, and so, should wait because we are going to invite them to give us the information they are trying to give to the public. We pray that a directive be made that they stop issuing press releases that they have been running in newspapers. 

Thirdly, the energy ministry and its officials should stop acting in a manner that can be construed to be pre-emptive; how do you invite Members of Parliament who are investigating your sector? For Christ’s sake, we have a name to protect. After eating with you, how do you take us seriously when we are asking you certain questions? We feel it is the committee’s concern that you make a ruling on this matter that the Members should not be party to that review workshop. After all, it is the very first since 1962 – according to the invitation letter signed by F.A. Kabagambe-Kaliisa. And according to that letter – there are some witnesses who come before us, whom we want to protect – it is very unfair when we invite Witness X from the same family and he gives an opinion which may not be popular with the family; then somebody Y from the same family volunteers to give press releases and pre-empt – what I am trying to say is that when he appeared before us, hon. Onek gave us what he has given this House before in December 2004 about Bujagali. We know that there are some – if not today then it will be tomorrow – do not be surprised to read a statement refuting the same from the energy ministry. (Interjections) 

Please, you are all potential witnesses; do not volunteer information, rather wait for our summons so that –(Interjections)– because that information was not given in corridors or on the streets of Kampala; it was given before an ad hoc committee of Parliament investigating the same. So, when we see you going to address the press conference, wherever you could have done so, we are taking that as contempt of Parliament, an act of cowardice and bringing disharmony in the investigation. (Interjections) It is our humble prayer that the House – 

THE SPEAKER: Really, there have been attempts on this Floor to bring the subjudice rule to stop us from doing work. Let me reverse it and say that anybody who is playing around with what is happening in the ad hoc committee is also acting in a subjudice manner because the committee is investigating certain issues and so they should wait for the report. I have said it many times that I do not want anyone to fund the activities of Parliament; I have a budget and if the Members need instruction on regulation, generation and transmission, I will fund it and they would be here in the Conference Hall. I do not think it is appropriate at this stage for them to move out of here, abandon the work we gave them, go to Africana Hotel and then sign minutes. (Laughter) No, I will not effect that. (Applause)

3.40
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This year, on the 12th of July, I raised a matter of national importance concerning the recruitment of the Executive Director of National Forestry Authority. I was responding to two adverts I had seen in the newspapers. One was last year in December where people had been invited; went through the interviews and were about to be given jobs, when an individual through what we would call some kind of corruption, emerged and was a favourite, but he had not sat the interviews. 

They thought they would circumvent the process by throwing away the people who had been interviewed earlier, and they placed another advert which ran on 6th of July. I raised a matter asking the Minister for Water and Environment to tell us why.  What was the fate of these people who had been interviewed and were duly qualified for the job? When did security become part and parcel of clearing individuals whose adverts did not clearly indicate that this was a requirement? 

Another issue was the short period they had given to the second advert. On 29th of July, another advert appeared extending the period because I had complained about the period they had given. Consequently, many more members responded, including the person who was suspected to be favoured for the job. After the Board of Directors considered the applicants, it was discovered that this favoured candidate did not have the required academic qualifications. I have been reliably informed that this individual has enrolled for a course and the Minister of Water has placed another advert cancelling the second advert in order to wait for this particular candidate to qualify for the job. (Laughter) (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Maracha before it turns bloody.

MRS LEMATIA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information. In Civil Service, when you are asked to act in a position, the statement is clear that it is six months, before they can confirm you. Now, there is one person who has been acting for the last two years and the adverts are sort of dodging this person left and right. This is the information I want to give.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I equally got information that the person you are talking about had been among the three people who sat vigorously for the first interviews and had the required academic qualifications. This should not be accepted to continue in this country; where adverts are placed in the media - as Government, we must been seen to be serious and not to hoodwink Ugandans. We have very many qualified Ugandans who can fill this job and we should not wait for this unqualified person who is still studying to qualify -(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I actually have information. The reason this gentlemen was not given the job is that the region where he comes from is not a good one. He comes from Arua district. I can assure you. He is called Mr Adroa and I can give you that information.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I am interested now -(Interruption)- one of my great prayers to this House, which you consented to and directed the minister was that, she must come here on the Floor of the House and make a statement to this effect. Five months down the road, there is no statement, and no explanation to this House, and she has not even be seen here. Waiting for an unqualified person to qualify? 

I represent Ugandans and I represent people from Buyaga West. They are qualified to fill this job; our forests are disappearing. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Tinkasiimire, for giving way. The issues being raised are so critical to this country and I think as Parliament, we need to take a keen interest in this case. There are many Ugandans who are deserving, but for one reason or another, opportunities are given to people that you may consider not so worthy of those appointments.

Hon. Tinkasiimire is the Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee and right under his docket, we have just put in place, a Kampala Capital City Authority, where all the directors and other civil servants are supposed to be appointed on merit, through adverts, so that all Ugandans of competence can apply.
 
The question I am specifically raising; recently, you saw peoples’ buildings around the city being brought down by the new authority, and behind it all, I was looking at one person, the Director of Planning, who has been acting in the place of Madam Jennifer Musisi. This is a person who had applied to become the Planner of Sembabule Town Council but failed an interview. (Laughter) He went to Lwengo District and it is a fact that in Lwengo, he could also not qualify, but all of a sudden, he is a Director of Kampala City Council Authority -(laughter)- and I can testify that he does not even have the six months experience.

Am saying this, hon. Members, because I know the person coming from Lwemiyaga, and the evidence is there that he was the leader of the ‘Kiboko Squad’ and we have all this evidence; and when you see all this coming up, you get perturbed. I know for sure that this country is indeed being taken for a ride. 

The other day, I was on television – with a statement – (Interjections)- I urge all those affected –(Interjections)- no, no, he said, “I argue all those affected to comply” - really, the deficiency in English should have even alerted the people who appointed these people. (Laughter) You cannot say, “I argue,” when you mean, “I urge”. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this matter is serious and the country needs to be honest.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: My prayer to this House is that this minister is becoming very stubborn. She should be directed to report tomorrow without fail, with a statement explaining the circumstances - the minister who presides over our forests –(Laughter)- explaining the circumstances under which she placed an advert on 20th December last year; then she ran another advert on 6th July; another on 29th July and then another advert on the 4th of this month, for the same job, and people have been responding and they are interviewed. 

She should tell us under what circumstances –(Interjections)- the same job –(Interjections). My prayer is that tomorrow and not later than tomorrow -(Laughter)– because if she is not directed specifically, she will continue circumventing until this unqualified person qualifies for the job and yet my constituents from Buyaga West are qualified to fill the job even now. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we finish with the laying of papers and information, and then I will ask the government to respond? Hon. Epetait had something and that is the last one. 

3.54
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have risen to lay some reports to do with the health sector. During the last Parliament, where I was Shadow Minister for Health and through the Office of the Leader of the Opposition, we contracted a consultant to carry out an assessment of the capacity of the national health institutions in this country. 

A voluminous report was presented, but unfortunately, we have not found time to debate, in-depth, the issues regarding the health sector.

As of now, the report is touching on the health sector financing over the years, the status of the various health institutions right from the national referral hospitals to the health centre IIs. I also beg to point out that this report talks about the human resources in the health sector, and the deficiencies therein, district by district. 

I thought that it would be in the interest of this Parliament to look at the report because all your constituencies are covered, hon. Members. In fact, I have the inventory of Government-funded health facilities as of March 2010, and it mentions the category of health centre IVs, IIIs and IIs and their functionality. Some of them are under construction while others are closed, and all that information is in the report. 

Since it is a voluminous report, I thought it prudent to send soft copies to all Members. Kindly, check your emails and you will find soft copies for your perusal and further study so that when we debate the health sector matters, we debate from an informed position. 

I, therefore, beg to lay the hard copies for Parliament. This is a report on the National Health Institutions Capacity Assessment dated 2010. (Applause) I would also like to lay the inventory of the Government-funded health facilities in Uganda as of March 2010. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. It is my prayer that we find time on the Order Paper, either end of this week or early next week, for Members to make more input and observations that we think are befitting for us to take as Parliament, in order to steer the health sector in the right direction. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank hon. Epetait for laying those documents and I will appoint a day for the debate. But now, I want you to help me in welcoming our citizens from Luuka in Walibo Parish represented by hon. Evelyn Kaabule and hon. Bagoole. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause) I also welcome His Excellency the Vice-President. 

I would now want the Leader of Government Business to address us on the issue of the Microfinance board, the energy sector - Nyagak, the IGG’s issue on the withdrawal of charges, clearance of Members’ travel, the NFA saga and anything else –(Hon. Muloni rose_)- we start with her? The Minister of Energy?         

3.59
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise in response to the two issues raised by hon. Christine Abia and hon. Oboth. The ministry is committed to resolving the energy issues in West Nile. The ministry recognises the delays that have taken place in completing Nyagak hydropower in West Nile and as a matter of fact, my ministry has been in close contact with all the Members from West Nile to the extent that in September, I personally visited West Nile. We had a workshop for all the Members from West Nile and our development partners. I appreciated the challenges in the region and I promised them that Government would do everything possible to address the energy issue.

I appreciate that there were delays in the execution of the Nyagak hydro power project, but the ministry has addressed those challenges. We terminated the contract of the previous contractor and I was able to visit the site over the weekend to assess the work that is going on. The two contractors are on the ground, the dam is being completed and the electro-mechanical work is also progressing. 

By nature of the construction industry, you cannot force to prematurely complete the dam because the concrete which is being used needs to set. The minimum time it will take is not less than ten weeks. We should not compromise the strength of the structure given the fact that a lot of resources have been injected in the project. 

I had a meeting with the leaders and I updated them on what Government is doing, and I requested them to be a little more patient. Our earlier prediction was that by the end of this year, the dam would be completed. But because of the contract processes and the discussions we had with the contractor, this has been shifted to January –(Interjections)– I am telling the truth. 

When His Excellency the President addressed the people of West Nile, he was well-intentioned. I want the people of West Nile to know that this Government is committed to – (Interjections)– allow me to finish. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue of Nyagak has been on the manifesto for a long time and I am sure all Ugandans want to hear. So, let the minister continue. 

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise that this Government is committed and I am committed as the Minister for Energy and Minerals – I am personally following it up to ensure that Nyagak Dam is completed and commissioned. So, I ask Members to be patient –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Madam Speaker, I was forced to rise up. First and foremost, when His Excellency came on the International Youth Day, his word was final. He told the minister, “I will come back here in December to commission Nyagak.”

The minister was in Arua last month and when I was with her having dinner, the same minister stated that the President’s word was final. As I speak now, our region has been in darkness for two weeks; she was there and can, therefore, attest to that.

Is she, therefore, in order to mislead this House and tell lies to the people of West Nile?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we all want West Nile to have power, but we also want a good job done. So, if the minister is saying that the construction is incomplete, do you want the President to go and commission something that is incomplete? January is not far and now it is a Government assurance. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On that issue, I would like to once again appeal to Members of Parliament from West Nile to know that Government is committed and we are doing everything possible to complete and have Nyagak commissioned in January.

I now move on to the issue of the sector review which has been organised for Thursday and Friday. Sector reviews are not a new issue. This is a fora which allows stakeholders, people with interest in the area – in which case the two committees; the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on National Economy - were invited to attend this sector review. 

But should the members of those committees also be members of those ad hoc committees, they are at liberty not to attend. This information is going to be shared –(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, hon. Oboth rose up on the Floor of this House to cry foul on how they were invited to wine and dine with the people they are supposed to investigate. And you directed as the Speaker of Parliament that whoever wants to deal with MPs can find them within Parliament, to save the integrity of this institution. 

So, is the minister in order to come here to explain an issue which is Functus Officio as per the Speaker’s ruling – is she in order to waste Parliament time?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the matters for which you are inviting the Members are subjudice, so leave them alone. 

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate, and so for Members of Parliament, please do not come to the sector review; but the sector review will still go on with other stakeholders. It was really organised in good faith; there was nothing ill-intentioned. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, and hon. Colleagues, I wish to thank the Member who raised this question of not having a board of directors for micro-finance. As the Ministry of Finance, we are equally concerned because without the board, the civil servants working in that institution have nobody to guide them. 

Consequently, we are working around the clock to ensure that this board is put in place as soon as possible. The problem is that we have to make wide consultation. That is why we have not been able to put it in place immediately. I want to assure this House that this work is in progress and I think within two weeks, we should be able to come back to this House and report on how far we have gone in putting a board in place. 

As to the budgets of Arua District – Terego, Maracha, which were removed from Arua – sorry, Maracha was brought back to Arua without the budget moving. On this, I need to go and check my figures properly and I want to promise this House that I will come back in two weeks and give an answer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, on the issue of the IGG - 

4.10
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mention was made by hon. Ssekikubo about the appointment of directors in Kampala Capital City Authority. For the record – without advertising anyway – for the record; the law that was passed by this House in the Eighth Parliament and hon. Ssekikubo was a Member of the Eighth Parliament that; “The directors of the Kampala Capital City Authority shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Public Service Commission.” That process was duly followed and Engineer Agaba whom he is referring to was -(Interjections)- was duly interviewed and found to have the necessary qualifications and experience. (Interjections) For the information of this House, if it is the wish of this House, I will even bring the CV of Agaba to this House. (Interjections)

I think we need to appreciate our background and I want to say that sometimes, if we do not follow properly, we may miss the point. Agaba, I remember, correctly, said, “I urge you to comply,” not, “I argue.” Even here, hon. Ssekikubo, who is almost of the same dialect with Agaba, almost failed to differentiate between the two. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: IGG’s issue

4.12
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Tinkasiimire has for the second time raised the issue of the position of executive director of the National Forestry Authority. This matter will be brought to the attention of the minister, Hon. Maria Mutagamba, who has been indisposed for quite some time. But in her absence, the matter will be brought to the attention of hon. Betty Bigombe, who is the minister holding the portfolio. 

What has been happening is that the board is responsible for the recruitment of the executive director. It is the board which has been advertising. It is only after the board has selected candidates that they are forwarded to the minister for approval. But as I have indicated, I will take this information to the minister and she will be able to come and make an authoritative statement. (Mr Okupa rose_) I thank you. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: There was a point of order. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to shift from information to order, but I saw the rate at which the minister was taking off from the stage and realised that that is the only thing to get him up. (Laughter) 

Hon. Tinkasiimire who brought this matter in July had facts about it. In fact, this morning, I got a petition from the three people who qualified and were forwarded by the board to the minister for appointment. These three people, in the order of their performance in the minutes, were Robert Nabanyumya, Hudson Andrua and Arthur Mugisha. These are the names the board forwarded to the minister and the minister was stopped from appointing the best candidate, Mr Robert Nabanyumya, citing security concerns. (Laughter) It is not the first time such a matter arises.

Hon. Reagan Okumu was the Chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and a similar incident happened in the National Drug Authority. A gentleman called Edward Muganyizi had been denied the position on grounds of security concerns yet he was the best candidate. It took the chairman, hon. Reagan Okumu, to summon the board, the Police officers from Wandegeya Police Station and staff from URA, whom they had purportedly said had furnished the information about security concerns to deny Edward Muganyizi a job. But the chairman in the leadership of hon. Reagan Okumu directed the board to go ahead and appoint Edward Muganyizi and today, he is the Internal Auditor of National Drug Authority.

We are seeing the same game played here. No wonder hon. Tinkasiimire has cited someone who is being favoured and someone’s name is being tarnished citing security concerns. What are those security concerns? If you do not want this gentleman because of what he is -(Mr Okumu rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: It is not a debate. It was a point of order.

MR OKUMU: Just information Madam.

THE SPEAKER: Raise the order.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I think some of these things - when we stand up like this, many of us do not just jump up, but we want to give information to the House and I think it is important. What happened in the case of the National Forestry Authority is that after the board had recommended and the minister was supposed to carry out the appointment, the IGG also jumped on board and said one or two of those people might have a case; so, they should be given time to investigate. I think recently, the IGG withdrew and said, “Now, you can go ahead.” That is why the National Forestry Authority again came out to re-advertise some of these posts. This still reinforces the earlier point of the IGG jumping in and withdrawing, really, what is the problem?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, with that background information, is the minister, hon. Migereko, in order to say that the board did not take part in interviewing and forwarding the names to the minister? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if what hon. Tinkasiimire has relayed to this House is true that there have been these numerous changes in adverts, I think this is not a good way of conducting public affairs. All Ugandans have a stake in this country and we need answers. I think we need answers. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to lay on Table the numerous adverts.

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay them. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The numerous adverts and to also lay on Table, various people who responded to those adverts. For the first advert -(Interjections)- that ran in the New Vision on Monday 20 December 2010. Because I have tabled these documents, I will read –(Interjections)– Okay, Madam Speaker, let me lay another one –(Interjections)– I am not an amateur in this House because six years are sufficient for me to command knowledge and experience in legislation.

Another is of 6 July; let me lay this on Table as well. Then there is the one that ran on 29 July extending the period, and the recent one for the same job ran on Friday, 4 November this year. 

I have made a litany of those who responded to that advert and let me also lay that list on Table. This is true information. I have done thorough investigations to help every Ugandan who qualifies for this job.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I shall invite the Minister for Water to take an interest in those documents when she is making her response because they are significant. Yes, Prime Minister.

4.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the question of the actions of the IGG raised by my learned brother and colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu, the Shadow, I wish to cite that same Article that he cited; Article 227 of the Constitution of Uganda. That Article is about the independence of the IGG and it reads as follows – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have been trying to be quiet on this matter, but I have reached a point where I must find out who the shadow is in this House. I am saying this because I know that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister knows how to refer to the Frontbench Members in the Opposition. So, is he in order to call them shadow? I really want to be helped; maybe not as a matter of order; the best way to refer to them, is my concern now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we were about to debate the State of the Nation Address, I invited the Leader of the Opposition to read the names in the Shadow Cabinet and their portfolios. It was not an exercise in futility; it was intended that all Members of the House should know what portfolios respective Members are in charge of. So, hon. Abdu Katuntu is the Shadow Attorney-General. (Applause)

MR MBABAZI: Precisely, he is the Shadow Attorney-General. As I was saying, this Article is about the independence of the inspectorate and it reads as follows: “The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority and shall only be responsible to Parliament.”

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the IGG acts independently. He consults if he wishes or he does not, if he does not wish to do so. Therefore, I am very aloof to invade the constitutional powers of the IGG to take decisions independently as I have read.

If this Parliament, to which the IGG is responsible, feels that that IGG should come and explain, I have on many occasions in the past, seen the IGG appear before a Committee of Parliament. Please, invite him to explain his actions because this Government is determined, as always, to obey and act in accordance with the Constitution of Uganda and that is what we are doing. I think –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the Prime Minister is: We all read in the media the President saying that the incarceration of the former Vice President was a political witch-hunt. We also know that the President has all the intelligence, and so, what he was saying must have been supplied to him by his intelligence. Now that the Prime Minister has said that the IGG acts independently, how did the President come to say this was a political witch-hunt? May I get that clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MR MBABAZI: Well, hon. Members, I have no intentions today of engaging in any kind of speculations at all. So, I will not speak for the IGG because I do not want to act in breach of the Constitution of Uganda. And if you want the President to address that, of course, you know that he can also address it.

The last point came from my brother –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for giving way. I think at the end of the day we are all Ugandans and the matters being raised are very pertinent to the extent that even the framers of the Constitution did not imagine that the IGG would be immortal and absolute. That is why, even within the same Constitution, Article 224 talks about the removal of the Inspector General of Government and the Deputy Inspector General of Government.

Whereas at this stage we may not talk about removal, it shows the various grounds like:

“(a) Inability to perform the functions of 	his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind; 
(b)  Misconduct, misbehaviour or conduct unbecoming of the holder of the office;   or
(c) Incompetence.”

Now, if the judgment of Government is that there has been a miscarriage of justice; if someone has been arraigned without a proper charge or justification, are we justified as a country and as a Leader of Government Business to simply get resigned rather than saying that, in the circumstances that there are no grounds under which the IGG is conducting his business, we may have to look at a, b, c, d. Short of that, it remains a matter of conjecture and the position being put is that the IGG is probably acting under the influence of some person or authority and is no longer independent. In the alternative, the institution of the IGG is being used to witch-hunt innocent Ugandans. And in the third alternative, we might be seeing a prelude to all other officials implicated, being given the same respite. 

So, on those grounds, I would imagine and call upon the Leader of Government Business to clarify to Ugandans; are we all inactive, without any effort and strength to see that we put to question such kind of behaviour? 

When it started, we all said it was witch-hunting and as it has turned out indeed, it is the same case. We deserve a more robust response than appearing resigned and saying, “to whom it may concern” or “all of us God knows”. Do we still need the institution of the IGG in the face of its fundamental failure and in the face of its failure again to explain to Ugandans the circumstances that have led to all these ramifications? I thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, addressing our minds to Article 224 of the Constitution, and I will read verbatim; “The Inspector General or a Deputy Inspector General, may be removed from office by the President on the recommendation of a special tribunal constituted by Parliament….” Therefore, if we as Parliament deem it true at the moment that the Inspector General of Government - acting, or his deputy, is incompetent to carry out a duty, we may follow a procedure of Parliament and set up a special tribunal as prescribed by Article 224 of the Constitution. And I think he will be given all the proper administrative procedure, according to law, to present his case, and where we feel dissatisfied, then we may recommend to the President, who is the appointing authority, to take action. That is the clarification I wanted to give. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank you for your wise guidance of this Parliament. Sometime back, the President of this nation had a press conference at State House, Nakasero, where one of the Bukedde reporters asked him how the Vice-President was arrested. The President said, “My dear friend, there are people in this system who are using Government institutions to arrest people.” And he added, “Please, let me fight this war, but let me keep it aside.” 

Madam Speaker, through you, I want to ask hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, are you aware of any meeting you held with the Fountain of Power, where you were asked this particular question by another minister. The President asking you in particular –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the point of order?

MR SSEWUNGU: I will raise my point of order.

THE SPEAKER: There is no order.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, let me make this clear statement and I want all my colleagues to listen to me. Power without law is despotism. If we do not have rules which we follow, we cannot have order. (Applause) And if any of you thinks you have the monopoly of abuse, you are mistaken. 

Let me respond to hon. Odonga Otto. Hon. Odonga Otto, in a very unconcealed way to instigate my colleague, MPs, against me, says that I, as the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, have delayed authorisation of travel by Members. I want to assure you colleagues that as I speak - today, for example, there is no single paper on my desk pending. I have signed many, including one authorising hon. Odonga Otto to travel, and if he challenges me I will bring it here. (Applause)

I want to assure my colleagues that I will do my best to handle the documentation as and when it comes to me. Even last week, I had a heap because I had gone somewhere. I spent the whole of Sunday afternoon signing, not only authorizations, but many other documents that were on my desk because I desired. Therefore, I want to assure hon. Kassiano Wadri, whose origins are known to me very well, that I delay no documents and I discriminate no one. Should there be a delay, then we can find where it is; it is certainly not my desk.

MR WADRI: I want to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for allowing me to seek this clarification. This morning, I saw a copy of a letter on my table written by your permanent secretary, Mr Pius Bigirimana. It is also connected to the same subject matter that you are responding to.

Your accounting officer says that for all travels abroad, every accounting officer should submit travel itineraries one year in advance. I have the letter on my table and he goes further to say that the request must be made at least two months in advance. 

The clarification I want to seek from the Prime Minister is, in this Parliament there are a number of commitments and the exact dates are not known. You can know that you are going to IPU meetings say four or five times a year, but you may not be sure of the exact dates. You may have the East African Association of Public Accounts Committee meetings; you will not know the exact dates. You may have a situation of say CPA, the exact dates are not known. Don’t you think such kind of directives, which we respect, may stifle the operations of this institution?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I read that letter, but I can inform this House that what we have discussed in the ministry is that, the idea that the Prime Minister should authorise everyone who is travelling, year in, year out, is not a good one. So, we have said that, therefore, those activities which are planned in advance, which are budgeted for, for which money Parliament has appropriated, the accounting officers should take direct responsibility. That is what we are coming up with. But should there be additional requirements of expenditure, then we should adhere to this system so that there is some central control somewhere.

We have not discussed it in Cabinet, although it was raised, and to the best of knowledge, what we talked about recently is that, when you want to travel, please file adequate notice, unless there is a reason such as an emergency -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: We have to be very cautious as Parliament, because the way the Prime Minister is submitting, he is trying to assume the responsibility to allow or disallow trips. The Financial Institutions Act is very clear; the person who allows or disallows trips in the institution of Parliament is the Speaker. We just come to the Prime Minister for foreign exchange. So, do not talk as if you are the one now in things. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: We have an administrative Act of Parliament and a Parliamentary Commission. When you read Rule 10, the people who sit on the Parliamentary Commission include the Speaker, who is the chairperson, the Deputy Speaker, the Leader of Government Business, his or her nominee, the minister holding the portfolio of finance and the Leader of the Opposition.

Why am I saying so? This is another arm of Government, which runs its own administration. For someone to travel, they must be allowed by the accounting officer, who is the Clerk, and who sits on this committee. I think as a faster method of managing institutions, a Speaker can allow the accounting officer to authorise and they may not need to go to the Prime Minister. I think this can done in other institutions because permanent secretaries are the accounting officers.

When you read the Public Finance Act, it is the PS who allows anybody to travel. I would request that as the Chair of the Parliamentary Commission, you sit with the Leader of Government Business, so that they work within Parliament, and those who want to travel can be handled faster. Imagine a Member who gets money from a money lender and travels, but fails to get it from Government and is charged interest. If you sit quickly, it can help the institution to be run smoothly and without animosity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not a question of me sitting with the Prime Minister. In the last two commissions, we tried to get ourselves out of the hands of the Executive because this is our budget and these are our travels, but it was resisted by the Executive. At least, no one can complain that I have not written their letters, and that is out of the question. The problems are not in my office. So, what we need to do is to take a policy decision on whether we want to continue being cleared for foreign exchange by the Prime Minister - because it is our money. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like you have explained, the Parliament is very efficient in initiating paper work, particularly the finance and the protocol people in Parliament. It is also true that when most Members of this House have an opportunity to travel, they travel without their facilitation. I have met very many, and many of you have come to us as commissioners. Some of you borrow and sometimes lend Members money and the reason is that letters delay in the Office of the Prime Minister, and I am sure hon. Amama Mbabazi knows that. And like hon. Odonga Otto explained about the origin of taking the letters to the office, there is no value right now that the Office of the Prime Minister adds to that process because institutions budget for their own money; the accounting officers and the heads of institutions approve and the foreign exchange regime is liberalised. So, there is no need of taking these letters to the Office of the Prime Minister. Therefore, we want the law to be amended. The policy change should be now because what we are asking is for the Executive to concede to this without any argument so that the different institutions can manage their own budgets without any hindrance and frustrations like we see. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to be guided. I thought when Parliament thought of putting in place the Parliamentary Commission, it was to strengthen the separation of powers. It was to ensure that Parliament should not necessarily depend on the decision of the Executive, in order to move forward in some of its activities. So, that is very important. We need to go back to the basic reason of why we chose to put in place the Parliamentary Commission and right now, we have the Accountability Act and various financial regulations for the purpose of enforcing accountability, and Parliament right now is autonomous in as far as expenditure of the budget is concerned.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to be convinced that you, the Speaker, have to subject your budget and your activities to the vetting of the Executive. I am not looking at travel only, but I am looking at the supremacy of this institution, and why you should subject your autonomous budgeting activities to the vetting and the scrutiny of the Executive and still insist that you are autonomous. I want to be convinced and if you cannot, therefore, convince me, I want to move that –(Laughter)– I don’t want to sit down unless I am convinced. Otherwise, I wish to move that Parliament should from now on approve the travels of Members of Parliament by the Parliamentary Commission because all other things are administrative. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. You are condemning me without allowing me to explain. I have already told you that in the last two commissions – the Seventh and Eighth commissions – I raised this matter. I said that I do not accept that we should be writing to the Prime Minister to say that I am going to that meeting and then depending on what he says, I then comply. We battled it in the past commissions. So, I think we need to do it formally and amend the law and get our autonomy as was intended under the Administration of Parliament Act. So, it will have to be done formally by a private member because we have no minister anyway -(Laughter)- So, it is up to us. Commissioner, finance, maybe you may want to move that motion formally, but not now.  

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just want to know this law that you are referring to; the law that binds Parliament to the vetting of the Executive. May I be informed about that law?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should not engage in that debate now. Let us do the research, bring a motion here and debate it. If there is no law and it is a practise, it will be found out here. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have persisted because I thought this will help us. Following the discussions we started in the commission about this matter, this morning we directed the director of our legal department to look into the laws and find whether we just need a resolution or an amendment to the Act, such that we are able to move formally. So, I thought I would give this information such that hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s concern is put to rest. We have already asked the director of the legal department of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why I said we should do it formally; get all the research and bring it here.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin from the very note where hon. Okupa has ended, that indeed, we have tried to look through the laws as Members on our own, considering what we have experienced in the last two or three weeks, and there is nothing in the law that bars us or that insists or requires Parliament to get cleared by the Office of the Prime Minister for anyone to travel. It is just a policy and a very unfortunate policy. 

About three weeks ago, about five of us travelled to London. The day before, at about 6.00 p.m., it was a Saturday evening, we were informed that each of us was supposed to spend about Shs 12 million including meals, hotel bills and inland travel for about eight days, and we were told to borrow that money since we were travelling the following day, because the Prime Minister had not cleared our per diem. It was very unfortunate because the banks were closed and it was so important to attend that oil arbitration. There is no way we would abscond from duty. We had to make all sorts of phone calls and it was quite embarrassing having to call someone who thinks you earn quite well trying to borrow from them and at some point, you also have to put in a little interest. As if that was -(Hon. Okumu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No. The matter is already settled.

MR OKUMU: It is just a little information, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, hon. Karuhanga for giving way for this information. The information I want to give is that whereas the letter from Parliament that goes to the Prime Minister’s Office is asking to purchase foreign exchange, today as we speak, if I am travelling abroad I actually get my money in Uganda shillings on my account, and I purchase my own dollars or pounds or whatever it is. So, really I do not see any sense and yet I thought that if I was travelling, then you should pay me in dollars. You do not have to pay me in Uganda shillings because then, in the process of buying dollars, I also lose.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a matter for the commission to determine. Please conclude.

MR KARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Speaker. As if that was not enough, last week, the Youth MPs were asked to travel to five countries - each one of us was asked to travel to a given country to study the youth funds in those countries - and I was asked to travel to Lesotho. Again, we thought that certainly, they would give us the per diem and we travel and pay the hotel bills and all the other bills. Up to today, we have not been paid and we do not know whether we shall be cleared by the Office of the Prime Minister.

Now, Madam Speaker, I do not want us to trivialize this matter -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order because it hurts so much to see that there are people who have been travelling and some of us have not travelled. It is so hurting! (Laughter)  How can you allow somebody to go to London, then Lesotho when others have not travelled? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want any Member of this House to think that they will not travel. You have just come, you have not spent even a year, and we have got five years. By the time you complete the five years, every Member of this House will have travelled, but you cannot all go together.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude - 

THE SPEAKER: Wait. I wanted to clarify on the issue of those who went to London. You remember, hon. Members, when we had the special sitting on the oil sector, I informed this House that I was sending five Members of Parliament to go and observe the arbitration proceedings and come back and report. So, I am expecting a report from those Members.

The youth wrote to me about two months ago - they are here five of them as youth and that is their constituency - and I authorised them to travel on the issues of the youth and come back and report to this House. That is what they are talking about. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had thought when the Woman MP of Kanungu chose to run as a Woman MP, she was not a Youth MP. She was past the youth age. (Laughter) 

At times these matters look a little trivial, but they do not at times only embarrass us as Members of Parliament, they also embarrass the institution. That is why it was probably provided for in our Constitution that as far as remuneration of the Members of Parliament is concerned, it is going to be handled by Parliament itself. As I conclude on that matter, I would have loved to move that from now onwards, Parliament does not find any reason to be cleared by the Office of the Prime Minister - 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you are - 

MR KARUHANGA: But since you have already ruled, Madam Speaker, we shall follow the procedure you have guided us on. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us follow that. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

5.06
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the conclusion of the debate on the Committee of Local Government, I undertook to bring documents relating to that report. The Leader of Government Business will give a report on other issues relating to the conclusions of this Parliament. 

The first document is a letter which I have written to the Attorney-General to recover $489,650 from NIKO Insurance Company, who issued a performance security in favour of Aitel to procure the bicycles. That letter is signed by me and it is dated 4 November this year.

The second letter is the letter written by the Accountant-General to the Director of Payments and Settlements, Bank of Uganda, and the subject is “Unutilised balance on letter of credit.” The letter says, “This is to advise that you do not return $2,579,000 to the Consolidated Fund until we are directed by Parliament on the utilisation of this money.” That letter is dated 3 November this year, and I beg to lay it on the Table. It is signed by Mr Bwogi, Accountant-General. 

I also have a letter which was written yesterday, 7th November, by Bank of Uganda. It is addressed to the Accountant-General: “Refund of $2,579,000 from Citi Bank in favour of the Ministry of Local Government.” It states: “Citi Bank, our correspondent bank, returned the balance on the procurement of Local Government bicycles following the expiry of the letter of credit. The balance of $2,579,181.88 is being kept on the Bank of Uganda Dollar Account to avoid forex fluctuations waiting for further instructions from either yourself - the Accountant-General - or the Ministry of Local Government. The Swift Statement is hereby attached for your ease of reference.” It is signed by John Chemonges, Director Banking in Bank of Uganda. I beg to lay it on the Table.

This Parliament also gave me one month from last week to come back with a proposal on using the balance of the money to procure the bicycles using cheap means. I am now left with three weeks and I undertake it that in three weeks I will be here to present the proposal for the approval of Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi):  Madam Speaker, I just have information in response to the requirements by Parliament that I do inform Parliament on the actions taken on that report.  

On the 31 October 2011, I wrote a letter to the Attorney-General asking him to immediately take the legal steps necessary to recover the US$ 1.719, 454.58 and the accruing damages and interest as the case may be against AITEL for breach of contract. 

The same day, I wrote a letter to the Minister of Internal Affairs in which I asked the minister to immediately cause investigations against all the persons mentioned in the report, with a view of taking appropriate action by the relevant agencies of Government. 

In his letter to me, the Minister of Local Government had earlier assured me that the ministry had commenced, in liaison with other Government agencies, with implementation of the other recommendations of the committee indicated in paragraphs 7.3 - 7.10 of that report. 

On 2 November 2011, the Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet wrote a letter to Mr John Kashaka Muhanguzi interdicting him with immediate effect from the duties of Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government. In addition, the Head of Public Service has written to all the accounting officers under whom the affected officers serve, to interdict them immediately. I don’t have the immediate report about who is involved in detail, but when we get it, we will give it to you. 

Finally, I wish to reiterate Government’s unflinching determination and commitment to doing everything to combat such outrageous actions by its officers and agencies. Thank you. 

5.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, we would like to thank the government very much for acting very swiftly and we would also like to thank the Prime Minister, who has stepped aside, for acting very fast. 

You recall that hon. Odonga Otto raised the issue of the Minister of Local Government writing to the Minister of Finance, asking for Shs 18 billion. And when I came on the Floor to talk about it, citing that on the 12 of April 2010, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, had written to the Minister of Finance then, Syda Bbumba, asking for 18 billion to buy bicycles, I recall hon. Mwesige got up and said, “This is a lie,” I would like to quote the Hansard  on page 52: “To allege that I asked for a supplementary of 18 billion, when it has just come here for the first time and the report of PPDA being quoted, I don’t know who signed it, I think this is a lie.”  And he went on to say that he has never asked and never written any letter. I have the letter here now, dated 12 April 2010. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My due respect to the Leader of the Opposition; I am sure that he speaks for the Opposition in this Parliament.  However, I rise on a point of procedure. The report of the committee was duly laid before this House; it was debated; it was amended, and it was finally approved. You guided this House, Madam Speaker, and your guidance is very clear in the Hansard on the very matter that the Leader of the Opposition is now raising. 

I rise in accordance with Rule 68(2) of our Rules of Procedure, which states: “If the question of closure is agreed to by the majority, the motion which was being discussed when the closure motion was moved shall be put forthwith without further discussion.”  With due respect to our Leader of the Opposition, last Tuesday when we discussed this matter, he presented to us documents which he purported to be from the PPDA dated 14th October, but the report of PPDA was actually released on the 4th of November and clearing that report – the report, which was laid on Table here by the Leader of the Opposition varies very greatly from the final report which has been presented by the PPDA. For example, under the background, the report of the Leader of the Opposition completely erased the budget figure he is talking about that was presented by the minister for the purchase of bicycles, which was Shs 12.9 billion. 

Secondly, in the report which the Leader of the Opposition presented he inserted certain sections - sections 2.1 and 2.2 - which are not in the report of the PPDA. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t talk about the report. I rejected the document which was tabled here; it had no address and no signature. So, I don’t think it is fair to ask me to rule on reports which we have not seen and not read. 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if you have a substantive matter, it must come in substantively so that we can debate it - (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is good you have ruled. I would like to make a correction of the record. Madam Speaker, it is true that at an appropriate time, I will come here on the Floor to deal with the issue of the letter dated 12 April 2010, where the minister denied - according to our Hansard on page 52 –ever having asked for a supplementary from the Ministry of Finance -(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Leader of the Opposition to insist on a point that you have ruled on? Even if he is to give notice, this is not the way they give notice if you are to bring business in this House. Is he in order to continue with a point that you have ruled on and closed and you have guided that if he has anything new, he should come with a motion to re-open that debate? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have already ruled that if anybody wants to re-open this matter, come with a substantive motion.

I would also be interested in knowing whether we passed this supplementary before we go on a wild goose chase because they come to this House. Please, bring a substantive matter and I will give you time on the Order Paper, but not now.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for your guidance, which we shall comply with. But as a way of interjection, Rule 71, Appendix F “Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament” –(Laughter)– Code 3(f) demands a Member of Parliament to be honest. The Minister of Local Government is also a Member of Parliament. I think we are not going to hurriedly sweep it under the mat. Our Hansard quotes the minister denying in Parliament that he did not write any letter. We do not intend to bring the issue of the bicycles again. The minister denied on the Floor of this Parliament, that he did not write any letter. Today, the Leader of the Opposition is showing the letter, which the minister wrote. So, –[Hon. Members: “Order”]- I am also on a point of order.

The point of order I am raising is, is it in order for an honourable minister to come and lie in this House and we encourage him to walk away?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we agreed that we shall follow the Rules of Procedure of this House and I have ruled that if you have a substantive matter, bring a motion formally and you are put on the Order Paper. I have also ruled that I would like to hear from the Budget Committee as to whether indeed we passed this supplementary budget. So, let us not talk in the air.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, most obliged! But the only thing which I want to ask the Minister of Local Government is that he raised 60 percent -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue of his lying - You know, even in this House we have a rules committee. If he has lied, the rules committee will look at it, but bring the motion and we debate it and then agree on what to do in the rules committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I will follow that. Now, the issue we are asking is that the 60 percent is not $2.5 million; it is supposed to be $2.9 million. Where is the difference?

THE SPEAKER: So, you are responding to his report?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker; it was $4.86 million. Sixty percent of that comes to $2.9 million, and he is telling us it is $2.5 million. Where is the balance?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the committee.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some information for the Leader of the Opposition. I take note of the point you are raising. Yes, the amount at first was $4.8 million, but that was inclusive of tax. The eventual figure, which was agreed upon is $4.2 million or thereabouts. The $1.7 million is actually 40 percent of the amount of the Letters of Credit; so the amount the honourable minister has quoted is the real 60 percent.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to draw the attention of the House to the report, which has just been given to us; this statement is in response to the Local Government Committee report. The Prime minister has given us very good follow-up actions to at least allay our fears. I thought that if any other person or the Leader of the Opposition has also cited some other information, which could be in addition to what has already been given to us, it would be good to enrich our knowledge.

So, I thought that the fact that when we were debating the report, the minister denied writing the letter; and now our attention is being brought to the fact that we have now discovered the letter that would complete this report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, you were not here when we debated that report. Secondly, I have ruled that the Leader of the Opposition can bring a substantive motion on that matter specifically. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.27
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Madam Speaker, this is in response to the statement made by hon. Nadala-Mafabi, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament on a matter of public concern.

On Wednesday, 2 November 2011, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, made a statement on a matter of public concern, following events that occurred in Kasangati a few days ago.

It is true that Dr Kiiza Besigye was advised and restrained from going ahead to participate in the walk-to-work campaign, planned and executed by a group of people including some honourable Members of Parliament. The advice was given following receipt of an intelligence report suggesting that those planning and participating in this campaign have other motives other than demonstrating against the current high costs of living. 

The intelligence information is collaborated by the actions of the involved individuals, their statements in various fora, their persistent refusal to cooperate with the Police in the maintenance of law and order, and their fragrant refusal to respect the rights and freedoms of others.

These actions definitely called for Police action to ensure that the rights and freedoms of all, and the public interest, are secured. This is the reason why Dr Kiiza Besigye was advised not to walk because this could have resulted in more chaos. The possibility of loss of property was certain and it could have been even worse.

It is true the courts ruled that Dr Besigye’s residence is not a detention centre. Therefore, the Police respected this decision and this is why the Police withdrew from the residence.

It is sad to note that despite the goodwill exhibited by the Police, Dr Besigye and his supporters continue to insist on violating the rights and freedoms of others. The insistence to walk despite the very clear indications of the resultant chaos and injuries to persons, and despite the warnings given by the Police, all these forced the Police to take the actions that were taken on October 31, 2011. But as hon. Nandala-Mafabi stated, Dr Besigye was released without charge because it was never the intention of the Police to charge him. The action of the Police was preventive arrest under Section 24 of the Police Act, and Section 26 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

Madam Speaker, the allegation that some goons were ferried to Besigye’s residence with fictitious claims, demanding payment, is news to us. Government was not involved in any way with these people’s actions. It is good some were arrested and handed over to Police; investigations are underway. It is, therefore, not true that they were released without any charges being preferred. Once the investigations are completed, appropriate action will be taken. Certainly, the Police would not have taken the action they are taking had they been aware of these people’s activities.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi states that the FDC have “credible information” that Dr Besigye will from now on not be prevented from walking, but will be harmed along the way. He claims that Dr Besigye will be injected with a very dangerous poisonous substance that will lead to his death. This is a very serious matter! Given its seriousness, I request the FDC to produce this “credible information” in their possession now or else some people will be forced to believe that it is they who intend to harm Besigye and then blame it on Government, given their internal power struggles. (Applause) 

FDC, please produce this “credible information” now because we are tired of lies and fabrications. (Applause) I assure the House that upon receipt of this “credible information” Government will conduct thorough investigations and all those found to be responsible for the alleged planned actions will be dealt with as the law demands. I must, however, emphasise the fact that Government has no intentions whatsoever to harm Dr Besigye. And if hon. Nandala-Mafabi is found to have lied, he will also be dealt with by the law.

The Leader of the Opposition alleges in his statement that FDC’s efforts to meet the Police leadership for dialogue over these sensitive matters were turned down by the Police. I categorically state that the Police leadership has never at any one time turned down such a request. On the contrary, when information was received, suggesting that some people were planning to harm leaders of political parties, the Inspector General of Police wrote inviting all political party leaders to a meeting to discuss the matter and together plan a way forward. I am glad to report that the FDC was represented at the meeting by hon. Katuntu, hon. Kazoora and Mr Angoliga. This meeting was one among many that have been held. You will recall that on February 5 2010, at Imperial Royale Hotel Kampala, the Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) signed a memorandum of understanding under which the parties agreed to move forward towards peaceful co-existence and a purposeful dialogue and cooperation to uphold specified key principles and values. 

This memorandum of understanding was signed by: Daniel Walyemera Masumba on behalf of the Conservative Party; hon. Mathias Nsubuga on behalf of the Democratic Party; hon. Alice Alaso on behalf of the Forum for Democratic Change; hon. Hussein Kyanjo on behalf of the Justice Forum (JEEMA); hon. Amama Mbabazi on behalf of the National Resistance Movement; and Christopher Opika Okumu on behalf of the Uganda People’s Congress.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your brave action of allowing me to come and assist this Parliament to cure this terrible disease of wasting taxpayers’ money; sitting here to waste time –(Interjections)– yes, by some Members of Parliament, including ministers. The minister is reading a document confirming that I signed a certain document on behalf of the Justice Forum and yet he is sure that I did not. Is he, therefore, in order to stand here and say that I signed when in fact I did not?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you will have an opportunity to ask him because I do not know where you met. So, let him finish his statement.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government is committed to upholding these principles. Indeed, Government offices and all officials are ready for dialogue on any issue at any time. The Inspector General of Police has stated this on many occasions and indeed, many people continue to dialogue with him. It is simply not true that the Police leadership turned down requests for dialogue. Current and past actions show that this is not true. 

Lastly, the call by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to the concerned authorities to take necessary measures to prevent uncalled for provocations or plans, to abide by the decisions of the court and ensure the safety of Dr Besigye, is welcome. I, however, wish to extend the same call to all of us. Let us take measures to prevent ugly incidents. One thing I want to state here is that I commend my colleague, hon. Kyanjo. He one time stated at a Police function that when Police tell him to stop, he stops right there. (Applause) But how many of you do the same? All of us, including the FDC, should take measures to prevent uncalled for provocations. We must abide by the decisions of the courts as well as the Constitution and laws regulating public demonstrations and similar events, in particular, Article 29(d) as limited by Article 43 and regulated by Article 212 of the Constitution. We must respect understandings reached and signed to ensure everybody’s safety. Let us enjoy our rights and freedoms while minding the rights and freedoms of others. Let all of us protect the common good. 

As our Prime Minister stated, power without law is despotism. If you do not obey the law because you think you are powerful MPs, then that will be despotism. It will not be good and it is not sustainable to protect individuals’ rights if the rights and the freedoms of others are being violated. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, since the statement is a response to the Opposition’s request, let me start with them.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I seek guidance on that matter; whether this Parliament is competent to debate a report presented by a minister who has been interdicted by this very Parliament on allegations of theft and corruption of oil money? Whether we can debate a report of a minister we interdicted three weeks ago? I seek for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the resolutions were clear. I do not think that this House interdicted the minister. The resolutions required the minister to use his conscience to take a decision. 

5.42
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye West Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. Probably, let me bring this one, just as a correction. If the minister did not know, I was in that meeting. I disagreed with my colleagues because I thought the partners we were sharing the signatures with were not going to be honest. Indeed, they were not in the subsequent future; so I refused to sign. So, for him to say I signed is erroneous.

Two, when I looked at the report of the minister - I first thank him for responding because many times, ministers do not even want to come and make responses. So, that one is good enough. 

When I look at No.3 on page 1, the honourable minister talked about the Police action in No.3 and as he explained here, I do not think I am convinced that the Police can assess and, therefore, make such drastic decisions independently. They – themselves - do not follow the law. I have cried on the Floor of this House a number of times that this Police have been infiltrated by paramilitary elements. They take action without the command of the streamlined Police officers and the Police officers simply keep quiet. So, this whole idea of ministers coming here to tell us that Police are doing their rightful duty is also questionable. 

There was a report which came as a result of the commissioning of this very particular House into the conduct of the Police. This is a huge volume. It was prepared under the leadership of hon. Peter Nyombi. This report is there. It was politically squeezed and denied space on the Floor of this House. It speaks volumes about the Police conduct, but this Parliament will never know for as long as that report is denied space to come here -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, are you alleging that the Speaker has politically squeezed that report?

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. This report was in the Eighth Parliament, so it was definitely not you. Everybody would have been surprised, but the report was squeezed and was denied space. I would be delighted if, Madam Speaker, you used your powers to instruct that this report be brought on the Floor because it is still alive -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, whether the report was done in the Eighth Parliament or not, it was done for the Parliament of Uganda. The institution we are referring to is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; whether the Eighth, Seventh or not. Madam Speaker, you happened to be the Deputy Speaker by then of the Eighth Parliament and according to our Constitution, you are a Speaker. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Kyanjo to allege that a report which was written to Parliament, where you were a Speaker by then, was politically squeezed and not put on the Order Paper? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: You substantiate.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of fear for the limited time for every Member to have space to debate, but I am lucky the hon. Peter Nyombi is here. The other Member who is here has no capacity to debate in this House, but hon. Peter Nyombi knows for a fact that this report was never allowed to come to this Floor. So, it is very easy, he can even whisper to his neighbour minister. Anyway, I would plead that you just ignore the request by the minister and we proceed with serious business.

On page 2 of the report of the minister, which is in question right now, he talks about -(Mr Kamara rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What do you want? Is it an order, clarification or information? What is it?

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor has just said that some Members are incapacitated and they cannot debate on this Floor of Parliament. I would like to know among us, those ones incapacitated and I would like to know, is it in order for an honourable member to tell us that we are incapacitated?

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the Hansard has captured the Member interrupting me, but I said, one of the people who were with me in the committee has no capacity to debate this issue in this House now. So, I will make a revision with my colleague in the corridors when we finish this session.

The honourable minister talked about the goodwill; the second paragraph in No.4 page 2. I want Parliament to learn to despise some of these statements. Really, for a minister to say that Police are giving a citizen goodwill, I think is not right, because Police are not there to give favours. It dispenses business, so it is not right for the honourable minister to say that there was goodwill exhibited by the Police to Dr Besigye. There was anticipation that Dr Besigye was going to cause trouble. I want to tell everybody listening to me that all the people who have died in the entire exercise of walk-to-work, have been killed by the Police, and all the properties that have been destroyed have been destroyed by the Police. So, unless there is an excuse – you know, there are some traditions where there is an excuse that if you shout at me, I will not shout at you in return, but just throw stones at your windows. If this is the stage, then we can go by that.
 
THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR ONGALO: The honourable member has just told this House that all the properties that were destroyed were destroyed by the Police; and that all the lives that were lost were as a result of Police action. Lately, there have been complaints about the state of roads in Kampala and I travel on these roads throughout Kampala, and I have seen the destruction that has resulted on these roads as a result of people burning tyres –(Applause)- on these roads. Is it in order for the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs to insinuate to this House that it was the Police burning tyres on those roads? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you should concentrate on the statements. 

MR KYANJO: I am very delighted, Madam Speaker, that you had saved me from statements that I may not be able to respond to. I want to proceed on the point on page 3, second paragraph point No.6, where the honourable minister wants credible information in the possession of FDC, and that if FDC does not provide this same credible information, then the Government will think otherwise. 

I think this is also dishonourable. That a person volunteers information to you for your own perusal and instead you come with a threat because these are actually threats to individuals who want to tell you that there is a problem. There has been –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: I thank you, hon. Kyanjo, for giving way and the Speaker. Hon. Members, it is true that if there is violence, it is not deserved in this country. It is also true that when handling certain matters, the Constitution has prescribed certain things. As per Article 23 of this Constitution, the state has the right of protection of personal liberty, and all of us, whereby except in the prescribed circumstances as prescribed by this Constitution, someone should enjoy or any person should be free to enjoy their liberty. In reference to Article 24 of the same Constitution, we should respect human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment of others. 

In executing our duties as Government, I think it would be prudent, because we are living in a changing world, that just as court deemed it right, incarcerating a person by using the pretext of preventive arrest in someone’s home –(Interjections)- I know. You want to clarify?  With due respect to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, we always share notes here, but in this case I may not take his note. (Laughter) It would be prudent in any case – he also wants me to read Article 43 – yes, I think let us debate in goodwill for the entire country. I will read his article as well. He says that, “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” (Applause) And that is true. I agree with him entirely. It is in public interest that 90 percent of the people in this country walk to their work places.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is very good that you have read the article very well, but it would be ideal that you read the article up to the end, and then it would be very good to understand it, but not reading it selectively. So, can you read Article 43(2)? 

MR NSEREKO: Since it has become a routine for me to do that noble job, Article 43(2) “Public interest under this article shall not permit —
(a) political persecution;
(b) detention without trial;
(c) any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed by this chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society, or what is provided in this Constitution.”

Therefore, hon. Members, I think it is true that in this match, every side is trying to protect its goal post using the same Constitution, but the reality is that this shall continue to move. I am worried and thinking of a situation – may God forbid - whereby let us say, hon. Byabagambi, who is my friend, is at one time put under preventive arrest thinking that he may go on to a ceremony with Police having intelligence from, for example, Mohamed Nsereko, saying that hon. Byabagambi in his tour of the road, may cause certain dangers to certain people and he is put under preventative arrest. 

With due respect, I still believe that whereas I came out to say at one point that it was not the right time to cause demonstrations during a period in which children were going to do exams –(Applause)- but it is also true hon. Members that if Police are duly aware that I am coming to Parliament to perform my duties as a Member of Parliament and the means that I have chosen to move to Parliament is by foot, then why would we really engage in such cat-and-mouse actions of stopping me from my house to walk to Parliament? I think that in this case, hon. Member –

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you have taken hon. Kyanjo’s time and you are really now submitting.

MR NSEREKO: Indeed, that is the information that I wanted to give –(Laughter)- but let us not all try to protect goal posts; let us discuss in the interest of this nation that today, it may be used for such circumstances and tomorrow, the perpetrators may use it with wrong motives. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, please close.

MR KYANJO: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for the information. I was going through the statement of the minister, but I will have to stop somewhere because I think Members will also contribute in other areas. 

There is this statement, again on page 3, where the minister is promising that Government will conduct thorough investigations and those proved responsible for the alleged planned actions against Dr Besigye, will be dealt with. 

There has been history to read from; the same “minister”, the one occupying that office, has not been able to bring to this House the people who killed others during the Kayunga riots. He has not been able to bring credible reports to this House of who burnt Kasubi Tombs. This ministry has not been able to even hold Arinaitwe accountable. This same ministry has not been able to present credible reports on who actually were the Kiboko Squad. So, if this same organisation parades itself here to say they are going to bring credible reports to this House, I have my doubts and I think I should be forgiven because of such a history. 

Lastly, the minister says, “I must, however, emphasise that Government has no intentions whatsoever to harm Dr Besigye.” Allow me, Madam Speaker, to accept the plea of the minister, but also to inform him that there is no sufficient control within the organ. Dr Besigye has in the past been harmed and quite critically. There was no apology or any single action against those who perpetuated these cruel actions to Dr Besigye. 

So, my prayer is that when ministers come to this House, let them be humane and treat us as their colleagues, and present a balanced picture so that we do not debate with anger. Otherwise, when you tell blatant lies, you cause people to become angry. I definitely thank the minister for the good complement he has given me and thank you, Madam Speaker for this time.

6.02
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Leader of the Opposition was giving his statement, he was looking at what has happened to one citizen in this country since 2001; when Dr Kiiza Besigye tried to compete for presidency of this country. The state interfered with his freedom and his constitutional right. You recall how he was locked up in his house and how he run away from this country and went to exile. 

He came back as a Ugandan and a citizen to stay in this country to enjoy his rights. When he again tried to vie for an office which is open to any Ugandan between 35 and 75 years, he was again badly handled and arrested, court martialled.

Again, in 2011, when he wanted to stand for presidency, the same thing happened. He has undergone torture, humiliation, intimidation, denied freedoms and rights, which he is supposed to enjoy in his own country.

The statement which was presented on the Floor of this Parliament was to request this Parliament to enable every Ugandan to enjoy these freedoms. Madam Speaker, the rights for me and every other Uganda is not granted by the state. It is my right to enjoy my freedoms in this country. Therefore, there is no way the state or a given institution can stop me from enjoying my freedom. 

The Constitution further directs that the organs of the state must ensure that all of us in this country enjoy these freedoms. So, why should Police come to my house, my person, property, which is guaranteed by the Constitution? Why should I be imprisoned? 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for his statement. I have a few remarks to make on this statement. On page 1 paragraph 3, the minister rightly observes that indeed, the intentions of the demonstrators were not limited to the high cost of living. 

I would like to inform the minister and the House that it is true that indeed, it also involved demonstrating against the rampant corruption in this country other than the high cost of living. 

Secondly, on page 2, No.5, the minister remarks that the people he termed as goons were apprehended at Dr Kiiza Besigye’s residence and taken to Police by those who arrested them. But he has not reported that they were eventually released and even given transport. But after two days, those who arrested them were all arrested and as I speak, they are being held incommunicado by the state for the last six days. They are 11 people who were apprehended for arresting goons – and the minister is here preaching justice –(Interjections)– since he did not name the goons, I will not name them either. 


I pray that if the minister is indeed in charge, let him brief us on where these people are being held, so that they can get justice.

On page 3, the minister is talking about information that is being alluded to by the FDC, to the effect that Dr Besigye could easily be harmed or even killed. I would like to tell the minister and the House that the misgivings of the FDC and the rest of Uganda emanates from the history of the state –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join those colleagues that have thanked the minister at least for attempting to give answers to Parliament. On page 1, the minister states that the advice was given following receipt of intelligence reports suggesting that those planning and participating in the walk-to-work campaign have other motives. 

Now, the minister keeps it at that and those motives are not mentioned. But I just want to remind this House and the nation that Dr Besigye, by pronouncement of the Attorney-General of this Government and which is Government position to date, has been pronounced in this country as the only citizen who is less innocent than others. And for that reason -(Interjection)- yes, the Attorney-General wrote that he does not stand at the same scale of innocence like the other candidates he was competing with in this country. It is, therefore, not surprising that when Dr Besigye walks, he must of necessity, threaten the rights of others. The only way, in my construction of the English language, a person walking can trample on the rights of others, is by stepping on their toes. Nobody today, since this campaign started, has ever come up to say that Dr Besigye stepped on his toes.

On page 2 of the minister’s statement, he states - number four, “It is true, courts ruled...” – it was one court in my recollection – “...that Dr Besigye’s residence is not a detention centre. The Police respect this decision. This is why the Police withdrew from the residence.” I think this statement is lacking in honesty. I attended the court proceedings and these were the findings of court. That detention in a place that is not gazetted is wrong; detention beyond 48 hours is wrong; detention without a charge being spelt out is wrong and so on and so forth. 

What is most striking in this is the minister telling Parliament that Police withdrew in respect of this position. That is not true. We have two affidavits on the court record. One by one inspector Tanui that even before taking this matter to court, they had withdrawn and the minister is saying, “When we got the decision, we left.” (Member timed out.) 

6.13
MS RITA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I want to thank God first for the opportunity of being able to catch your eye ever since this Parliament started –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know when you want to speak, you stand up. If you do not stand up I cannot imagine that you want to speak. Please.

MS NINSIIMA: Madam Speaker, I want to bring it to this House that when we are discussing Dr Besigye, we should realise that we are not discussing someone who is usual; who is common. In my view, Dr Besigye is at the rank of President Yoweri Museveni -(Laughter)– and, therefore -

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS NINSIIMA: Therefore, it is hurting when you look at a president like Besigye being humiliated and degraded in the manner that is usually done. I, however, want to plead with Members of the Opposition to realise that since Dr Besigye is at the rank of such a person, they should not take it for granted that walking is normal for him, because I imagine if President Museveni woke up one morning and decided to walk, he would attract crowds. People would come and say, “Eeh, why is he walking” and they would be concerned. Therefore, when Dr Besigye is given the opportunity to walk normally, expect crowds to come, some of whom are full of thieves that -(Mr Ssasaga rose_)- excuse me, hon. Ssasaga; this is the first time I am speaking. So, just wait -

THE SPEAKER: That is her maiden speech. Leave her.

MS NINSIIMA: I would imagine that we look at him as a person who is important, and cannot easily walk and just pass by without catching the eye of the public. Also, sympathise with the business community because some of the people who move with him are looters and not genuine in the cause. Let us sympathise with our people. As we respect Dr Besigye, let us also think about the business community that is usually innocent in some of these causes.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you honourable for giving way. The information I wanted to give you is that, it is very true as you are saying that President Yoweri Museveni cannot walk and if he walks, perhaps he can attract some crowds. The information I was giving you is that when Dr Kiiza Besigye passes in my constituency in Budadiri East, those who are digging, those who are cooking, those who are doing whichever activity, will leave it and run to him. When President Museveni passes around, nobody will run around. (Laughter) That is the information I thought of giving you. (Laughter) Really, that is the latest information from Budadiri. Dr Besigye should be given more respect and honour given the magnetic forces he attracts when he is moving around. Thank you.

6.17
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make some comments. I will try to be as brief as possible. I beg the indulgence of Members to listen to my views. I have three points to debate on.

We have set a precedent in this House that there are areas that we sometimes all speak about and agree. If they are bad things, we condemn them; if they are from Government, we condemn them. But sometimes I get disappointed by my colleagues from the Opposition. I honestly get disappointed, with due respect to my Leader of the Opposition, my former chairman of PAC, whom I respect. I watched Besigye on TV supervising the inhuman beating of the youth -(Interjections)- yes, I saw him! You want to be treated with respect by the Police and you want to mistreat others; people dripping with blood. Why didn’t he report them? I heard him asking the youth, “Ombanja?” How do we know that those youth have no contractual obligation with Besigye? 

Number two, mistreating the Police officers. The wife of Dr Kiiza Besigye, the man who is not usual, one time slapped a poor woman Police officer at the High Court. The same people never condemned it. Human rights bodies never condemned it. Colleagues, does being an Opposition leader mean someone is above the law? Does being not usual mean being above the law? Sometimes you disappoint me!

Finally, why the allegations of killing? I sympathise with my friend Anywar. I was watching NTV. I felt so bad because they told me she had gone to intensive care, but at the same time, I was disappointed to hear insinuations that she got an accident because of the Police. Let us not politicise each and every matter, otherwise you will kill our bi-partisan spirit.

THE SPEAKER: What is the order hon. Osegge?

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that as we talk now, we only thank God that hon. Beatrice Anywar is out of intensive care. Rightly as the papers said, she kissed death. Is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to say it was an allegation when he was not even there; and two, when the person being talked about is not even in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, no one has talked about hon. Beatrice Anywar. Secondly, it was the Leader of the Opposition who came here and requested for a statement from the government about Dr Besigye. Maybe you were not here at that time. Honourable members, you know that my work is to listen; if you are making noise, it means I cannot listen.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I said that I sympathized with hon. Beatrice Anywar, when I saw her on television being disturbed by what she was going through because of the accident. However, at the same time, I was perturbed to hear the same commentary from the FDC spokesperson, who was saying something on television that this could have been Police foul play –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, just a while ago, you ruled rightly that a Member must rise to catch your eye. I just realised that the names you are reading out to contribute are for those Members who are seated yet there are those who are willing to stand to catch your eye. I would rather think that those through hon. Kabakumba’s intervention should not be permitted. Members should really rise on their own to catch your eye.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, do not try to do my work. The names I read from the Opposition were given to me by the Opposition. Hon. Peter Ogwang.

6.22
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, allow me thank the Minister of Internal Affairs. As a youth representative, I would like to say that we need to be taken seriously on one aspect. Some of us are walking, but the way we are beginning to mobilize our young people as a stepping stone for our own motives is not going to work for us. How many times have some of us gone to these prisons you are talking about? How many times have we suffered as leaders? Really, why should it be the youth? Why should a leader announce that they are walking? If I want to walk to work, why should I announce it? Why not just walk as Peter Ogwang?

Secondly, I recently watched some footage on television – imagine how leaders carried potties to Police officers! Surely, you go and give a potty to a Police officer! As leaders, we should be realistic. We know the state of our country and we know the problems we are fighting. Are you trying to say that some of us who are talking here are not concerned about fighting corruption? Do you mean only those walking are the ones fighting corruption? As leaders, we should look for solutions to solve the problems of this country other than resorting to walk-to-work; it cannot solve our problems.

6.25
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA  JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank the minister for the presentation to this House. While I was reading through this report, I noted a few issues on page 5. Like hon. Ritah Ninsiima said, I have high regard for Dr Kiiza Besigye because by all standards, he is a senior person in this country. However, at the same time, I also noted, like the minister put it and like the Constitution says, that as we enjoy our rights and freedoms, we should be mindful of the rights and freedoms of others.

Madam Speaker, we have seen it all in this country, especially with the nature of riots and demonstrations that have been going on in Kampala and other areas like Mbale. With that, I do not think that a right-thinking person, whether in the NRM or the Opposition, would appreciate that. Like hon. Ogwang said, many of our young entrepreneurs lose business due to the confusion in that regard. 

At the same time, if you look at the international image, according to statistics, the earnings from the tourist sector went down by 30 percent, as members said. This is because the would-be tourists got scared, thinking Uganda was on fire because of such activities. So, I would like to say that as senior cadres and other senior people think of this, they should also be mindful of the side effects. In that regard, I do not support demonstrations and I do not support the enjoyment of rights at the expense of the rights of others. I do not support this. My people also do not support it. That is why you can never hear of demonstrations in Hoima.

I would also like to say that I support hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s request for Government to provide security for Dr Kiiza Besigye. I am saying this because much as you have information that there are intentions to harm the leader of Dr Kiiza Besigye’s nature, some of us also have information that within the very organisation in the Opposition, there are members ready to create an impression that they are from Government and they harm their own leader. (Member timed out.)

6.29
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have got two issues. One is that I want to respond to what my colleague, hon. Ritah Ninsiima, said. I would like to remind her about Article 98, clauses (1) and (2) of our Constitution when relating Dr Kiiza Besigye to the President of Uganda. The President will always remain the fountain of honour. I do not see in any way Dr Kiiza Besigye being near to the President. 

The second issue is on page 3 of the minister’s statement. The minister’s statement talks about producing credible information by the Leader of the Opposition. We have seen names of our security people being spoilt because of fabricated information. Sometime in here, hon. Akello Franca was talking about the accident, and you might have read what was written; it was insinuating that a so-called Arinaitwe, who transferred to reside in Lubowa, caused the accident because when somebody got that picture in their mind, then the accident happened. 

Madam Speaker, all these statements are made to insinuate and even spoil the names of our security personnel. We have seen many being intimidated from even taking action because of these political statements. I want to request this House that as we have been passing resolutions demanding that Government comes on this Floor and substantiates whatever they do, I beg to move that the Leader of the Opposition comes with another statement to bring credible information to this House so that the truth is found out and those who are involved are investigated and the law is applied. If not, he should withdraw his statement. 

6.32
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the minister for presenting this statement. I will begin by putting the record right on what was raised by the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs and member of the Committee for Defence and Internal Affairs, my brother Hajji Hussein Kyanjo. He said that the report that was made by the select committee that was probing the action and acts of the Police was politically suppressed. I want to put the record clear that the day we saved the Bills that lapsed in the last Parliament, you did say and advise that after handling those Bills, we would handle the reports that remained pending in the last Parliament. That is on the record of the Hansard. 

Secondly, hon. Ssemujju Nganda said the last time Col (Rtd) Besigye was walking or participating in the walk-to-work campaign, he was protesting corruption. I want to appeal to Members that that is not the way corruption can be wiped out in this country. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have the appetite to speak on this matter, but I have not spoken on it. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to concoct and attribute statements, which I have not made in this House, to me? 

THE SPEAKER: I believe –(Interjections) (Laughter)
 
MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, these two friends normally walk together. Secondly, Ssemujju Nganda happens to be my MP; maybe that is why I happen to remember what he says more than he does. However, the way to fight corruption is through the laws that are in place. We have the Constitution and we have the IGG. We have the arms of Government that can help us fight corruption and not walking to work; this will not solve any problem in as far as corruption is concerned. 

Hon. Members, we are overstretching the Police. Whereas the Army, the workers and youth are represented in this House, the Police are not represented. It is we who should help and explain whatever is happening on that side. Whenever we condemn the Police, we demoralise or de-motivate them. A “thank you” is enough. Anyone of us who says “thank you” to the Police gives enough motivation. We should not always condemn or accuse. Recently, we lost a Police officer in Kira during a walk-to-work campaign; who is accounting for that life? (Member timed out.)

6.36
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance, and maybe the guidance of the Attorney-General, to interpret for me something that is disturbing my mind.  I respect Article 97(1) of the Constitution of this country that provides for the immunity of Members of Parliament in this House. However, I want to be educated about the limits to which this immunity must stretch. Does it mean that I will just wake up one morning, and bring anything unverifiable to the House for purposes of informing through rumours, gossip and everything? 

Possibly, Madam Speaker, this could be the reason why some Members who bring information to this Parliament and tell us that they are informing us are not ready to speak the same way outside Parliament. To me, it shows that possibly they do not want to take responsibility of what they say here and instead disguise behind the immunity of Members of Parliament. 

I would, therefore, like to be educated on how far this immunity stretches and whether we cannot, as Members of Parliament, re-navigate this provision to make it definite so that we provide for those who are going to serve us with rumours, engage us in debate and waste our time debating according to rumours and unverifiable information. Can’t we re-navigate this provision and provide something, some kind of motivation, whether negative or positive, to whoever will have served this Parliament with rumours - wasting Members’ time debating according to rumours? I beg to be clarified. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought the issue of Dr Besigye being arrested or stopped from moving is in the public domain. Where is the rumour? 

6.38
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for his statement. Whereas we would appreciate the action or the intention of the walk-to-work protests, I would like to condemn, as a mother and a leader, the issue of walk-to-work protests. With due respect to the walk-to-work campaign, we need as leaders to weigh the good and the bad that it has caused to this country. 

If you are a leader and you are empathetic, and you have been given an opportunity by Ugandans to come and represent them in this House, should we lead these people to go on the streets and walk to work when we know - whereas the walk-to-work campaign may have its own intentions, we must look at its effects. Our children have been taken to prison; many of them have lost their lives and their families are hurt. With due respect, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I think we are making an attempt to reach a compromise and as we make that attempt, we need to be careful not to injure the feelings of one part of the House.

If someone stands in their capacity as an honourable member to condemn the whole exercise of walk-to-work, it is not good because a child was at home in Masaka and was shot dead; the child was not walking and it was not killed by the people walking. Is the honourable member in order to put a blanket condemnation on an issue that has got its own merits, which are known to the people who conducted it? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter has never come here to be debated on its merits. So, I do not know whether walk-to-work has demerits or not; so I cannot rule.

MS SENINDE: I thank you for your wise ruling. The reason why I raise these issues is because in my personal opinion, I have weighed and I have seen that there is no good but bad. We are the leaders who are elected to come and talk on behalf of those people who cannot come here to Parliament and talk. If we see that there is a problem, we are the right people to come here and propose policy changes. We are the right people to propose amendments in the laws. We are not the right people to go to the streets as leaders and mobilise people to walk to work when we well know the outcomes for the people we represent.

As I conclude, I am glad that I am saying this when my brother, hon. Mpuuga, is here. I saw hon. Mpuuga on TV mobilising Ugandans to go and walk to work when the children were going to do exams. I was perturbed because we are all parents here - we are leaders, mothers and fathers of this country; is that the right thing to do? If we have intentions, let us make our intentions clear to Ugandans.

6.34
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): If I could turn the attention of the Members to page 3 of the presentation by the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs. He says that there are some concerns from the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala Mafabi that Dr Besigye’s life is in danger. I am trying to put a way forward. When you enter politics, you have to first protect yourself. If Dr Besigye is saying that his life is in danger, he has to make sure that he protects himself. If he sees that walking to work will endanger him, then he should stop walking to work.

I think I am bringing a way forward. As Members of Parliament, our concern is to make sure that Dr Besigye’s life is safe, but for us to do that, let him first stop walking to work and there will be no excuse for someone to harm him as he walks to work.

I am also requesting Government not to fire bullets when we are handling walk-to-work demonstrations. When we fire bullets, some innocent people get hurt. We should find a proper way of handling walk-to-work campaigns. We can use teargas, purple water but not bullets. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I want to give you is that my understanding of political parties is that the Opposition is a government in waiting, but more importantly, it must respect the legitimate government in power. As the Opposition, if they are to win the battle, they must respect the government in power. The government must also respect the Opposition because it is a government in waiting. 

I am of the view that as Members of Parliament, we need to move beyond local and cheap politics; populist politics. On the very day when we were debating the oil issue, we asked hon. Mpuuga not go and walk because we were debating corruption. He insisted and walked. This is why you are alone. We are now saying that if we are to fight a war, we must fight a war that is genuine. I thank you so much.

MS NEBANDA: Thank you for that information. Another thing is that Dr Besigye contested to be the President and he is still going to contest. If he walks to work and dies, that means he will no longer be a leader. So, I am saying this in good faith. In order for us to protect our children, let us stop walk-to-work campaigns and I am requesting the government not to use brutal ways when handling walk-to-work protests in order for us to save our children. 

6.49
MRS CECELIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to contribute on this subject. I am amazed that on matters of security of persons, the House is polarised. When this matter was first brought to Parliament, Parliament was unanimous in the condemnation of the manner in which the Police handled the walk-to-work demonstrators.

Madam Speaker, I just want to draw the attention of the Members to Article 211(3) of the Constitution. I would not like to take so much time reading it, but it does describe the character of a Police officer - of what we expect our Police to be. Clause (3) says: “The Uganda Police Force shall be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive…” 

I have watched on television the behaviour of the Police, particularly the notorious Arinaitwe, under the command of a senior Police officer, and I am amazed that today the Minister of Internal Affairs is asking for credible evidence. As a senior citizen, I travelled to Nairobi to visit Dr Kiiza Besigye, my party president, and I took trouble to talk to the doctors who attended to him. The concern of the doctors was the corrosive nature of the chemical that was sprayed at him. It was for that purpose that Dr Kiiza Besigye had to be transferred to be looked at by another expert in order to establish the effect of that chemical. Today, the Police officer who is supposed to be patriotic, disciplined, competent and productive is not behind bars. He is free and at large, having handled Dr Kiiza Besigye in the manner he did. (Member timed out.)

6.53
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Following what has been said by the two sides of the House, I beg you to lend me your ears. I have a very important message which I beg to communicate now. (Laughter) 

On behalf of the Opposition political party leaders who do not sit here - I am representing them - I would like to echo a message of concern about the safety of our fellow leader, Dr Kiiza Besigye, in this country. Following what happened to him in April, we are worried as to whether this government cares that anybody of eminence in the Opposition should deserve a life. 

I am saying so because under the Uganda laws, Article 29(d) of the Constitution indicates that any person is free to demonstrate his or her interest on a matter of concern. The matter related to the walk-to-work campaign does not even have to be referred to the Constitution; free movement is a fundamental human right. So, I expected the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs to come here and explain as to why Ugandans should not be free to walk. 

I would like to cite a case in a court of law, which was decided recently, Uganda against Dr Kiiza Besigye, at Kasangati. The chief magistrate ruled that “walking to work is a freedom and I find difficulties to convict Dr Besigye because walking to work is a constitutional freedom.” I expected the Minister of Internal Affairs to come here and report that the court has ruled that walk-to-work is a freedom, so you should go on organised. (Laughter) I am surprised. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs, knowing very well that Uganda is one of the countries in Africa which is supposed to be law-abiding and a member of the United Nations General Assembly, should have reported that from now on, Government would like to ensure that those who walk to work are protected. Recently, for example, Gen. Tinyefunza was sent to see a certain old woman in Luweero and he walked a very long distance to go and report. Why didn’t the Police arrest him? (Laughter) Why concentrate on Besigye and we in the Opposition? 

6.56
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, it is sad the way we are debating a matter of human rights, about an individual who is a citizen, and about individuals who are citizens. There is a proverb in Kiswahili that says, Wanyonge wana haki. It means that the weak ones have no rights; that is, the way we are, might is right. 

We should listen to each other. Right now, the NRM is in power, they are the majority and they are powerful, but that has happened in Uganda’s history and other countries’ history. So, we must respect the rights of other citizens, the minority. You can only be a democracy if you respect and protect the rights of the minority. So, Madam Speaker, this idea or practice of turning victims into aggressors like we see in this country will lead this country into more trouble. 

The NRA was dissatisfied - I was a member of the UPM - and they went to the bush to fight aggression and bad governance. There are people who are now dissatisfied with the NRM leadership and they have not gone to the bush to kill 300,000 people. They are just walking. I have participated in the walk-to-work campaigns three times. I have walked from my house alone without telling anybody that I am going to walk and Dr Besigye does exactly the same. He walks alone. 

We now think that Dr Besigye’s life is in danger. Why? We have information which we cannot present to Parliament, but there are plots by the Police and the Army to harm Dr Besigye and this is not far-fetched because the Police of Uganda, under Gen. Kayihura, has seen extrajudicial killings of about 100 Ugandans. (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I think we should be very careful of what we say here as leaders. I do not recollect - and I was in charge of the Police for five years - the Police ever killing anybody through extrajudicial arrangements. Never! 

Madam Speaker, is it in order - and at an appropriate time I will demand an explanation and an apology - for an honourable Member of Parliament to stand before this House and tell this country, without giving any substantive information, that the Uganda Police has been involved in extrajudicial killings? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wafula, can you substantiate the 100 people.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes, Madam Speaker, I will. During the Mabira demonstrations, five people were killed. One was killed by mob justice and he was an Asian; four were shot by the Police and –(Interruptions)- killing without trying somebody is extrajudicial for goodness sake! 

During the Kayunga demonstrations - that report even came here - over 30 people were killed by the Police and Army. During Kasubi, four people were shot. We even saw on TV people being shot by the Army. So, what evidence do you need? During the walk-to-work campaign, about 20 people have been killed. What evidence do you need? (Applause)
THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, but you say it was the Police who killed 100 people and now you are making adjustments; you are saying the others were killed by the Army and the others were killed through mob justice. It is a serious matter.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, people have been killed by the Police and Army, and all people who have been killed have been shot. Walk-to-work or the Mabira demonstrations have never had cases were they held a gun to kill anybody. That is a fact. Unless we accept some of these mistakes we make, we are not going to have a country which is democratic. We should accept -(Mr Olanya rose_)- Information accepted.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seen how Dr Kiiza Besigye is being handled. I would like to seek clarification from the government -(Interjections)- by way of information.

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Oromait.

MR OROMAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am now half a century on this planet and I have seen regimes from Obote I, Amin and this one here. When we talk about extrajudicial killings, let us give credit to this Government that it has never done anything. (Applause) I have seen what happened during Amin’s regime, Obote’s regime and Obote II, where I even lost one of my eyes. I do not see with one eye because of how brutal the soldiers were. When we are talking, let us talk responsibly. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: But people have been murdered and shot, and they have been shot by security forces -(Interruption)

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu - and by the way, I thank you for giving way - that in the case of the deaths that we had over the Mabira demonstration, the main cause was that the route that was agreed upon by the Police and the organisers of the demonstration was not followed. Another route was taken in a crowded area and this cost a lot of lives. Therefore, the cause of loss of lives was not the Police. 

The Police were attempting to stop a riot that had erupted, which led to the death of one Asian and, therefore, it is not correct, Ndugu Wafula, to condemn the Police as being the cause. In my view, the cause was diverting from the agreement that had been reached by the Police and the organisers of the demonstration. I thank you.  

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, we should not justify murder. Children have been shot in school by the Police because they are striking. Almost every strike where the Police have gone, they have killed children and you know that, honourable Members of Parliament. You know it. (Member timed out.)

7.06
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Kasangati is one of the places I represent in this Parliament and I would invite you to sympathise with us. Kasangati is under siege. Even as I speak to you today, we have more than 20 residents of Kasangati arrested by the Police and being held incommunicado. Some of them, their crime is that they have been seen walking with Dr Kiiza Besigye. 

Not all these people who are being arrested and tortured are from the Opposition. Let us separate Dr Kiiza Besigye from the torture. I know there are some people who grow pimples each time the name of Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye is mentioned. Can you sympathise with the rest of the Ugandans who are, as a result, tortured? 

I was arrested in April this year and taken to Luzira. I was booked in Ward 1B where the hon. Mike Mukula was a resident -(Laughter)- where Brigadier, now Major General, Jim Muhwezi was a resident and Dr Alex Kamugisha was a resident. Recently, the hon. Gilbert Bukenya also found himself in Luzira. After the killings that happened in September 2009, the hon. Gilbert Bukenya applauded the President for showing that the State exists. I pity colleagues who are clapping when you are talking about human rights. We will be watching - those of us who will be alive and I hope I will be one of them - when one by one you are being taken to Luzira and bundled up on pick-ups by the very people you are now applauding and clapping for.

When you are speaking about people’s rights, you go to Kasangati, you fire tear gas in hospitals and MPs here are blaming Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye. You go and kill people and it must be Besigye. The other day it was Buganda and Police as a result killed more than 30 people –(Interjection)- I will receive information later if you can allow me -(Member timed out.).

7.10
MRS JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU (MRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by reading Article 21 in Chapter 4 of the Constitution: 

“Equality and freedom from discrimination -
(1)	All  persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every respect, and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.”

I would like to explain this briefly. People should not ask for fair treatment of one person at the expense of others. (Applause) If we are here to debate the problems of riots and others, let us look at the root cause of the problem.  Let us look at the trouble causer -(Interjections)- Yes, let us not look at the effects. If the riots that are led by Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye were not there, do you think people would have died in the way they did? People would not have died. 

You have a right to fight for your freedom because it is rightly stated in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that everyone has a right to expression of their freedom and the rest, but sincerely, if there is no hidden motive behind the walk-to-work campaigns, can you find people going to their places of work in a taxi and you ask them to disembark and join you? Do you have to burn tyres on the roadside? At the end of it all, you blame it on Government that it has not delivered. Sincerely, if we are to debate, let us do it –(Interjection)- Yes, please give me the information. 

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The honourable member is debating very well. Some people were sent from Kampala to Kasangati in a bus so that they could begin walking from there. Really, if people are walking with good intentions, why should you hire them from Kampala? There is something wrong with the whole exercise. Thank you very much. 

MRS NANTUME EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, I would have appreciated the way it is brought up because the government has a role to protect people’s lives and property. So, if we are bringing up one person in the name of Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye to be protected, as demonstrators, let us also look at people’s lost property and the lives lost, so that we can play a fair game. 

MR SABILA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Arising from the need for human rights, that is, the freedom of expression, usually people do not die. However, a case like this one of walking to work and other related incidences, have claimed lives of many Ugandans. We have lost immeasurable property in terms of economic value. I wonder why leaders of our calibre, at the level of legislators, continue to cherish and glorify such incidences that continue to claim lives of our people and continue to make us incur losses. I feel embarrassed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS NANTUME EGUNYU: We have other party presidents like hon. Lukyamuzi here; how come he is not behaving the way Col (Rtd) Besigye is behaving, but just joins them -(Laughter)

7.15
MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to go straight to page 3 of the statement, No. 6, paragraph 2, where the minister says, “FDC to produce credible information”. I think this could be very useful so that these people avoid propaganda, because what they always do is nothing other than propaganda. (Applause) So, the Opposition –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I am pretty sorry that I had to interrupt my colleague. However, I was one time allowed to lay on the Table images and pictures of individuals who had intended to kill Dr Besigye. That is evidence that I brought on this Floor. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to allege that we have no evidence? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think he said that; proceed. 

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, what my brother should only do is to stop walk-to-work protests and all these other complaints they are stating will not be there. It is them who are causing all these problems because of the walk-to-work.  You imitate what my brother, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, does; when he sees something dangerous, he jumps away and hides somewhere. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of information. Since I came to this Ninth Parliament, I do not recall at any one moment when I ever gave up the crusade of walk-to-work.  The only incidence where I retracted from a move was when Police wanted to attack me at Ndeeba and I found shelter because ordinarily, when you are at war and you are the captain, you should die last. (Laughter)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, that was a funny moment because I watched my brother on the television jumping around wetlands.  However, I would like to urge the Government side to be very serious. When the Opposition says Government is planning to harm Dr Besigye, they are the ones planning dangerous motives for the Government side. So, we need to be very serious because the plan they are talking about is more dangerous to us as Government. 

7.19
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for his presentation. I just have two or three comments to make. 

One, I think the Opposition should review the methods you are using to engage Government. I think walk-to-work at the moment is not a right strategy. (Applause) Most of the people we see walking seem not to even have offices in Kampala. However, that is not justification for Government to sometimes use excessive force like in the incident where Dr Kiiza Besigye was sprayed with lachrymatory chemical in Wandegeya. As a doctor, when I watched, I got scared because I thought that it was too much and that putting that chemical directly in the eyes would injure the cornea and even result in blindness. 

Part of the cure to the ills that we are seeing has to do with Article 71 of the Constitution, which clearly defines how the multiparty political system was envisaged to function. Article 71(2), if you will allow me to read, says: “Parliament shall, by law, prescribe a code of conduct for political organisations and political parties and provide for the establishment of a national consultative forum for political parties and organisations with such functions as Parliament may prescribe.”

I think Government should show us the commitment that we would want a multiparty system to function in this country by introducing these relevant Bills, which will define how the various political parties shall behave, but also provide for a consultative forum for the various political parties where constructive engagement can be held -(Interruption)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Baryomunsi. The National Consultative Forum has been re-activated. There have been consultations already on the matter and a meeting of the various political parties under the forum is due to be held on the 17th of this month.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Rugunda, for the information. My understanding of this provision in the Constitution is that the code of conduct and also the instruments to create that forum should come here to Parliament so that we define how that forum can function and also how the parties can function within this multiparty system. Otherwise, one will ask, why is this forum not functional? 

One of the reasons why Dr Kiiza Besigye and other key political leaders keep walking is because they want to engage in the political process and we have not created sufficient space at national level to enable political leaders at that level to engage each other. (Member timed out.)

7.23
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think this is the time for us as Parliament to not only review, but pronounce ourselves on the matter of walk-to-work campaigns. If walk-to-work was a project, it is the time to say it is an unprofitable venture. This is the time to say it is an undesirable business and this is the time to say, it is an incompetent enterprise and indeed it is an undesirable project.

We know that under the guise of the walk-to-work campaign, there is nothing but economic sabotage. Therefore, this Government and we as the people of the people should come out strongly, condemn it and discourage it by all means.

I am surprised that we come here and cry foul under the guise of human rights, but we know very well under the law that he who seeks justice should come with clean hands. How clean are the people feigning human rights violations? What is the genesis of all these deaths and destruction of property and disruption of business in this country under the guise of walk-to-work campaigns?

I would like to say that for me this is not “walk-to-work”, but “work-to-walk” where unsuspecting innocent youths are enticed to do the work by walking, destroying and creating carnage on the roads. This must stop. It is the right of the State to protect and create stability in the country; we must encourage it, use every means to stop it and advise our colleagues to use other means of engagement other than this wanton destruction. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.25
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and colleagues, this matter has been very contentious. Let me take the opportunity to say that my brother, Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye, was one of those who midwifed this Constitution in 1995. One of the key things we need to understand is that we are at the stage where we are having the second multiparty dispensation. It is also important for us to note that if FDC, God forbid, was in power today, they would do exactly the same thing the NRM is doing.

I want to put it on record; let me say, and listen to me very carefully; no government in the world would negotiate itself out of power. I am from the private sector and there was a great scientist called Isaac Newton; he said that for every given forward force, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Once the elections have taken place and a government is sworn in, that government is mandated to protect the people and ensure that the instruments of coercion are properly utilised.

What is the duty of the Police? Let me be as clear as I can; the functions of the Uganda Police are very clear. One, is to protect life and property. Is Uganda Police doing that? Number two, is to preserve law and order. Is Uganda Police doing that? Number three, is to prevent and detect crime. Is Uganda Police doing that? Four, is to cooperate with civilian authorities and other security organs established under this Constitution with the population generally. Is Uganda Police doing that? (Interruption)

MS BUSINGE RUSOKE: Thank you for giving way. Related to that, I think the law is very clear that no one is above the law in this country. As a good leader, we must lead by example, especially when peaceful means are suggested. I think, dear colleagues, if you want to demonstrate, the Police will allow you to request and can even escort you to protect you and protect the crowds you cannot control.

One of the members of the Opposition said that Dr Kiiza Besigye is popular and wherever he passes, crowds follow him. For your information, these crowds are rowdy, uncontrollable and destructive, and he does not have the capacity to control them. Do you think our Police will sit down and look at people’s property being stolen, stones thrown at the Police, things grabbed, roads burnt and destroyed and you expect Police -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, hon. Mukula, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you concerns – you remember one time when I called you and you were crying that you were a conduit of money to some other people, but you were being victimised. (Interjection) I am talking to him because he is aware. So, do you also agree that sometimes people can be victimised? (Laughter)

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that is a diversionary matter. (Applause) I, Mukula, to cry like a baby! (Laughter) Moreover, an Arrow Boy! what are you talking about? We shall get another time when we will discuss the matter that you have raised. 

Let me put it on record that I regret, personally as a Ugandan and a Pan Africanist, the loss of life. Yesterday, while you were approving the Inspector General of Police, one of the key things that he might have raised was the way sometimes the Police acted. We still have a Police Force that is continually undergoing training. My view is that on the side of the Opposition and for us in Government –(Member timed out.)

7.32
MS ANIFA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative,Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that we are discussing at hand is a very serious matter and I call upon every Member that once we are contributing, let us avoid making wild allegations. Let us search our souls and realise that human rights issues are non-partisan and they are supposed to be enjoyed by every citizen. The moment we get that, it will move us to what our obligations are. 

Article 17 of our Constitution, clause 1(b), enumerates the duties of a citizen, including our senior leaders, namely, to respect the rights and freedoms of others. The moment you want your freedom to be respected, respect the freedoms of others. Hon. Mpuuga, the moment you want your freedoms as a representative of Masaka Municipality to be respected, respect the rights and freedoms of the MPs from Wakiso and Kampala districts because they also came with a mandate to represent their constituencies. 

Regarding justice and fair treatment, when you want to be treated fairly, extend the same treatment towards others so that they also enjoy the treatment you desire. Article 17(1)(c) of the Constitution talks about defending and protecting children and vulnerable persons against any form of abuse, harassment and ill-treatment. I am the Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee; imagine the walk-to-work protest at the time when our children were going to sit for final exams. Imagine the trauma they would go through. That was treasonable! 

Article 17(1)(f) asks us to cooperate with the lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order. The Police are doing their work and so, you are supposed to work together with them instead of saying, “We have information that our leader is going to be harmed”. (Member timed out.)

7.35
MRS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister for Internal Affairs for their statements. At least their statements will make the whole country know how the Members of Parliament have been feeling about the walk-to-work protests. 

I join the leaders who are concerned about the increase in commodity prices and those who are against corruption. However, my concern is: By walking to work, how does it solve the increase in prices and stop corruption? Moreover, when people were debating, there was no relationship between the walk-to-work campaigns and corruption. (Mr Omona rose_) I am not taking any information. (Laughter) The citizens of this country need peace and stability, and so, I am requesting whoever is planning to disorganise the country to withdraw from the walk-to-work campaign because it will not help us. (Applause) 

I also want to take this opportunity to appreciate what the Police have done for this country. They have played a very good role. However, there are some things I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to take note of and correct. One of them concerns a road block or a check point from Pakwach. When buses are travelling at night, all of them have to disembark and undergo checking, and people are asked for identity cards, which we do not have. What are they looking for? If they were interested in finding out wrong luggage, they would be checking the bus boots, but they are not doing that. Instead they are inconveniencing travellers from Arua and Southern Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, the other thing I want -(Member timed out.)

7.39
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read through the ministerial statement and also the statement by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. My observations are that there is mistrust that is prohibiting cooperation between the Police and demonstration organisers, threats to safety, poor communication, opportunism at the expense of the youth socio-economic wellbeing, perception by the Opposition groups that Police are not independent, and of course abuse of rights and power. 

One would ask: What is the role of the Police? If the Police is to do regulatory work, then it means there is an aspect concerned with legality, proportionality, necessity and accountability. Now, the standard to that would mean that we, as Parliament, should come in and give the necessary support to both sides such that we move forward in harmony. What would this be? We need to enact necessary laws that can give a conducive environment. In any case, if the laws come onto the Floor of Parliament, both sides are here to input the interests of our masses. 

If I could pose a question to my colleague from Masaka - I happen to be his deputy because I am member of the youth of central region. I grew up knowing that the values, norms and cultures of my country are never at any single time to be chaotic. I wonder if really, resorting to walk to work, becoming chaotic and exchanging is the solution to what we would wish to be. 

I would like to say that it is well known that whenever there is an event and a response, of course we get an outcome. If we are looking at the challenges of the standards of living of Uganda, the message should be clear that if this is the challenge, the answer is this. To say let us to go and confront is not the solution. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.41
MRS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by saying that the late Dr Kwame Nkrumah was elected with overwhelming majority of over 90 percent when he was in prison. We are all going to leave legacies. All that we are doing here will be remembered. If we condone mistreatment of others, then that is what will be remembered. Dr Kiiza Besigye, I am sure, will be remembered very much after maybe 50 years, and Ugandans will say, “If we had a person with a very humane heart, then that was doctor”. 

Dear Members, it hurts some of us very much. It is just about pulling crowds. When doctor walks, he pulls crowds and that one hurts some other people and yet we are in politics. Like it or not, we have to have a strategy of mobilising our people. Hon. Hillary Onek put it very clearly, that there were some other motives -(Mr Mukula rose_)- My honourable brother, my time -(Interruption)

MR MUKULA: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. I would really like to know from you, a very senior person in the party, what would really be the strategy of walk-to-work campaigns apart from civil disobedience with the view of regime change?

MRS AOL: Thank you. I will clarify that, but let me first say this. I will do it very competently. 

When you say there are other motives, my brother, you should have actually come out with those motives. You should not have left it like that. You have not done your work thoroughly. So, do your work thoroughly. Some of us here are believers - we are Christians, we are Muslims -(Interruption)

MR KAMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What is enshrined here in this Constitution shows us how Government -(Interjections)- Article 81 shows us exactly how a Member of Parliament will come here. Article 103 shows us how the President will assume power. I would like to really know from the honourable Members of Parliament - some of you are senior here in this Parliament - is it in order to continue arguing on the walk-to-work campaign that has really put this country into confusion? Is it really in order for senior honourable Members of Parliament to continue confusing the public and Ugandans that walk-to-work is something better while it has spoilt our country? Is it really in order?

MRS AOL: Thank you. Let me continue. I just would like to say that positive action is in the Constitution. Go to Article 29(d), you will find that positive action is allowed, and that is when politicians go in for positive action without guns. I think Dr Kiiza Besigye together with the group never held guns -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are here to legislate on behalf of all the people of Uganda. I would like to hear someone speak for the voiceless people whose property is stolen, who are beaten, who lose their capital and who lose their property in this walk-to-work campaign. Can someone speak for them also?

7.47
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have talked about Tororo-Soroti Road in this Parliament under Dott Services -(Interjections)- Just a minute; that is a preamble. You have talked about Jinja-Kamuli Road in this Parliament and nothing has happened. What other option do you have? The next option for us on Tororo-Soroti Road is to begin walking from Soroti to Tororo to demonstrate our dissatisfaction. It is only a week ago that I read in the papers that even the Speaker was prepared to demonstrate if the Kamuli road is not worked on. My thinking about -(Mr Mukula rose_)- I am fully informed. I do not need any. 

My understanding about a demonstration is that it is the humblest way of expressing one’s dissatisfaction and even the Constitution allows it. If one demonstrates to express his dissatisfaction, it is far better than going to the bush. So, I think we should say we are very lucky to have people who merely demonstrate to express their dissatisfaction. 

I am not impressed by what the minister has said here on page 3, No.6 - “Hon. Members, hon.Nandala-Mafabi states that FDC have credible information that Dr Besigye will from now on not be prevented from walking, but will be harmed along the way. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s information is that Besigye will be injected with a very dangerous poisonous substance that will lead to his death”. He goes on to say, “Hon. Members, this is a very serious matter. Given its seriousness, I request the FDC to produce this credible information in their possession. If FDC does not produce this credible information, some people will be forced to believe that it is they who intend to harm Besigye and blame it on Government.”

When I read this statement, I am left with no option but to begin thinking there is something missing somewhere. We very well recall Besigye was shot at, but thank God, it was a rubber bullet and his ring finger got broken. Two, we remember Besigye was sprayed with pepper spray to the extent of becoming unconscious and was taken to hospital –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just for the record, I will be demonstrating, but I will do the following: I will inform the Police, I will plan with them, I will not go to the shops, I will not go to the market and that is how it is going to be done. (Applause)

7.50
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give my contribution with this direction: There is one philosopher, who one time said that “whether you care, you will die; whether you do not care, you will die; therefore, care.”  

Chapter 4 of this Constitution talks about fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. Article 20 says: 

“(1) Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the State. 
(2) The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.” 

That is why the DPC of Jinja Road Police Station, under Chapter 4, was able to escort Olara Otunnu, the President of UPC, to Uganda House. When he escorted him, what he got was to be transferred from that Police Post. 

There is nobody who likes to walk. If you are to research amongst all of us, Members of Parliament, and ask how many of us can run 400 metres in a day, you may find few or none of us can. Walking from Kasangati to Najjanankumbi is not a short journey for Col (Rtd) Besigye. The Police, hon. Hillary Onek, the minister - with the spirit he sometimes gets when it comes to energy and it runs away when it comes to internal affairs with Col (Rtd) Besigye - you have the capacity to escort or give accompaniment –(Interjections)-  By the way, these people who say that they re-walking to work, as I also do, if we are moving from Kasangati, my final destination with a whole team will not be Najjanankumbi because as you walk, you break off as you go to your workplaces. So, what does Police lose with all the numbers? As you go to Entebbe Road, there are more than 30 pick-ups of Police people, security –(Interjection)- I want your information, but I will get it after from outside. (Laughter) I know it is very good, but you tell me as you move out.

We want to see this Police behaving the way the British Police is behaving. Let us give it a trial. If Col (Rtd) Besigye is going to walk, accompany him and then you have that capacity of controlling. If he gets tired on the way and wants to go through Kampala, divert with a short-cut. (Member timed out.)

7.53
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you so much, Rt hon. Speaker, and I thank the honourable members for the spirited debate. However, I would just like to make a few comments. Our history, not very long ago, was a bloody one. A few years ago, the NRA, which is now the NRM-O, went to the bush just like my colleague said –(Interjections)- and I want you to listen if you are honourable members. It is very unfortunate –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, we know very well that the honourable colleague knows history. We also know very well that the honourable colleague appreciates the political history of this country. She has gone ahead to state, in her accuracy, that the NRA is equal to and is now NRM-O, whereas the NRM-O is a political organisation and yet the other one is the armed wing of the political organisation. Is the honourable member in order not only to insinuate, but also bring inaccuracies and incorrect information to the Floor, well knowing that she is misleading this House against the rules? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think she had reached that far. 

MS OSEGGE: I thank you for your wise ruling. The point I would like to raise to this august House is about the concerns we are all raising. The issue I am bringing to your notice is the fact that in 1986, NRA fought, especially in Luweero where we have skulls that we still view up to today. Those were people’s children, somebody’s father, somebody’s brother, somebody’s sister. The reason for that was because they were dissatisfied with the Government in power at the time. 

I want you, honourable members, to appreciate the fact that as surly as day follows night, there is no permanent situation. I would like to ask you to be cognisant of the fact that times are changing –(Interjections)- and when people exercise their right - yes you will say that – it is not limited to them; we have to be open-minded. Tomorrow it will be you wanting to express your dissatisfaction, and today you are going to rule against somebody who is at a disadvantage trying to express themselves. I want to advise us to beware that some of our members, even in this House, still give us those bitter memories – lost their eyes, lost parts of their bodies –(Interjections)- You know him. 

Secondly, I want you to realise that it takes two to cause commotion. It takes two to cause a wrangle. If you are going to prison in this House –(Member timed out.)      

7.58
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I do not think that I will even need all the three minutes. When hon. Hillary Onek was appointed Minister of Internal Affairs, all of us from Acholi sub-region were not happy. (Laughter) We knew that the centre cannot hold; that the stone was so hot and they were looking for where to throw it, and finally of all people in this Parliament, it had to be an Acholi like me to present such a bad statement to this House.(Laughter) So, we are not happy with what is going on. 

Hon. Hillary Onek is a very good man, and when some people lodged an application in court challenging his citizenship claiming that he was Sudanese, we stood beside him. So, I do not know why an energy specialist and engineer can be dragged to such a ministry like that one of internal affairs. They should have left these things for those of hon. Amama Mbabazi – (Laughter) 

MR OMONA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I get insulted by the contribution of hon. Odonga Otto. I am an easterner of northern origin and by tribe, I am an Acholi -(Interjections)- By virtue of what hon. Odonga Otto has said, I do not know whether hon. Otto is in order to say that it is us the Acholi to whom the things are thrown. I feel this is tribalising national issues. I feel hurt myself. Let us come alive on Rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure; I beg to read it verbatim: “Content of speeches: It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.” 

I read this in goodwill; probably I am one of the very few who have blood relations with hon. Otto. But is he in order to insinuate that such roles are meant for other people based on tribe? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether the Constitution directed that certain tribes should do certain jobs. I think all Ugandans are eligible to do all jobs. So, you are out of order, hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am most obliged, Madam Speaker. You know the Baganda say, once someone has died in your home, you the owners of the body must carry the head. After 23 years, this NRM is degenerating into something else. So, my concern is that it should be one of my brothers to carry the head while others are in Ministry of Ethics, Fisheries, Attorney-General –(Laughter)– having said that –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, it is out of order for a Member to continue debating on a matter on which you have already ruled; that is Rule 66. So, is hon. Otto in order to continue tribalising this Parliament and making it look like an Acholi caucus, yet we are discussing matters of national importance? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, address the statement without going into the personality of the person who brought it. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have two observations to make; some MPs were asking me what they should do to come to Parliament for more than two terms like I have done. Probably, I should use this opportunity to tell you. One, you should always side –(Interruption)

MS BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, applying Rule 66, I beg to move a motion that hon. Odonga Otto no longer be heard –(Applause)– because it is not in order for a Member to continue in irrelevance and tedious repetitions using objectionable words and being called to order and refusing to apologise. Is he right to despise your authority; you ruled and asked him to withdraw? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I ruled him out of order and he was talking about how long he has been here.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In fact these are the kind of people who will not come back to this House –(Laughter) 

MR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have wanted to speak since morning and things were not working out; but now I have got a chance.

I am still raising Rule 66 and I still move a motion that hon. Odonga-Otto no longer be heard by this House because he is persistently making statements that despise Members of Parliament. All of us have got the chance to speak and we are equal here because we all represent our people. 

Madam Speaker, you have ruled again that hon. Odonga  Otto should stop saying those words and he is not complying. And the rule says that if a Member persists in irrelevant or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words - so I move a motion that hon. Odonga Otto no longer be heard.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I have two more observations to make. One is that when there is a question of human rights, you must always side with the weak. Two, never blame the victim – always side with the weak and never blame the victim – (Member timed out-)

8.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I want to put some few issues in context. In South Africa, when the Apartheid Government was about to go, they asked the Minister of Internal Affairs what should be done. He said, “We should build more prisons and equip them better.” What he did not know was that they could be the ones going there next. 

Our Constitution is very clear and the people are following it. First of all, I send my condolences to those who died –(Interjections)– those who died and those who lost property from Luwero to date. 

There was a demonstration in the UK and the British Government put up a team to investigate. The report clearly said that the Government is to blame. The reasons they gave are that those people who were on the streets were from less privileged areas; they did not have access to education, they are from poor families and their lives were bad. It is very good that we have a few individuals we are trying to protect in the country, who are well to do. But the majority are suffering. So, I would plead with all of you to look at this issue from this point of view. 

Before I talk about the report of the minister – by the way, the Minister of Internal Affairs was at one time the MD for National Water and Sewerage Corporation. And you are aware that while he was there, he was one of those people who had cases and was indicted -(Interruption) 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, I do not like the method and politics of Nandala-Mafabi because his politics is on personal attacks and insinuating and fabricating lies about others. This Parliament is not the type of Parliament I stood for in Lamwo and won elections to come and be a Member. If you want to challenge me, challenge me outside this Parliament -(Interjections)- besides, I have a lot about you in your records -(Applause)- you know, as a Minister of Internal Affairs, I have a lot of security records about you. The activities you do, I have. I am not going to spread it here because I do not believe in malicing anybody.  Finally -(Interjections)-  Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Order! 

MR ONEK: My record in National Water as a managing director has been the best record ever in Uganda. I developed water systems in all the counties, including your town Mbale. I left very clean records. (Interjections) My contract was finished. I left very clean records there and it is one of the few parastatals still existing today. Most of the parastatals died; railways and others – they all collapsed. I trained manpower; I developed a very powerful technical system of management which can never be collapsed by even Nandala-Mafabi if you become a manager. I do not believe in that kind of politics. If you start it, I am going to – get out of here. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate -(Interjections)- that a whole Minister of Internal Affairs has information on people and he has not taken action. He is just waiting for Parliament. That is why we are worried that he should even be the one - for now, I will mention all these things at the end. 

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is a very honourable House. I feel so hurt that if we reduce the dignity of this House to personal attacks, we will lose the substance of our national vision. I appeal to honourable colleagues to respect themselves and remain on the substantive issues and address national issues. That is what has brought us here. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we were moving well until Members started talking about tribes. Now, they will talk about height. Soon they will talk about colour and so on. Please, be courteous to one another. Conduct yourselves in a dignified manner. Focus on the issues that affect the country not the tribe and the colour.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Madam Speaker, we know; where you touch and then you see people running, there are issues. You know very well. We have mentioned that goons went to Dr Kizza’s place and no charges have been preferred against them. The Minister of Internal Affairs never mentioned anything about that. The information is there and you are aware, Madam Speaker – even Members have put across how Dr Kizza was almost killed by Arinaitwe under the command of Grace Turyagumanawe and no action was taken. 

Hon. Anywar is in hospital and the first person who ran there was the Inspector General of Police. He said, “I am going to take care of all the bills. I will give you a car.” And he pulled out the car and said he was going to repair it. If it is true that Police was not involved - many people have got accidents; many people have got hurt; but I have never seen Police running to do that; yet hon. Anywar is under a medical insurance scheme.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I will not allow you to talk about the IGP. Yesterday, we were in the Appointments Committee. The Inspector General of Police said she called him after getting the accident. Hon. Okupa and other Members were in that meeting. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. She called him to tell him that she had seen Arinaitwe. That was the reason. That is what he did. It is very clear those are some of the reasons why the Inspector-General took up that matter -(Interjections)- yes, it knows me. 

The minister wants credible information. We have given you issues of Arinaitwe and no action has been taken. At the end of the statement, you are saying, “We are going to take care to prevent any uncalled for...” you said in eight, “We are going to ensure the safety of Dr Kizza Besigye.” You are going to ensure - if you are not concerned; if you are saying it is the FDCs who want to harm him, why should you ensure it if that is not you? 

We would have been happy if the minister came here and told us the actions he took regarding the cases of goons who were taken to Kasangati and reported on 1 November 2011 under SD24 and SD30. As we talk, they went to Kasangati and arrested the villagers around. Since Saturday, they have been at Jinja Road Police Station because they said they are the ones who beat the people who had trespassed Dr Kizza’s home. Those who reported the trespassers are the ones who are being harassed. Those who committed the crimes are free. Does it now confirm that this was a planned move by the Police to take these people and eventually let them free when they were at Dr Kizza’s home? 

It would have been better if the minister had explained what he had done to those goons who were found at Dr Kizza’s home. And why hold the 11 and yet the other ones confessed that, “We had been taken there by the State?” 

Police is for all of us. In fact, Police should protect the weak not the strong -(Interjections)- because those who have power are known. 

MR BIRAARO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My information to the honourable Leader of the Opposition is that Police should protect the right not the wrong. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now, you have made a point because you are saying, if they have got somebody on the way – now, you are accepting that there should always be mob justice because -(Interjections)- yes, you are saying, the thieves who have stolen chicken should be killed. They should not be protected and you protect those who have killed because they are right; they are killing a thief who has committed a crime. It is unfortunate –(Interjections)- it is not simplistic. That is what he did.

The Constitution was read here when the Prime Minister gave to hon. Mohammed Nsereko - he read Article 43, clause 1 but he also read clause 2. I want to repeat clause 2: 

“Public interest under this Article shall not permit 
(a)	political persecution;
(b)	detention without trial;” 

But people have been in prison since Saturday and are now beyond 48 hours.

“c) Any limitations to the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed by this chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society or what is provided in this Constitution.”

If this is a free and democratic society, as you claim, then you should allow people walk to work. Unless you are telling us that this society is not free and democratic –(Interruptions)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that Dr Kizza Besigye, while attending a victory party for hon. Kevinah Taaka in Busia, said that we must get prepared to have a new Government by December this year. If you are the Head of Government, isn’t that a security threat?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I want to quote scholar Isaac Newton, who my brother Mike Mukula also quoted. Newton said that if you suppress pressure, it will always look for an exit. And when it gets it, it will be worse. That is why you have to be careful when covering these pressure cookers. The moment that pressure gets an exit near you, you can burn. 

What I am trying to say is that if people are trying to release their pressure by demonstrating, that is very dangerous. In a free and democratic society, people should be allowed to express their views. And if they are walking, leave them to walk because they will eventually get tired –(Interruptions)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, we all watched what happened when the so-called goons went to Kasangati. They were beaten by a mob; many bled, with blood streaming on their bodies. Now, do those goons have rights and freedoms to enjoy? How about those who were beating them? Why didn’t they arrest and hand them over to the Police? Do you support mob justice that you have just talked about now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me thank hon. Byabagambi, who is also my friend, for the information. But I would also like to inform him that if he took off time and went to Dr Besigye’s home, he would have noticed that there are three roadblocks before you get into his house. The goons came and got cleared by the Police before they were escorted. And as they did what they were doing, Police was watching. So, I would like to state that those goons were taken there by the Police. If not, why were they not charged before charging those who beat them? It would have been better to first charge the goons with trespass before the Police got to deal with the second matter.

Madam Speaker, as one of the honourable members said, today it is me, tomorrow it could be you. You know that nobody ever knew that His Excellency the former President of this country would reach Luzira. He even shed tears yet he could not think about making that prison a good place while he was still a vice-president.

You may be thinking that Luzira Prison is only for the Nandalas, but you need to take note. It is not right for us to see something wrong and we keep quiet for political reasons. I know that even Rt hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi knows that some of these things are bad; he knows it. But of course he has failed to take any actions. If some of you are supporting them blindly, please accept my pleas for us to know when to call bad, bad and good, good without bias. I am saying that since we started talking about “walk to work”, I have never seen Dr Kizza Besigye pick anything of somebody while walking. In fact, he has been stopped – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please wind up; you have already used 15 minutes.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In fact, he one time walked for about 7km until the Police came in. I have walked before and reached Parliament safely, save for the few times when Police disrupted me.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to call upon you to respect human rights. If we do not do that, we will be in problems –(Interjections)– the Minister of Internal Affairs is asking whether I also respect human rights and I would like to say, yes I do. If you know very well that you have information about cases against people, but are keeping quiet, then I think you are one of those people who are making –(Interjections)– yes, he mentioned it –(Interjections)– if you talk of fighting the Army, I am available. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for presenting a statement that is twisted. In that regard, I would like to ask him to rethink about it. Further, I would like to inform all of you that Uganda belongs to all of us and not a few of you. Actually, those policemen who are beating people are also suffering the way all of us are doing. The mistake they are making; to protect a small group that is –(Member timed out.)

8.28
MR GILBERT OULANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Let me also thank the minister for presenting this report. 

All of us know that the moment you get an entry ticket, you become an honourable member. As such, we should really measure up to some minimum standards. I have liked one statement from hon. Nandala-Mafabi that when they see something wrong, they cannot keep quiet, and indeed, I cannot keep quiet too. But on the issues of walk-to-work, I would like to say that we live above such activities as Members of Parliament. When these activities were intensified in Kireka, I saw a wooden kiosk of an old woman, which she uses to sell tomatoes, being vandalized to light fire. I also saw newspapers being snatched from the vendors to light fire. Really, we are here to speak for the voiceless; we are here to defend the defenceless. 

I have heard an honourable member of the Opposition saying they want to leave a legacy. Is this the legacy you really want to leave behind? We saw when the “walk-to-work” activities intensified in Ntinda, tyres were burnt and innocent Ugandans were beaten, flogged and clobbered out of taxis to join the “walk-to-work”. The tyres had been put on the road and no one was to pass. Why would you force people to join what they don’t like? Is this the legacy you are talking about? (Applause)

Recently, they had again organised to intensify their activities when our innocent pupils and students were going to do their exams. Surely, would these be the innocent children you would want to vote for you tomorrow. Is this the legacy you want to leave behind? 

About the Kasangati saga, any right thinking Ugandan who saw what happened - taking this as a laboratory case - this was a simple hiccup. Whether these were your supporters or not, leave that aside; these people were assaulted and clobbered. Blood was oozing from them as if they were not Ugandans. Is this the legacy we are leaving behind? Using this as a laboratory case, we saw what happened; the results were enough and we should not leave this Government to be taken over by the Opposition if you are going to handle things the way you handled them. (Member timed out.)  

8.32
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that this subject matter has come to the Floor of the House so that we as Members of Parliament can pronounce ourselves on this subject. 

There is a saying that runs: “You can fool some people most of the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time.” I think time has now caught up with the Opposition on this subject matter of walking to work. “Walk-to-work” is a guise for destabilising Government just for quest for power.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us not hide under the Constitution, under phrases and so-called rights and freedoms. If you are talking about freedoms and your rights, you should first and foremost recognise the freedoms and rights of others. You should be able to know that you are hurting the children who would benefit from money, which now is being used on soldiers to guard you and to maintain law and order. You should know that when you take shelter in a school where there are children, or in a hospital where there are patients, you are actually doing more injustice than what you intend to achieve. So, I think this is a wrong approach. That strategy is bankrupt. It is high time it’s withdrawn. (Applause) 

DR OMONA: I thank you very much senior colleague. The information I want to give here is that we as Parliament have the opportunity to end the “walk-to-work” campaign. Why I say so is that “walk-to-work” has been a campaign running for many months and we have debated many issues, but we have not taken the trouble to debate what causes “walk-to-work.” I want to give information that there is no sane human being that repeatedly does an activity without reason. There is a reason. We may laugh at them; we may arrest them, but this may not end “walk-to-work”. 

In this House, there are authors of “walk-to-work.” If they are patriotic; if they do it for the good of the country, let’s ask them to Table it in this House so that we debate why they continue to walk to work and end this walk-to-work campaign. 

My good friend, hon. Nsubuga, is one of authors and he is here. We have the opportunity in this House to end “walk-to-work” and I pray that these people bring it to this House for us to debate and end this “walk-to-work” campaign once and for all, if this activity and campaign is patriotic and meant for the good of this country. I thank you honourable colleague. 
  
DR TWA-TWA: Thank you very much for that information. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Members, let’s be orderly. Let’s hear the closing of the Member’s views and hear from the government. 

DR TWA-TWA: I was winding up. Colleagues, we are putting blame on the Police and military for the actions they take during “walk-to-work” but we are the very people who are the authors of the Constitution. The Constitution clearly mandates the Executive to use the various instruments it has to maintain law and order. Since there is no -(Member timed out.)

8.36
COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, dear colleagues, you are all aware that one of the functions of Government is to protect the people and its property. You are all aware that we went through elections and NRM emerged the winner. The Opposition lost miserably. Now, the Opposition is changing strategy and tactics, and is trying to make this country ungovernable by causing trouble through “walk-to-work”. Government is aware that you are trying to cause problems so that the Police uses force. Police have a right to use force in order to protect the government, the people and their property. And you are busy compiling all those things – hon. Nandala-Mafabi was saying that you intend to drag the government to Ocampo’s court. This is what you are trying to do. And you continue provoking Government; violating other people’s rights and you come here to demonise the government that it is doing wrong every time. It is not right gentlemen. You must respect the government in order to be respected. 

Eng. Byandala has clearly stated that the so-called goons went to Col. Kizza Besigye’s house and they were beaten. Imagine if you were in Government, what would you do? You would do worse things. You are quoting Britain and America. You visit those websites. Go to New York now, they occupy Wall Street. They are being hurdled by Police, even worse than what the Police is doing here. Go to Britain; you saw what happened. They were manhandled. They were sent to jail for four years and here you are walking scot-free after disturbing the peace of the people and nobody is touching you. 

NRM brought this peace here and you are drunk with this peace. You are disturbing the peace of this country. It is not acceptable, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

8.40
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me congratulate the Minister of Internal Affairs for the well documented response he has given to this House, and also for the stamina he used to present this document. Over the weekend, I was in my constituency and had the opportunity to discuss this issue with members of my constituency. My constituency is Kioga and the people of my constituency asked me to submit to the effect that as long as the intelligence report shows threat towards the security concerns of this country, such a report should never be compromised.

In fact, they were quick to add that the peace that they enjoy today is premised on the strong intelligence network that this Government has consolidated over the years. As citizens of this country, therefore, we need to stand our ground and ensure that law and order prevails without any fear or favour. 

When I read a statement that Dr Besigye was released without charge, it makes me ask colleagues to pay special tribute to this Government. Never in my life have I ever seen a Government so generous like this one. Let me hasten to add that –(Interruption)

MR SABILA: It is evident that affairs that have been happening on the continent and other parts of the world are mainly uprisings due to mass action. It is evident that maybe our members have been trying that one in Uganda because they feel that when you fail through the vote, you can cause mass action and then overturn a system. I think that one is evident and we have to condemn this at the highest level we can. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, we want to caution Government, especially the Minister of Internal Affairs that I hope this action will not be a motivation to continue violating the rights and freedoms of others. In fact, let me tell you that no one is above the law and now the precedent that we have set to release certain people without trial, should be done in my constituency also. Certain offenders should probably be released without any charge –(Interruption) 

8.43
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, there is no question that in April, the way Kiiza Besigye was arrested and manhandled, was brutal, and this House had the opportunity to make a statement on it. MPs who were in Parliament then recall that we got a very bad public relations image and whenever we travelled out of this country we tried to explain what really happened. It became worse for us who are in the NRM, because we had to own up for an action which had not been officially sanctioned by the party, but was caused by the overzealousness of a Police officer.

Generals in the Army condemned it; Gen. Tinyefuza and his colleagues came out to state that the manner in which that officer was handled was not proper.

I want to thank the Police that progressively, there has been an improvement in the way they are dealing and handling civil matters, and we wish to call upon them to continue being reminded and trained to uphold the human rights at the highest standards, and this will make our work as Members of Parliament easy. When we stand up to talk and appropriate money, it will be with ease.

Recently, the commissioners, including the Leader of the Opposition, were in the House of Commons and the issue of Besigye was raised. The good thing is that hon. Nandala and Okupa had an IPod each and they had just read that the Police had been withdrawn from his house that morning. When that issue was brought up, it was very easy to deal with because we had relevant information to respond to. Besides that, we raised it to Members of the House of Lords and said, “Recently, you had demonstrations in London; how did you respond and how did you deal with it?” This is an issue which we did bring up because it was very fresh, and just recently, they sentenced those who participated to very long terms in jail.

Therefore, let me use this opportunity to say, on our part, let us continue using civil means while dealing with civilian issues. Let the Opposition, especially my dear friend Dr Kiiza Besigye, also use the law. 

We asked the people in the House of Commons whether  people can just wake up and start demonstrating without having an agreement on how they are going to do it? We have seen it in the US; there must be some bit of formal agreement on how issues are going to be done. 

We also asked a question; to what extent should people enjoy their rights when they are trampling on other people’s rights? Why should I enjoy a right to walk to work when there are innocent human beings such as children who are supposed to sit their exams so that they become like us? Why should we trample on their rights? 

Lastly, Government must take the opportunity. Given the statements of Nandala-Mafabi and the minister that somebody may want to exploit this situation to harm Besigye so that there will be nobody to blame or everybody will be blaming the other - it is the responsibility of Government to protect people and their property. So, Minister of Internal Affairs, make sure that Besigye is well, safe and alive.

8.48
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the statement that he has presented to Parliament. I would also want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for triggering off this very good debate that we have had this afternoon. The minister has indeed so aptly captured the issues at stake. I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for the robust interventions and the debate that we have had this afternoon.

I have one appeal; I am appealing to hon. Members and all the promoters of demonstrations to cooperate with the Police. Once we cooperate with the Police in all ways using the law we shall avoid all these hiccups that have been raised here on the Floor.

I have another appeal; let us be honest to ourselves –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The question of the Police - maybe the Minister of Internal Affairs will tell us what it is. When you write to the Police and inform them that there is going to be a demonstration or rally in Kololo and they refuse, they do not even reply to you, what do you do? Walk to work - you cannot ask for permission to leave your home and go to office because you are an individual. Hopefully the minister will explain to us what cooperating with the Police means because – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, if it is a simple matter, may I know why you do announce that, “On Thursday, we are going to walk?” Why don’t you just wake up from your house and move?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, just to help this House, we have written to the Police. The last one that I vividly remember is when we wrote to the Police that we wanted to use Kololo Airstrip for a rally. In fact, for all the written requests we have made to the Police as Members of the Opposition, there is not even one they have accepted. So, what do we do? Do we keep writing to the Police which is just a branch of the NRM?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday in the Appointments Committee, the Inspector-General of Police tabled letters from Members of the Opposition; a letter from hon. Wafula Oguttu; a letter from hon. Mathias Nsubuga; a letter from hon. Alaso and others, thanking him for cooperating with them in their demonstrations -(Mr Mpuuga rose_)- not you; it was Mathias Nsubuga of DP.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I still have the Floor. Let me ask hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to really give me chance to talk and complete. I don’t have a lot of time. I am appealing to us to be honest in this debate and in whatever we do.

Finally, I am appealing that we have love for our country. Let us not create a Benghazi in Kampala; let us not create a Tahrir Square; let us have love for this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

8.52
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Onek, for a very sober and candid statement that he has made this afternoon. I would like to remind Members of Parliament that we owe it to the Police and other security agencies in our country. Today, Kampala City is rated highly among other cities particularly in Africa, from the point of view of security. That is factual and we know it. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Appointments Committee, for talking to the Inspector-General of Police for over two hours. You raised a lot of concerns, but at the end of the day, I think you agreed with the assessment that overall, the Police has done well and you gave him another lease of three years. Therefore, we cannot escape the reality that our security agencies are trying their best within the circumstances to give us security. Yes, there are errors sometimes and we are not saying that there is completely no error and these errors are harshly punished, as you may know, honourable colleagues. 

Members of the Army who have been caught either killing someone or raping someone have after the due process of the law been heavily punished including execution. When errors have occurred, whether in a school demonstration or on the streets, the Police have been harshly handled. So, when I hear colleagues talking of extra-judicial killings and stopping there, the key thing is that when it happens, what is done? Extra-judicial killings will happen even in New York or London, but once you establish that policeman X or soldier Y was the one who committed this, what do you do? That is the key point that we should be bringing out –(Mr Kyanjo rose_)- just hold on, hon. Kyanjo. I will give you time. 

We are here in the House, Madam Speaker, and I would like – (Ms Franca Akello rose_)- just a minute, hon. Akello, let me make this point first. What does our population think? What does our population feel? I think if we are honest to ourselves, whether from Kasese, Bukwo or Gulu, our people are in a state of anxiety. They are wondering what is going to happen in Kampala. The walk-to-work; the running battles on the streets; people are really worried out there and we should listen to their voices and act like their representatives. Religious leaders have spoken. About a week ago, Archbishop Dr Lwanga spoke and he was very clear on both sides. He said that this walk-to-work should stop; Government should fight corruption and Government should deal with the economy. Our leaders in the Muslim community have also spoken. So, it is very important, honourable colleagues, that we listen to the people we represent and take appropriate action. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I can take one or two clarifications. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, I also thank you for finally yielding the Floor. I want to give information to the honourable minister because he was actually speaking about the Police and said that the Police have always done - I don’t want to repeat what he said, but Madam Speaker, there is a recent incident that took place in my constituency in Agago, about a month ago, where three policemen, including the acting DPC at that time, on 30th of last month at night, went under the guise of an operation and shot dead two people. They actually said that they were looking for one of them because he had escaped from prison, but the second man was actually the first to be shot and yet he was innocent. Immediately after the incident, when I contacted the DPC, he denied knowledge of the people who shot the deceased. Actually, the then acting DPC denied the incident yet he was there.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, up to now, they have refused to accept that they killed someone, and I remember coming to your Office and letting the higher authorities know about it. This is one of the scenarios of a few things that the Police do and just walk away with it. It is just a month ago and it is not true that the Police, once caught in certain scenarios, are always handled by the law. Anyway, it is because this one is still a recent and fresh case. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Minister, for giving way. I have been prompted to seek clarification from my senior colleague and father, hon. Kiyonga, regarding the case of cooperation. I am one of the people who cooperate with the Police vehemently. I went and reported to the Police a case involving Military Police, where one of my constituents, Kivumbi, a young man, was shot and incapacitated. The honourable minister knows about this case. This young man had a wife and she left with the children. I have been looking after this man for two consecutive years now. He has no employment and he is growing bigger. He is there. The minister promised me that he was going to work on the issue, but up to now, he has not done anything. Government accepted that they were in the wrong when they shot this young man because he was completely innocent. He was at home, the Military Police was running after a thief and they shot at him. Now, what kind of cooperation shall we offer?

Secondly, just last week, one of my other constituents, Mr Wamala, also a young man in his 20s, was found painting his house at night and the Police said, “There is a thief. This one is just gimmicking but he is the one.” The boy was crying, “I am not the one.” They shot at him and killed him. My people wanted to demonstrate but I said, “No, let me go to the Police and find out.” Nothing has come out of it.

I can enumerate hundreds of cases where I keenly cooperate with the Police - so, I want the minister to clearly put out these issues so that when we are crying away from you, you know these sentiments.

Probably, let me use this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to appeal to you that unlike in the usual way when we debate issues and then finally get out, I would like you, from your own hearing which you have taken, to give us a proper ruling out of what you have heard so that we have a step to move upon depending on your own wisdom rather than simply going out and dividing ourselves in corners and saying, “We have had a score and you have had a loss.” Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is 9 O’clock. Let us close. 

DR KIYONGA: Well, I would not have responded to what my two colleagues have said, but it is in the Hansard. I have been very clear, Madam Speaker, that I am not saying that I am rating the Army or the Police at 100 percent. I have not said that. If I am to give them a rating, they are around 70 percent and that means there is still room for improvement. There are errors which are being made by individuals and when found out, definitely action is taken.

Now, regarding hon. Kyanjo’s recurrent complaint about his constituents, it is true that in chasing a criminal, a brother who happened to live in hon. Kyanjo’s constituency was injured in Makindye. When evidence was brought, the Army admitted its mistake and we wrote to the office of the Attorney-General saying that we do not need to go up to the court and that we should settle this matter out of court. And the agreement between me and hon. Kyanjo is that when the occasion arises and the Attorney-General is here - I am here and he is here - we should pursue the matter with the Attorney-General. We will continue to do that because there has not been any denial. 

But to continue with the points I was making, honourable colleagues, our country, our continent, our region and indeed the whole world, faces real challenges, particularly the people we represent: Challenges in the economy; challenges with security and particularly, international terrorism. We face high rates of unemployment; we face high rates of poverty and there are also attempts - I am sure some colleagues will agree with me on the part of some powers in the developed world, who want to re-colonise our continent.

So, there are so many things happening and if we are not steady and we do not isolate each item and deal with it, we may end up throwing the baby out with the birth water. We have to really decide our priorities and pursue them one by one. 

It is a right for people to demonstrate. Yes, it may be a right for people to walk to work and even announce like hon. Mpuuga and others have been doing, but if this has the effect of derailing us in attending to economic and security issues - let me give you a scenario. If we had a big demonstration in town here and an agent of Al Shabaab took opportunity to throw explosives into that mass walking, who will take that responsibility? It is the responsibility of Government to foresee these difficulties and deal with them proactively. (Applause) If the reason for “walk-to-work” is to make a point about the economy, how many times do you have to walk to make that point? The minister has been on this Floor and has admitted that we have economic problems. She has indicated measures that we are going to take to deal with economic challenges. The response should be from those who are not agreeing with her to bring an alternative package and we debate it. Surely, walking out there on the street will not solve that problem. It will not. (Applause)

So, on the government side - and the Prime Minister will speak to this –we have to really draw the line between wrong and right in bold. It has to be clear. We cannot just play around with the economy of our people, their security and their welfare. The people have given us this Parliament; they have voted us here. We, Members of Parliament, let us debate here. Let us agree or disagree here. I think I must give notice that when the Rules of Procedure come here, I will move a motion that Members of Parliament who have a voice here should not be in demonstrations -(Interjections)- this is double dipping. Why are you participating in demonstrations when you have a voice here? 

I appeal to my colleagues that we solve our issues here. Let us support firm measures which will ensure that the lives and property of our people are protected. Let us carry out political competition, paying due respect to the basic interests of our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Onek then the Prime Minister.

9.08 
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for whatever contributions that I picked from their statements. I want to begin by apologising because when my colleague hon. Nandala-Mafabi was coming up with outrageous - I almost went for his throat -(Laughter)- but I have realised this is the House and we cannot do that. When you have been lied about again and again, it irritates your nerves. You can get really possessed. For example, when all these lies have been piled on me, I cannot continue normally because -(Interjections)- I do not carry a gun when I come to Parliament. So, I would wish that this Parliament becomes more mindful of what they do to others, particularly when you are peddling lies. You must be very mindful because if you peddle lies here and utter false documents, those are criminal actions. Parliamentary immunity will not be there. We shall drag you out to the courts -(Interjections)- yes, we shall drag you out if you utter false documents. Beware those of you who are uttering false documents in this House that you are not immune from that one. Anyway, that is just a point of information -(Interjections)- there is no clarification - 

THE SPEAKER: There were no documents. Hon. Minister, there were no documents presented today. Just respond in summary to the issues raised by the Member. There were no documents brought here today. Not on this matter anyway.

MR ONEK: Now, I must say, in East Africa, we have the best Police. The manner in which they handle situations as compared to the Kenyan Police, definitely we have a much better Police here. But there is a lot of room for improvement, for which we have taken your advice contributed here, and I am going to take it to the Police authorities so that where we are weak, we shall improve. In fact, I respect my colleague, hon. Kyanjo, a lot because when we are meeting in the committee, his contributions are very good, and today, most of you gave similar contributions for which I am very grateful. This is going to help us strengthen our Police and make it a far better Force than ever before. 

My brother, hon. Odonga Otto said that they were mourning when I was appointed Minister of Internal Affairs. I would like to advise my brother that I am actually a national leader and not an Acholi leader. (Applause) Although I am also an Acholi leader, in this House I am a national leader and I have full responsibility to the people of Uganda. I have to carry out whatever responsibility is given to me to the best of my ability with the honesty that I have always cherished. So, you can rest assured that we shall do our work with all the fairness possible. I must inform you that over the last five months that I have been in that ministry, my emphasis has been on training through seminars and meetings so as to sensitise our Police officers to tackle the problems much better than before, because they made many mistakes then, so that they continue improving. 

I will never step aside. (Laughter) Never! I will never -there are people to tell me to step aside and not you because I have a party and I am appointed by the Head of State -(Interjections)- there is no order here - (Laughter)- I will not accept any order here because you are not civilised. 

Madam Speaker, I must conclude by stating that whatever document that comes in this House – I would also like to bring it to your attention that whatever statement is made like the one made by the Leader of the Opposition concerning plans about Dr Besigye, must be substantiated in this House so that you give us room to investigate and find out the truth. 

Finally, I would like to thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament, more so our Members of the NRM –(Applause)– and thank our Government for keeping Uganda safe and ensuring that no anarchy is allowed. Thank you very much. 

9.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (MR AMAMA MBABAZI): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like thank you Members that have contributed to this long debate. I am sure that we will take account of all the things that have been constructively said here. 

I just want to make one fundamental point because I was not here when this statement was made by my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that the FDC has credible information that Dr Besigye will be harmed. I don’t know whether he specified by who because, of course, it is possible, as someone said, that maybe he was crying for help from those whose responsibility it is to help in those circumstances.  Maybe the harm is from within; just give us information. If this harm is from FDC, or from anywhere, please give us that information because we have the responsibility as the State to protect all Ugandans.  (Applause) 

But in case the idea is that the harm is from NRM and the Government of NRM, I would like to make a categorical statement that NRM can never entertain such ideas. We have a history; we have a record to go by. It has never been our practice to even kill our enemies except in battle. Never! We have never killed anyone except in battle and that is a policy. Therefore, the good Dr Kizza Besigye himself would know that very well. Therefore, I know very well that if anyone told him that there was a threat to harm him by the NRM, he would be the first one to say, “No, that cannot happen,” because he knows NRM. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has stated in his own words that they can never endeavour to kill anybody. It is on record that Police in broad daylight at Kasubi Tombs directly shot at people on sight. What is he talking about when we have a living example of that killing? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Madam Speaker, I do not want to run  foul of the colleagues, and especially the Chair, by giving way because it is late. 

My response to my brother hon. Lukyamuzi is that a commission of inquiry was put in place. I do not know if it has reported yet, but I look forward to their findings and we will go by those findings. Right now, I am not sure that I can take hon. Lukyamuzi’s conclusion as a reasonable conclusion that what he is saying is actually what happened.

Even if the Police acted in that manner, they would have been acting on their own and not consistent with official policy. I want you to know that; definitely on their own. I am saying - even if I have not concluded - this is a hypothesis by him because we do not have conclusive evidence yet that that happened, but I am saying that in the unlikely event that it happened, then that would have been the case.

Allow me to make these points, which I have made many times before, that the right to demonstrate is a constitutional right, but it is a qualified right. Article 29 reads as follows: “Every person shall have the right to... (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition.”

So, it should be peacefully. Whose job is it to maintain peace in Uganda? The Constitution answers that and it is in Article 212; “Functions of the Uganda Police - The functions of the Uganda Police shall include the following... (b) to preserve law and order.” That is one of the main functions of the Police, to preserve law and order and to prevent and detect crime.

Law and order means the state of society where the vast majority of the people respect the rule of law and where the enforcement agencies observe the limits of their powers. Maintaining law and order implies firm dealing with occurrences of disturbance of peace and that is what the Uganda Police has been doing.

As my colleague, hon. Kiyonga said, that is why Kampala today, is voted the safest city in Africa and one of the safest cities in the World. So, I want to put it on record that the Uganda Police has done a good job in performing their constitutional duties.

This campaign of malice and lies by some elements of the Opposition - the purpose is to sabotage and in fact to harm. If there is any intention to harm, it is the Opposition tactics and campaign to harm the economy of this country and there is no doubt about it.

Uganda has been voted the best tourist destination 2012 in the World. The reason is because everyone knows that it is safe to be in Uganda. You can have natural attractions, but if you are insecure, nobody will visit you. So, I would like to commend the Police of Uganda and the security agencies for giving Uganda that great name in the World, and to make Uganda a safe destination and the safest in the whole World.

Thirdly, the Opposition obviously thinks or hopes to cause dissatisfaction in the population who are victims of their actions. I was really and truly shocked to see on television my good friend, Dr Kizza Besigye, standing with young people and beating other young people on the grounds that they were not known -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the people who invaded Col Dr Kizza Besigye were transported. There are at least four road blocks on that road, including two near the residence of Col Dr Kizza Besigye. These individuals had instructions to undress him and beat him up. In fact, the two who survived the beating were rescued by Col Dr Kizza Besigye and he is shown on television asking the youth not to please, beat them up. We can produce evidence.

Is the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, who this Parliament asked to step aside as we investigate bribery allegations, in order to concoct stories and impute bad motives on the side of Col Dr Kizza Besigye, his former doctor and doctor of his colleagues, with whom they were wrecking havoc in Luwero?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unfortunately I am not privy to either the plans of Dr Besigye or the plans of the Police. So, I am not able to make a ruling on that one. Please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, let me also make this point; that in these demonstrations, it is on record and the Police has a file, that some of the shops that have been attacked and looted are shops of known supporters of NRM. This is a fact and absolutely true –(Interjections)- hon. Otto thinks there is nothing wrong with that. Well, I would not expect anything less from him.

So, let me use this opportunity to make an appeal to our colleagues in the Opposition. It is clear, by the behaviour of the Opposition, that they are really not ready to be party to democratic behaviour, where one competes honourably and loses gracefully, because for FDC, they cannot lose unless they have been cheated. I always wonder how they happen to have representation in this Parliament; what happened? Graciousness in winning or losing is conduct of a mature politician. Dr Kiiza Besigye has publicly proclaimed that he will not follow the law; he will use other means including “Tsunami”. This is the new democratic practice being proposed by Besigye – a “Tsunami” – to bring about regime change.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU:  Thank you, the Prime Minister. At one time, hon. Mbabazi after an election was taken to court that he had cheated an election and he lost that case. Court confirmed that hon. Mbabazi had rigged elections against Mr James Garuga. Therefore, it has been proven by courts of law that hon. Mbabazi had rigged elections. Is it in order for him to stand here talking about election cheating and saying it is Dr Besigye who loses elections and does not accept defeat gracefully.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what you want me to rule on. Please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, really it is not a crime to be ignorant. Obviously, it will help, though, to be informed. So, go and read that judgement because there was never such a ruling. Now, I want to tell some of these colleagues of mine that when we are talking about constitutions and laws, it is not like essay writing; these are serious matters that need intellectual depth. (Laughter) All I want to do is to appeal to the Opposition; you should know that if you demand for fairness, please treat others with fairness. That is all.

Finally, surely, colleagues in the Opposition, let the role of the Opposition not be to propose nothing, oppose everything and you hope by doing so you will overturn Government. It will not happen. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 35 Members have contributed to this debate, not taking into account the ministers. I gave it all that time because I thought it was an important matter. But I have this to say; the price escalation is not a new thing; nothing has changed with the walk-to-work. So, I appeal to the Members to change strategy and come to this House with your brilliant ideas so that we can find solutions to this economic crisis. 

I also acknowledge the right for Members to demonstrate, but I want to remind you that there are people who do not want to demonstrate and whom you have not asked permission to demonstrate around them; these are the voiceless; the traders and shopkeepers. In pursuing your rights, you should not forget the rights of those people who have no platform to speak from. 

Also, if mistakes have been made by Government in suppressing the demonstrations, please accept them and correct them. Similarly, if the Opposition have made mistakes, please accept them and correct them for the sake of the people of Uganda. So, hon. Members, I thank you. The House has been adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 9.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)


