Wednesday, 9 November 2011 

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)
  
The House was called to order.
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. One, I would like to inform the Business Committee that we shall meet on Monday, 14 November at 9.00 O’clock in the South Committee Room. So, please, keep that time available on your calendar.

The second one is a sad matter. Today we lost an eminent Ugandan, Prof. Dan Wadada Nabudere. He was among the gang of four with Yash Tandon, Edward Rugumayo and the late hon. Omwony Ojok. He was also a member of the National Consultative Council. We have decided that tomorrow we shall have a motion moved to pay tribute to him.

Thirdly, hon. Members, yesterday I briefed you about an Act on Citizens Economic Empowerment, which the Government of Zambia enacted. Finally, the paper has arrived so I just wanted to update you on what it says so that you can take an interest in it. It is an Act to establish the Citizens Economic Empowerment Commission; to define its functions and powers, establish the economic empowerment fund, promote economic empowerment of targeted citizens, citizen empowered companies - citizen influenced companies and citizen owned companies, promote gender equality in accessing, owning, managing, controlling and exploiting economic resources, encourage and increase a broad-based and effective ownership and meaningful participation of targeted citizens, citizen empowered companies, citizen influenced companies, citizen owned companies in the economy, contribute to sustainable economic growth, remove social customs, statutory provisions or other practices that limit access to any particular gender to skills’ training that is essential to effective participation in the economic sector, promote employment of both genders by removing structural and discriminatory constraints that hinder any particular gender from employment opportunities and in so doing, ensure equitable income distribution, promote equal opportunity of the citizens and the empowered companies - citizen-influenced companies, citizen-owned companies, etc. 

So, I would want hon. Nandala to lay the Act on the Table so that Members can have access to it and maybe we can emulate what the Zambians have done.

3.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the Citizens Economic Empowerment Act, 2006 of Zambia which we can use as a tool to make one to operate in Uganda. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There was a small matter from hon. Ssebagala and hon. Todwong only.

3.02
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. It is the policy of this Government to encourage local investors and we know that when we encourage and empower local investors, our people, our Ugandans, our voters, automatically get access to employment in those ventures. And you are aware that many of our foreign investors come along with workers from other countries leaving Ugandans not benefitting from the government policy of industrialisation.

We have one of our local investors dealing in pharmaceuticals and who has a factory in Kireka, and that is Mavid Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Mavid Pharmaceuticals Ltd deals in laboratory equipment. The company was closed under allegations of non-payment and indeed there was even a court order stopping the eviction by the Police, but they went ahead to evict these people leaving the company with a lot of problems. 

The Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, Joy Kabatsi, on 19 August, wrote to the Director, Kampala Metropolitan Police about this concern that the eviction was illegal and then they went ahead to implement it. 

We are talking about a company which has been employing over 100 Ugandans! You are aware that the only way for many of our local investors to boost their businesses is by getting loans from the banks. As we speak, the banks have started running down ensuring these people are -(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Ssebagala for giving way. As I was listening in carefully, hon. Ssebagala mentioned that there was a court order prohibiting the closure of a pharmaceutical company - I think it is an industry or a factory - and it was communicated to the Police and the Police disregarded a court order to the extent that the lives of over 100 people are at stake. This is where they derive their employment and their livelihood. 

Madam Speaker, am I hearing very right the fact that we have degenerated into disregarding court orders? Under what circumstances, if at all there were any other mistakes, was a court order duly issued, ignored and the closure went ahead? Can we have an explanation as to under what circumstances are the bona fide Ugandans, who are attempting to put up a factory and thereby putting up an investment, being nipped in the bud whereas many quack investors are around town and they get away with it? So, under what circumstances, on top of the merits of this factory, was the court order that was duly issued ignored?

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t you allow the honourable member to raise the matter because I have not heard the full story.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the directors of this company have waited for long and that is why they have approached some of us, Members of Parliament, to come here and present their concerns.  

The story could be long, but there are allegations that there are some foreign investors dealing in the same, who are behind this arrangement. Mind you, this facility has been of very great importance to pharmaceutical students of Mbarara University, Makerere University and other universities. We are aware that the policy of this government is to encourage foreign and local investors. When we look at the way we encourage our local investors, it leaves a lot to be desired. 

The Uganda Manufacturers’ Association (UMA) wrote a letter of which I sent a copy to hon. Amelia Kyambadde, because Mavid Pharmaceuticals is under UMA and I believe that hon. Kyambadde has been a little bit busy - I know she is a very hard working lady and maybe she has not received this letter. But my greatest prayer is that these employees, who are now running up and down because they got loans from banks and their names have been advertised in newspapers as defaulters because the factory was closed down three months ago, need to be helped. So, they cannot really meet their bank obligations.
  
Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer that the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Trade, come and present what they feel - in as far as the closure of this pharmaceutical is concerned - because the more we delay, the more problems these people will be faced with. 

I believe that these people are innocent. I believe that Madam Joy Kabatsi carried out various investigations and indeed these evictions were illegal as per the letter that I will lay on Table. It is my prayer that these Ugandans, who cannot come here, could be supported by this institution by requesting the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Trade and Industry to come out with a report in as far as the closure of Mavid Pharmaceuticals is concerned. Thank you very much. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am not aware of that incident because it was not brought to my office. There are so many cases of such unfair treatment arising from business rivalry in the country. There are companies that may see another company producing the same product and, therefore, threatening to take away their clientele and so connive with whatever authority is in place, including Police officers and court. I am asking my colleague - since I will be in office tomorrow as Minister of Internal Affairs - to bring those people to my office and I will immediately act on the merits of the case.  Thank you very much. 

3.12
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for allowing me raise a matter of national importance. The issue I am raising touches on –(Mr Ssebaggala rose_)
 
THE SPEAKER: You have raised your matter, allow him make his point.  Okay, come and lay it. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I am laying on Table three documents; one, a letter from Madam Joy Kabatsi, Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, dated 19 August 2011; another one from the Executive Director, Uganda Manufacturers’ Association dated 28 September 2011. The third one also from Joy Kabatsi dated 19 August 2011. I beg to lay.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Nwoya County in this Parliament and as part of our recovery from the war, we have encouraged our people to pick on trade. And I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for opening for us the market in Southern Sudan.  

But in the last two months that we have experienced heavy rainfall, the road that connects Uganda to Southern Sudan has given us nightmares. As I speak, on the road we have more than 50 trucks that are stuck; we have Ugandan traders that are losing and many of them have got money from microfinance institutions and banks and their goods are being damaged on the road. On many occasions, Government has expressed willingness to tarmac that road and even make it better than what it is. 

As a matter of emphasis, Uganda is earning more in foreign exchange from Southern Sudan as compared to our neighbouring countries. I have a figure from a report that was published by Bank of Uganda entitled: “The Informal Cross-border Trade Survey Report 2008.” The figures are summarised as follows: In 2006, between Uganda and Rwanda, our earnings through informal export trade was US$25 million, which increased to $55.2 million in 2008. Between Uganda and DRC, the total by 2008 was $219 million; between Uganda and Kenya in 2008, was $107 million. But in less than four years, between Uganda and Southern Sudan, we are now earning $929 million, which is an indicator that we are earning more through that route to Southern Sudan as a country. 

MR OLANYA:  Madam Speaker, as I speak now, the vehicles that are stuck on the Juba road are over 200 vehicles. You know for sure that the Juba road normally attracts very many businessmen and we have some businessmen who are transporting matooke from Western Uganda. Because of the bad road, you find that they spend two or three weeks on the road and the matooke and tomatoes and many other things get rotten.

Therefore, I really appeal to the ministry concerned that we need to look into this problem very carefully. Unfortunately, there is always a grader on that road. They are working everyday, but I do not know exactly what is taking place on the road; they are very busy, but doing nothing. This is the information I wanted to give.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, colleague for that information. As I wind up my submission, last year a trader committed suicide on that road. The trader had borrowed money from the bank and the goods got spoilt on the road because of the bad state of the road, and the trader realised he could not come back to Kampala. It has been a big issue. So, I request the Minister for Works to kindly update the nation on the status of work on that road. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Steven Chebrot): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Todwong for the information that he has given to this House. I wish to inform the Members of Parliament that this year the country has experienced very heavy rains and many of our roads, especially the murram roads, are now almost impassable in many parts of the country, especially in Northern Uganda, parts of Karamoja and also parts of Eastern Uganda.

I wish to reassure the Members that when the rains stop, the Uganda National Roads Authority will embark on a programme to rehabilitate some of these roads.

As you note, a lot of traffic on the murram roads is heavy. There are actually heavy trucks and most of those murram roads cannot withstand the heavy loads of traffic that they are being subjected to now. However, Government has put in place programmes to tarmac some of those roads in question. In West Nile, for example, the contractor is already on site on the Arua-Vurra road. They are mobilising and within the next three months, we hope that some of these roads will be tarmacked.

Concerning the contractor for Arua-Gulu-Atiak road, the agreement was signed and the contractor is mobilising equipment. We hope that some of those roads will be tarmacked. Many other roads are on the priority lists of Government to have them tarmacked, if resources are available.

So, I would like to appeal to honourable members to be patient; wait until the rains stop and then we will embark on the physical rehabilitation of the roads. Thank you very much.

3.21
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I did promise to lay on Table Mr Agaba George’s CV. Agaba George is a member of the American Planning Association. He is also a member of the Uganda Institute of Physical Planners. He has a Masters in Business Administration from the University of Phoenix, California. He has a Bachelors degree of Urban Planning and he has worked for Kampala Capital City Authority since March 2011.

He has worked for City of Rosemead in the Physical Planning Department of California, USA. He has worked for Imperial County Planning and Building Department of California, and indeed, in 1997 to 2001, he worked for Sembabule Town Council. I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: The clerk will make copies for Members to study the document.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, we are not ready today because my senior colleague is still holding some consultations over the same subject matter. We, therefore, request you to allow us to present this matter tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the record, since Monday, your minister, as well as the Clerk, have been pestering me to put this matter on the Order Paper. So, I just want that on the record.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH UGANDA PETROLEUM INSTITUTE, KIGUMBA UNDER THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2001 (AS AMENDED)

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, that is what I was requesting for. The papers together with the resolution will be presented tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: I just wanted to clear my side. For the record, when you are ready you will let us know. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE SUSAN MUWONGE, THE FIRST WOMAN RALLY DRIVER TO WIN THE NATIONAL MOTOR RALLY CHAMPIONSHIP TITLE IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Nyakikongoro? Hon. Iddi? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO FIND PRIME MINISTER HON. JOHN PATRICK AMAMA MBABAZI AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS HON. HILLARY ONEK LIABLE FOR CONTEMPT OF PARLIAMENT

3.25
MR CHEMASWET KISOS (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a motion for the resolution of Parliament to find Prime Minister, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi and Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Hillary Onek, liable for contempt of Parliament under Rules of Procedure 7, 22(2)(u), 46 (1)(k) and 195(2):

“WHEREAS Parliament on the 11th day of October 2011 did resolve that:

‘Government ministers, namely: Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Hilary Onek, who were named during the debate, step aside from their offices with immediate effect pending investigations and report by the ad hoc committee of Parliament’;

AND WHEREAS it is realised that hon. Sam Kutesa has since stepped aside as Minister of Foreign Affairs pursuant to the resolution of Parliament and his pending trial before the Anti-Corruption Court;

AND WHEREAS hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek have to-date not stepped aside and have continued to act and hold their offices, an act which is contemptuous to Parliament. 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

(i)	Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek, be found liable for contempt of Parliament;
(ii)	The said Members be suspended from the House until such time when the ad hoc committee reports to the House on the outcome of the investigations.”

I beg to move. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform honourable members that I am a Member of the National Resistance Movement and I was a member of UPM before that. I would like the Members of NRM to take this motion in good faith. We have no ill-intentions with this motion. On October 11th resolutions of Parliament were made on the question of oil. Resolution 9(c) was made as a result of deliberations that were made on that day. On October 12, the Clerk to Parliament wrote to hon. Amama Mbabazi as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to take action on the resolutions of which 9(c) was part. 

We believe that by being contemptuous to Parliament this is what it means – may I define the word “contempt” of Parliament. According to the New Encyclopaedia Britannica Volume III and published in 1994, Edition 15, contempt of Parliament in law means, “Insult to, interference with or violation of a sovereign court or legislative body. The concept is of English origin and is found only in countries that follow the Common Law system. The primary importance of the notion of contempt is that it warrants judicial action in defence of the judicial or legislative power itself. In England, both Houses of Parliament have asserted their power to punish contemptuous acts.” 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request honourable members of Parliament to debate this matter and be seen by their constituents as those who passed resolutions which led to the formation of resolution 9(c). I believe that the people of Masindi, Palabek, Ngom-rom, Kisoro and others, believe that Parliament did the right thing on October 11th. 

I would like to thank the Members who debated that motion on October 11th and were captured by the Hansard as being patriotic in this country now to have debated issues pertaining to oil and led to the resolutions that were made. I believe they still live by their word and uphold what was captured in the Hansard. I also believe that they still believe hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek should be punished. Following these resolutions and the motion I am presenting here, I would like to believe that we are not here to punish people, but to help them. Suppose the ad hoc committee comes up with a report, we would not like to have a situation where people will fail to debate the report – (Interruption)

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, we all respect this House and we respect other honourable members. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to address this august House while pocketing?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what part of the Rules of Procedure stops us from pocketing? Please, cite the rule. (Laughter)

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, when we look at Rule 69, it says: “Members should be decent when addressing this House.” When someone is addressing this House while pocketing, I think it is contrary to these Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chemaswet, proceed.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we would have made laws against making pockets in long trousers. I have never discovered long trousers before and so I am not part of that. But I believe –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this is a very honourable and dignified House and Rule 69 of our Rules of Procedure talks about the dress code. It says: “All Members shall dress in a dignified manner, that is to say, a suit, a pair of trousers and all military attire.” It also says that: “All Members shall put on dignified shoes.” So, Rule 69 is about the dress code. The point of procedure I am rising about is this: Is it procedurally right for an honourable Member of Parliament presumed to be of sound mind to misquote a rule of procedure in broad daylight? Is it procedurally right to proceed in that manner?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I did not think what he said was important. That is why I made no ruling. Please, proceed.

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, this motion is intended to help Ugandans, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Onek, and the entire House. And of course I have been informed by hon. Kabakumba that even the President, and I think she supports the motion by saying that.

This motion is intended to make sure that Parliament is heard. I would like to echo the words of hon. Todwong where he clearly separated Parliament from Government and said Government should make the roads in Northern Uganda and especially the road that goes to Juba. So, in other words, if you try to interpret it, he was saying that Parliament has its role. Parliament made some resolutions that ministers should step aside. We are informed that hon. Sam Kutesa and others stepped aside and I would like to thank them for being courageous enough, and I would like to say this House should really thank them for setting some precedent over this -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to know whether it is in order for the mover of the motion to mislead the House when actually everybody knows that those specific ministers stepped down because of another case, which is not the same as this one we are handling. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think he knows his facts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true hon. Sam Kutesa stepped aside with his colleagues because of the issue of CHOGM. But in his letter, which I will bring later and table here, he says that, “Even because of the pending oil investigations we shall do this” and I am good at it by the way; I am good at information. I wish I had known, I would have brought it, but I will lay it and you will see.

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi has put it right. By stepping aside, these are part of precedents of practice. And if it is a practice, as has been set already by a minister, then the other ministers should also take the same course. We do believe that this other case that we are talking about is similar to the other one. What is the difference about them? I request these honourable ministers to step aside and really follow what we are saying. If other honourable members debated here, I do not want them to create a very big roundabout at the moment, but I would like them to live by the word and say, “Of course, we debated the right thing in this country and we debated the right thing in this Parliament.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you very much hon. Chemaswet. On the 10th and 11th October, this Parliament in a bi-partisan manner, which was good for this nation, moved and I will quote (c) of 9: “That Government ministers, namely: hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Hillary Onek, who were named during the oil debate, step aside from their offices with immediate effect pending investigations and report by the ad hoc committee.”

In the event that with your guidance and that of the Business Committee the ad hoc committee was formed, I think it will only be very important for this Parliament to give respect to our earlier decision that for this ad hoc committee to do its work properly, the Members must step aside. I am a Member of the National Resistance Movement; there is no doubt about that and our manifesto is clear, “Zero tolerance to corruption.”

Rt hon. Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi is my friend and my Prime Minister. He is also very aware that the other day, when we mentioned that there is a case of investigation against Kashaka, he was very quick to act. Guilty consciousness needs no accuser. Madam Speaker, you were here yesterday and you advised properly that this is a matter of conscience. We do not even need to accuse. I would have expected the man in front of me and the one in the corner to be outside as a matter of conscience, and your guilt is actually conscious of that.

Today is historic in the history of the Parliament of Uganda that Parliament made a decision on 11th and I want everybody to stand out and be counted. Just stand and say, “I said this and I do not want to say it again.” It is very important for Ugandans. I know a lot of threats are there, I know we are intimidated here and there and I know we have talked a lot, but I want to tell you, power corrupts, but absolute power corrupts absolutely! There is no one who is unbwoggable; there is no one untouchable and there is no one in this country who this country cannot do without. (Laughter)

What man has learnt from history is that man does not learn from history. The integrity and independence of this Parliament is key! I want to tell you that you may laugh, you may clap and you may actually join the Uganda parliamentary clappers forum and be known for that, but I want to tell you, history will judge you harshly.

Under Rule 7, this is not a matter of Uganda. In the interest and your wisdom, Madam Speaker, this matter may not have precedents in Uganda. We can have the Commonwealth practice and this has been the order. In 2002, we saw Raila Odinga and Moody Awori step aside. What is wrong with Ugandans stepping aside? The precedents are also here in Uganda. The other day, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Rukutana and hon. Nasasira stepped aside. What is wrong with those who are here in front of me? It is only in public interest that we serve the people. We do not serve selfish interests. What is in an office that after 90 days you come back assuming you are not guilty? 

I want to raise it to everybody. You can be laughing at me, I do not care. I represent the people of Rwampara, and I am asking you, what is it that you are protecting in that office? What is it that the ad hoc committee will carry out on the Leader of Government Business when he is in Government? What is that the ad hoc committee will investigate in Dubai, in Malta and in UK using the Police, when the Minister of Internal Affairs is still in charge? Unless we are saying the ad hoc committee, which is going to use the taxpayers’ money is left out. I want to suggest, if this motion is defeated, then the ad hoc committee should also not go -(Interjections)- yes, because what would be the purpose? They go together! What would be the purpose of wasting the taxpayers’ money in UK, in Malta and in Dubai when we are going to do the obvious? 

I want to end by saying that today we tend to feign ignorance and we pretend that we are ignorant, but ignorance of the law is no defence. Often than not, we have quoted that there is no law; others have called it subjudice; others are - but I want to say, hon. Kabakumba, the law I know is in the Bible. (Laughter)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have quietly been listening to hon. Kyamadidi even when people were calling him names. Is it in order for hon. Kyamadidi to start attacking me personally in this House and mentioning my name? I am a devoted Christian, for avoidance of doubt. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether he raised your name in bad faith. I think he was telling you about the Bible. (Laughter)

MR MUJUNI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and most obliged for your wisdom and guidance. There are so many laws including the Mosaic Law in the Bible, but what I know in the Book of Deuteronomy, which is actually the Book of laws, is that whoever lives by the sword shall die by the sword. Ministers hold public office and are entrusted with considerable privilege and power, and in this way, they should hold and act with all honesty, integrity and propriety. For heaven’s sake ladies and gentlemen, Uganda is not ending today and it is there for all of us. I know that in the Ugandan laws, we may not see a law which talks about stepping aside, but in the moral laws in your mind, there is always that one that always touches you even when you are passing on the streets of Kinkizi, Mbarara and Kampala that I should step aside. 

Madam Speaker, I do beg for your indulgence and for your protection as I sit down. I am a representative of the people of Rwampara. Everyone here has a constituency and you may have your motives, but your motives should not supersede or override my motives. My motives are national and not personal. You can ride on your personal motives and you succeed, but my national motives will live longer for prosperity. (Applause)

MR KARUHANGA: I thank you hon. Kyamadidi for giving way. The information that I actually wanted to give you is that, Uganda is a Common Law country and we believe in the principle of precedent. We have had cases before of honourable ministers stepping aside with even some resigning. Hon. Mathew Rukikaire, who comes from around the same place, around Kanungu -(Laughter)- and hon. Kirunda Kivejinja are honourable men in this country who resigned in similar circumstances. A Member is also mentioning the name of hon. Kahinda Otafiire and some of our colleagues here in Kenya - the mover did. It is not in any way a problem of law that can stop a person from believing and respecting his conscience. We were all seated here as Members of Parliament and a resolution was passed in their presence. We want to respect you because you are honourable men and this is an honourable House. What is wrong with stepping aside and you are investigated? That is the information I wanted to give you. I thank you.

MR MUJUNI: I thank you very much my colleague –

DR LYOMOKI: I thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I am just rising on a point of clarification because hon. Karuhanga has said that hon. Rukikaire and other ministers resigned. The clarification I wanted to give, because I was part of the process when those ministers resigned. This was after we had done investigations and we had a report. Now the matter we are dealing with here is that, we have not yet done any investigation and those others resigned because Parliament had actually come up with the investigations and we were debating the motion. So, there were all grounds for them to resign because everything had been proved, but for this matter here, we have not even done any investigation. That is the clarification that I wanted to give.

MR MUJUNI: I thank you very much. I need to conclude on this matter and give others chance. I want to say that contempt in my understanding is total defiance of the decision of the majority. On 11th, there was a decision and the holy man, who even came with the holy spirit –(Laughter)- yes, and laid it on Table –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is common knowledge that I am a man of God and on that day, I laid here the anointing as a symbol that we should allow God to move in this matter. I have actually been waiting to go and pray for the committee to make sure that we anoint them so that they speak the truth. (Laughter) Is it in order for the honourable colleague, whom I respect, to doubt my credentials when I just came here with a matter of fact about what happened. You know, the truth must set us free and that is what the Bible says and I just came here to declare the truth of what happened. Is it in order to doubt my credentials? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR MUJUNI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I am most obliged. We are here not because we are moving a new motion or not because we are doing anything new, but we are here in line with the resolution passed by this honourable Parliament. And the resolution was that, for the ad hoc committee to do a thorough job, without influence peddling, without any other authority over this committee; for the committee to be thorough, that at least the honourable members implicated step aside. Now, my dear hon. Lyomoki, that is what I ideally meant; that even with your guidance, the Olive oil and with even the prayers you are going to give them, it is only important that by the time you pray for the committee to start and do a good job, let the Members be aside as earlier resolved. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Katabazi.

MS KATABAZI: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to be guided on procedural matters. I have listened very well to this matter that is at hand, and seconded by hon. Kyamadidi. The Seconder was saying that it is the same motion that we discussed on 11th and repeated on 25th of last month. So, I seek to be guided. Rule 59(2) states: “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current Session”. When you look at the Order Paper, this is the second sitting of the second meeting of the first session. So, we are still in the same session. That is the first rule on which I need guidance.

Secondly, Rule 68(2) states: “If the question of closure is agreed to by a majority, the motion which was being discussed when the closure motion was moved shall be put forthwith without further discussion.” Madam Speaker, I remember that on the 25th of last month, hon. Amongi Betty, who is our Chairperson UWOPA, inquired from you about who the Leader of Government Business was. You clearly stated that you submitted all the resolutions to the President and you were waiting for a response from the President in relation to resolution 9(c). 

The Prime Minister is put in office by the Constitution and removed from Office by the same Constitution. Under the Constitution, Article 108A (4) says: 

“The office of the Prime Minister shall become vacant if- 
a)	the appointment is revoked by the President;
b)	the incumbent resigns or dies; or
c)	the incumbent becomes disqualified to be a Member of Parliament.” (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issue at hand is not removal. What we are discussing now is not about removing the Prime Minister from his office; it is about stepping aside to give time for investigation. So, is the Member in order to insinuate that we are removing the Prime Minister from his office?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to distinguish between the resolution made on the 11th October, which was directed at the ministers, asking them to leave their offices in the ministries, and this motion. This motion is about suspending them from this House as Members of the Ninth Parliament. 

MS NTABAZI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think I am still on the right track –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ntabazi, I said distinguish the resolution for stepping aside as ministers, from the motion now to suspend their membership from this House. 

4.03
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion and speak in its support. I thank the movers and I thank you, honourable members, for your indulgence. This motion is a follow-up and particularly, it is turning –(Interjections)– We all believe in miracles and what has just happened to hon. Hillary Onek, I pray that it is permanent and real that he has stepped aside (Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, the motion in our hands does not intend to say that the ministers vacate their offices like the way a censure is done –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I decided to be an observer on this matter, but seeing a senior legislator, and a minister for that matter, on the Floor of Parliament giving a vulgar sign is the greatest insult, and he was pointing it at the Speaker like this and then like this. (Laughter) I saw this with my eyes -(Interjections)- Can the hon. Hillary Onek - and the cameras are there to confirm what I am saying - clarify to us the circle sign with the finger pointing at the circle? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, we allow the disabled in this House, but I am not about to believe that all of us understand sign language. Since hon. Hillary Onek has decided to communicate to the House using sign language, can he stand on the Floor and explain to us the circle sign pointed with the finger? (Laughter) Can he explain to us? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onek, I saw your hand in the air; what were you doing?

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I got up to go and wash my hands, Members from that side told me I was stepping aside. I told them “No”. I meant that is zero; there is nothing in it. I pointed at them and not at the Speaker. (Interjections) What you are talking about is subsidiary. The issue here is, let us address their motion. You had no reason to tell me to step aside when I walking out, therefore, you deserve the circle I gave you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us concentrate on the motion please.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I think it is high time the House is guided on what is taking place. I looked at the prayer of the mover of the motion, and I have been in this House for a long time. The mover is praying that these Members be suspended from this House as MPs. Madam Speaker, through your guidance, I want to know under which rule and when the House got the powers to suspend a Member of Parliament, not a minister. I am seeking your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: No, do not seek my guidance; debate it. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for 11 years. In relation to what hon. Bakkabulindi has asked, I, hon. Odonga Otto, MP of Aruu County, was nearly suspended from this House -(Interjections)- because I alleged that some Members of Parliament had picked bribes during CHOGM. In fact, there was a substantial motion which was debated for three hours; Parliament debated until 9.45 p.m. and the decision was whether I was to be suspended from this House or not. The committee which investigated that aspect claimed that we had not produced enough evidence to show that the Members of Parliament had picked bribes. So -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, Odonga Otto. I was a Member of the Eighth Parliament and the only rule which we used was rule 75. I can read it verbatim. This is where you can suspend a Member of Parliament from the service of Parliament. There is no other rule. If he is a minister, you use rule 118. I can read rule 75 verbatim: 

“Naming and suspension of Members 

(1) If the Speaker or the Chairperson of any Committee considers that the conduct of a Member cannot be adequately dealt with under sub-rule (2) of rule 74, he or she may name the Member. 
(2) Where a Member has been named, then -
(a) in the case of the House, the Speaker shall suspend the Member named from the service of the House; or
(b) in the case of a Committee of the whole House, the Chairperson shall forthwith leave the Chair and report the circumstances to the House and the Speaker shall suspend the Member named from the service of the House.”

If he is a minister, we use rule 118. I can read it verbatim -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just debate the motion. Debate the merits of the motion; do not shout.

MR KAKOOZA: That means even the motion we are debating is defective.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance, first of all, on the rule that hon. James Kakooza has just read. Even if an honourable minister is an ex-officio, he is a Member of Parliament without a constituency. The essence is not about their ministerial posts, it is about their attendance of Parliament in their capacity as Members of Parliament. (Interjections) Please, I am seeking for guidance. You cannot guide me in chorus. I need that guidance from the Speaker. (Laughter) Please, respect yourselves. You are honourable members, respect yourselves. 

In the last Parliament, I was acting Leader of the Opposition when five of my members were suspended from this august House for misconduct and not respecting rules in this institution. Here is a situation where the accused, the honourable ministers, are Members of Parliament. Parliament passed a resolution and in the resolution they are part and parcel of the whole thing, and here is a situation where they are defying the resolution of Parliament. Actually, in simple language, they are saying this motion is useless, that this institution which has passed this motion is useless and, therefore, cannot attract their respect. That is what it means in essence. Therefore -(Interjections)- that is the essence, because if they respected this institution and they are part and parcel of this institution, they should have abided by the resolution. 

The issue I am asking, therefore, is - I hear hon. James Kakooza talking about 118, a constitutional provision which only talks about censureship of a minister. This motion is not about censureship of a minister; it is about the ministers being found in contempt of Parliament’s decision and being asked for any possible action that Parliament can pronounce itself on. Really, are we moving in the right direction basing on the advice given by hon. James Kakooza? I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, debate the motion on its merits or demerits. Speak for it or against it. That is all.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence on this matter. The question we have in our hands is not in any way intended to vilify the mentioned and named ministers. The essence of this motion is to give the principles of natural justice a leeway, in a sense that once you have been named, it is only fair for you to give way; and you do not only give way, but you seem to give way so that at the end of the day, you take your rightful place once you have been found innocent. You can then also take your place in a civilized world.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have a challenge on our hands. The named officers could be our friends and they could be our superiors, but we have a duty to do in this country if those named cannot take it upon themselves to do so. We are now made to do this honourable work of enforcing those of our own by impressing upon them the duty of retaining their decency. Decency can be best protected by saying that okay, if you think I have soiled my hands, let me step aside and once the investigations are over, and once you are sure that they will be over, they can come back. This is very honourable of them to do. 

Honourable members, the matter is not starting with us here. The Member has mentioned those ministers in the past who have undergone the same experience and indeed they were restored at the end –(Interruptions)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I can see my friend, the Rt hon. Prime Minister here, and a learned friend of mine at that, and hon. Hillary Onek in such a situation. The situation we are addressing here is that of contempt. The question we are here to define and debate is that one or two of our Members are acting in contempt of a resolution that was passed by this House. Now, the issue in this question is whether Parliament deems it fit that they are acting in contempt or not. 

Following the previous discussions and debates that we had, it was proved that while we were here, the Rt hon. Prime Minister came up with a letter from Tullow addressed to the Speaker. He presented it here. The letter had not been copied to him, a sign that maybe in one way or the other, the letter found its way onto his desk. How? God knows. It found its way onto his desk before the Speaker to whom it had been addressed received it.

The ad hoc committee is one of our own, constituted as a result of one of our resolutions of Parliament, therefore it is only in prudence - surely speaking, there is no written letter of the law that calls upon people to step aside, but the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Hillary Onek are members of our own team. This is the team of the House and as our members, they are under investigations. 

Privy from what we heard the other time, one of the Members presented a letter that had not been addressed to him. In this matter, we are not saying that this committee, like the Speaker said and I am sure they are aware by law, is not adducing guilt or no guilt. That is not the question that the committee is going to decide. Therefore, it would be prudent for a senior Member of Parliament and a statesman at that, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to deem it important that if I have scratches now, it is better that I leave the House to perform its duties and delegate my duties to other members of the front bench or other honourable Members of Parliament. Government will not come to a standstill. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that today in the security circles, there is what we call preventive arrest. (Laughter) Under this arrangement, we have been told that for you to qualify to be under preventive arrest, you must have been suspected to be about to commit a crime. In regard to the honourables Patrick Mbabazi, Hillary Onek and Sam Kutesa, we suspect that they already have committed a crime and so they should be treated under that kind of arrangement, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as hon. Latif Sebaggala said, I think it is even very serious; we are now getting messages that UBC, which is supposed to be broadcasting this debate live, has been put off. That is a signal that there is something we are trying to hide. I do not think that is right, when we have agreed that our debates should be broadcast live. Why should broadcast be put off when we are discussing such an important matter? Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is a state corporation.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think this Parliament is being put to test. If we passed the resolutions as Parliament on 11th of October and now we are labouring to have them respected, if we gloss over this and tomorrow this honourable Parliament passes other resolutions and laws, how shall we guarantee that they shall remain respected? That is why I am saying that we honourable members – (Interruptions)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am a devoted member of NRM. Madam Speaker, we passed resolutions as Parliament. Later on, we went ahead to constitute an ad hoc committee. Before the committee started its work, it expressed worry that -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I want to know whether this is in order because when I read the Constitution, I know that this Parliament is supposed to make laws and not to prosecute. The previous Speaker was talking about executing; is it in order for the Parliament to make –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you should wait for the motion to be moved and debate it on its merit or no merit. That is when you will point out the demerits. Let them finish their motion and then we can debate. 

MR MUSASIZI: I was saying that the committee expressed worry that with these ministers in office, there is likely to be a lot of interference in their work and thus the outcome of the findings will be impaired. We are also leaders, elected by Ugandans, and one principle we should have in mind is the principle of integrity. I expect the mentioned ministers to exercise the highest level of integrity, and this can be demonstrated by stepping aside in order to allow investigations to continue. 

I want to conclude by saying that we are in the Ninth Parliament, the Parliament in which all Ugandans have hope in. We must stand up to be counted. This Parliament must be remembered for having fought corruption. This Parliament must be remembered for having passed laws that benefit the poor person in this country. 

I pray that when it comes to voting for or against this motion, we do it by secret ballot so that our Members who have been intimidated can have a chance to vote with freedom; so that we can have the best results. I thank you. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appeal to you, let the movers finish moving and then we can debate. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, ours is a choice; we either choose to give dignity to this House or we run it down. We are lucky and privileged to be Members of the Ninth Parliament. It means there are other eight parliaments preceeding us. Now, at this hour when the country is looking at us, what image and legacy are we leaving behind? Are we a Parliament of serious Members who are honoured to serve in this House or we are a House that will turn around on its own word? I beseech honourable members to reconsider. We either run down ourselves or we make progress not only for ourselves, but for our country. 

On this matter that we have on our hands, we are not re-inventing the wheel. It is a practice throughout the Commonwealth. Recently in Kenya, three cabinet ministers were named and before they went to the ICC to finalise the status of their cases, they stepped aside. It is a fact. Not only do we have it with us here, but we should emulate the best practices. It is a challenge for all of us here –(Mr Ssewungu rose_)- Hon. Member, the Speaker says we shall have a fully-fledged debate and Members will present in their substantive capacity.  

As Ugandans, we should always be on top. It is the duty of Parliament to ensure that we urge our Executive to live by the highest standards and these are the benchmarks that we have to set as Parliament. Cases are all over the world. Look at South Africa; if we are friends with South Africa and we are really proud to be associated with South Africa, why don’t we take their example. This goes to the President; he has his mandate and he knows what he wants to do. 

I am a member of the NRM - I will hold on until the Leader of Government Business is here so that I can give my quotation. We have a duty as Parliament. We have 34 million Ugandans waiting to see what becomes of this Parliament. We are here in this Ninth Parliament, but we are not sure whether we shall be here in the 10th Parliament but we must set the pace. We must set the standard. I would always be happy and look back to when this Parliament rose up to the challenge and told our own that when such matters arise, you step aside. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I was presenting on the 10th of October on these very matters regarding Tullow, Heritage and our ministers. I remember that this House ended at 9.15 p.m but by the following day, Parliament opened at 11 a.m. and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business had already secured a correspondence from Tullow which he laid on the Table of this House before the Speaker had gotten a copy of it. That shows, honourable members, that if we are honest in our heart of hearts, you cannot move very far with this kind of conduct. If he was able to manoeuvre a document in the night so that by the break of day, he already has the document with him, what much are you going to be doing? 

I remember very well that hon. Hillary Onek stood up and said he was ready to step aside as soon as the ad hoc committee is constituted. I do not know what has befallen the respected honourable member of this House. What befell him then and what has befallen him now? 

I know we have collective responsibility, but we do not have collective guilt. I do not want the honourable members of this Parliament to be associated with collective guilt. Guilt is individual; guilt is personal; and it should be borne by the individual mentioned. Do not besmirch the entire Parliament. Let this Parliament be a Parliament of honourable members. 

It is on that premise that I once again beseech the honourable members concerned not to put us through these hard emotions. It is emotional because they are leaders of our party. It is emotional because they are leaders of this country. But again, it is our duty not to flinch from that responsibility and proceed and demand that they step aside. Whatever happens elsewhere, that is the matter of the appointing authority. In his heart of hearts, I want to appeal to him because he is in charge of this country and this country has one Government and we have a President in charge; what precedent is he setting for this country?  

I want to read. This is a way forward in regard to NRM, the party I belong to. I want to inform Members that we are not re-inventing the wheel here. I want to read page 48 of the NRM manifesto of Yoweri K. Museveni 2011/16. This is in relation to corruption. It reads: “The President will constitute a committee that investigates political leaders and senior public officers once they have been mentioned in corruption related scandals and report back to the President within a specific timeframe. If in the committee’s opinion there is need for further investigation by other institutions like the IGG, then the President shall refer the matter for further investigations and ask persons under investigation to step aside during the time they are being investigated.” 

Hon Members, this is ours; I hope we do not run away from this. It is a contract that we have with Ugandans and it is only prudent that the secretary-general of the party ought to take first and prior respect of the manifesto. Now that he is not doing that, we cannot run away from reminding him to adhere to the same because the NRM came into power because of this. We used this to convince Ugandans to vote us into power. So, why are we at this point in time, at this hour, running away from this?

I want to end my submission by requesting all those involved, please save us the embarrassment, save the appointing authority the embarrassment; even if you know that you are innocent, history and Parliament will rehabilitate you. It does not mean that we are throwing you in the dustbin or it does not mean that we are condemning you, but we are telling you to respect the resolution of this Parliament. 

We also want to uphold the Constitution. We want to guard and protect this institution of Parliament. I once again want to call on the ministers to do the needful, to cooperate and allow the ad hoc committee to come with clean work. We do not want matters of complaints that they were gagged and interfered with.

I rest my case by laying this once again on the Floor of Parliament. It is a very good manifesto and I hope we can use it to refresh our memory if we seem to have forgotten.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, the motion was moved by hon. Chemaswet and it was seconded by hon. Kyamadidi and hon. Ssekikubo. In between there were interjections, but now it has just been completed. I want that to be clear for the record. So, now it is available for debate. However, the Minister for Information wanted to clarify whether we are off or on the air.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the NRM Manifesto 2011/16 by Yoweri K. Museveni. It talks of prosperity for all, better service delivery, job creation and particularly the question of corruption, which on page 48, Part VIII reads: “The President will constitute a committee to investigate political and senior public officers once they have been mentioned in corruption related scandals and report to the President within a specific timeframe. If in the committee’s opinion there is need for further investigation by other institutions like the IGG, the President shall refer the matter for further investigation and ask the persons under investigation to step aside during the time they are being investigated.”  I beg to lay.

THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Karoro Okurut): Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised an issue of UBC, but UBC has not been switched off. When he mentioned it, I went to watch and I have just consulted. There was a problem with the signal at some time, but that has been corrected. Hon. Members, there is nothing to hide about this debate. It is in the open, and we are on air and we have been on air for some time.

THE SPEAKER: I will get other people because I can see that there have been 10 movers. 

4.38
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam South Constituency, Oyam): I stand to second the motion and to state that this motion is reaffirming what this House adopted. I want to stand with the decision of this House. I want to stand firm to protect the decision we made as a Parliament because as a Member of Parliament, my role is to defend the integrity of the institution. 

The core of the issue is contempt of Parliament. What is contempt? In the Oxford Dictionary, contempt means an act of despising the state of mind; one who despises; disdain; lack of respect or reverence for something; and the state of being despised. Those are the different meanings of the word contempt. By the action of the two ministers, would it fall within the designation of contempt or not? Would it be construed to say that they are despising the resolution of Parliament? Would it be construed to say that they are not respecting the resolution of this House? By the international standards of the meaning of the word contempt, I would agree that it would mean that their actions are in contempt and disrespect of the resolution made in this House.

I want to say that earlier, people mentioned ministers in this Government who stepped aside because of one investigation or another, whether in courts of law or elsewhere or an inquiry. At the moment we know that three ministers are before court and they have stepped aside. We also know that this Parliament has the power of the High Court, therefore, the decision that we have made can also be construed that we believe in that decision. So, if someone refuses to respect that decision, it is contempt and that is why I agree that if you despise a resolution of Parliament, you should step aside. Surely, who is this one person who cannot respect all the institutions in this government? We have had three ministers who have stepped aside; who are these two people? Are they bigger than the institution of this country that they cannot step aside? Can this country not run without hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek? That is what we are saying and I believe –(Member timed out.)

4.47
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. A few minutes ago, you ruled that the motion on the Floor is about finding the honourable ministers being liable for contempt of Parliament and the other motion is about their suspension. 

I want to submit that the resolution that was made on 11th October this year and the two resolutions that are being sought today are closely linked. If the resolution that was made on 11th October had no legal basis, then you cannot talk about hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek being found liable for contempt and you cannot go to the next stage of having them suspended. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to move by convincing this House that the resolution that was passed on 11th October has no legal basis and, therefore, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek cannot be found to be in contempt of Parliament and cannot be suspended because there is no legal basis in that. 

Madam Speaker, the appointment, the responsibilities and the vacation of office by the Prime Minister is regulated by the Constitution, and clause 1 of Article 108A of the Constitution provides that: “There shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority from among Members of Parliament.” Clause 3 of the same Article provides that: “The Prime Minister shall, in the performance of his or her functions, be individually accountable to the President and collectively responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet -(Mrs Ogwal rose_)- I do not need any clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him complete what he is saying and speak against it. 

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, clause 4 of Article 108A provides for the way the office of the Prime Minister can be vacated. From the abovementioned provisions of the Constitution, the following is apparent: One, Parliament has a role to play in the appointment of the Prime Minister, in that, the Prime Minister so appointed by the President must be approved by this Parliament. So, Parliament has a role to play in the appointment of the Prime Minister. 

The other observation is that in the performance of his duties, the Prime Minister is only accountable to the President and not to Parliament. Whereas the Prime Minister is accountable, his appointment must be approved by Parliament, but in the performance of his duties he is only accountable to the President. So, if the Prime Minister erred, it is the President, as you did wisely put it, to respond to that.

Thirdly, clause 4 of Article 108A of the Constitution does not provide for the stepping aside of the Prime Minister, whatever the term means and includes. It is not known what “stepping aside” means and includes. 

Similarly, clause 1 of Article 103 of the Constitution provides that cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. So, the appointment of ministers must be approved by Parliament. Regarding the responsibility of ministers, Article 117 provides, “Ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the cabinet.” 

On vacation of the office of a minister, that one is provided for by Article 116 which provides that, “The office of a Minister shall become vacant- 
(a) 	if the appointment of the holder of the office is revoked by the President; or 
(b) if the holder- 
(i) 	resigns; 
(ii) 	becomes disqualified to be a Member of Parliament; or 
(iii) 	dies.” 

Thus, whereas Parliament must approve the appointment of ministers in the performance of their duties, ministers are accountable to the President and not Parliament and hence, your wise decision of referring this matter to the President. Also, Article 116 of the Constitution does not provide for stepping aside, whatever that term means. 

Madam Speaker, the resolution that was passed by Parliament on 11th October is not binding on the Executive because it is not provided for in law. Only resolutions provided for by the law would be binding on the Executive. One such example is the resolution of creating districts; that would be binding. This resolution which was passed here is not binding on Parliament, hence –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have read this motion and I have also read the resolution passed by Parliament on 11th October. I was not in the House. What the minister, who is also the Attorney-General, is telling the House now is pervasive and diversionary. He is describing to us and telling us the office of the minister and the role of the ministers and how the offices coordinate with the Chief Executive. 

Who is the President? He is talking about the functional operation of the Executive, which is one of the arms of the state. That is perfect; it is provided for in the Constitution. However, my understanding of the motion and my understanding of the resolution that was passed on 11th October, talks about individuals and not the offices - individuals in the names of hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Onek and whoever was mentioned. 

Is it in order -(Mrs Nyakecho rose_)– oh, it is my daughter from Otuke, but educate her to understand. Is it in order for the honourable minister, who is also the Attorney-General, to divert the attention of the House, to talk about offices and the role of the Prime Minister instead of focusing on the individuals that were mentioned in the resolution passed on 11th October?  Is it in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I guided earlier that this motion is seeking to suspend two members of this House. That is what we should be addressing. 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister and the two ministers, some of whom are going to be investigated, will feel vulnerable if Members of the ad hoc committee come and air their views on the Floor regarding this matter - (Interjections)- however -(Interjections)- I am trying to explain. 

I know what is on the Floor is about finding the Prime Minister and the minister in contempt of Parliament. I am saying you cannot talk about contempt of Parliament and you cannot talk about suspension unless the resolution that was passed on 11th has legal backing. I am submitting that on 11th October, the resolution that was passed had no legal backing because in the provisions I have read, the Prime Minister and the minister, administratively, are responsible to the President. I am also adding, Madam Speaker, that that is why you wisely referred this matter to the President. Accordingly, hon. Amama Mbabazi cannot be said to have been in contempt of Parliament in not stepping aside given the fact that the resolution that was passed on 11th October has no legal backing, and secondly because the resolution is not binding on the Executive.

Madam Speaker, at the conclusion of the debate, it was resolved that an ad hoc committee be set up to investigate, among others,  the allegations of bribery that had been made against hon. Amama Mbabazi and the two ministers. Clause 3 of Article 90 of the Constitution provides for the powers of that ad hoc committee. I read in the papers that they started their work and the Constitution gives them powers of the High Court. As you ruled yesterday, Madam Speaker -(Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to respect, and I honestly did not want to stand up on this point, but when the chairman and head of the bar started misguiding this House on a point of law, as an advocate I felt very concerned. Honourable Attorney-General, with all due respect - and you know I respect you very much - Article 108 that you are talking about honestly has no link whatsoever with what we are discussing here. Article 108 is about vacation and let me read it verbatim so that you get it right. At times you can get guidance from your student. (Laughter)

Article 108A clause 4: “The Office of the Prime Minister shall become vacant if - 
(a) 	the appointment is revoked by the 		President;
(b) 	the incumbent resigns or dies; or
c)	 the incumbent becomes disqualified to be a Member of Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, we are not discussing whether the President has revoked the appointment. We are not discussing whether hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Hillary Onek or hon. Kutesa have resigned or they have died or should. We are not discussing whether the incumbent has become disqualified. Honourable Attorney-General, in the protection of your colleagues, it would be a very right and honourable thing for you to do it within the limits of the law. In this motion among the rules that are mentioned, we have rule 7 and I want to read it for you: 

“Procedure in case not provided for and precedents 

In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided for in these Rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practices of the House, the constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth parliaments in so far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.” (Applause)

I find it quite irritating and dishonourable for the Attorney-General of this country, with all the knowledge of the law that we presume really you have -(Laughter)- to come here and procedurally misguide this House. Madam Speaker, I believe it is procedurally incorrect. I thank you.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I have no record as to when hon. Karuhanga was called to the bar but -(Interjections)- same day? 

Madam Speaker, hon. Karuhanga has alluded to rule 7 which says that if there is no clear provision here, we may rely on the precedents from Commonwealth countries. I want to presume that hon. Karuhanga knows very well that the Constitution here is predominant. It is the grand norm. (Applause) It is supreme. So, you cannot rely on the Commonwealth precedents when we have the Constitution here.

I was going on to the issue of the ad hoc committee having commenced its work. It is clear from the constitutional provisions that the ad hoc committee, in the exercise of its functions that were delegated to it, will act as a High Court and you recollect, Madam Speaker, yesterday you ruled that all matters that are before -(Interruption)  

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Attorney-General for giving way. 

The Attorney-General is alluding to the work of the committee which has begun. I want to inform him and this House that on Monday during the Spectrum Show on Radio One, hon. Werikhe and hon. Gerald Karuhanga appeared, and among the questions that were asked by the moderator was, “Hon. Werikhe, will you be able to carry out these investigations without fear or favour?” In his response, and we can play this, he said, “It will not be very easy. It will not be very easy to investigate these people when they are still in office. (Interjections) However, under these circumstances, we will try our best to do the job that has been assigned to us.
 
Madam Speaker and the Attorney-General, there are fears in the committee that this work is going to be subjected to interference. But I would like to tell you that however much we are all rejoicing that the committee has started its work, there are reservations and that is why we are saying that these officers should step aside to allow investigations take place –(Interruption) 

DR LYOMOKI: I followed the talk that hon. Nalubega is referring to and what hon. Werikhe said was that, “It would be difficult...” but he didn’t say that it would be when they were still in office. So, is it in order for an honourable colleague to come and mislead the House with lies when actually the honourable member said it would be difficult, but didn’t refer to their leaving office or not. 

Secondly, this motion is about these Members leaving the House and not leaving their positions. And even if we passed it, they will still remain in their offices. So, how is this point she is raising connected to that motion? Is it in order for her to mislead the House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I didn’t listen to that radio programme and so I don’t know who said what. But I would urge Members to argue the merits of the motion; win it or defeat it on its merits so that we can let this matter rest.  

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I am about to wind up. What I am saying is that yesterday, you ruled that matters that are being investigated before committees of Parliament are subjudice. The motion on the Floor today is subjudice and should have never been brought. 

However, I must commend you for your wise decision to refer the resolution of Parliament to the Executive. Parliament had done its part; the matter was left in the hands of the Executive, who having considered the facts and evidence in this proposal would take the final decision. And Parliament having handed over the matter to the Executive cannot now turn round and take action on a matter that is out of its hands. 

When Parliament referred the matter to the President, it divested itself of the responsibility to handle it. Therefore, in conclusion, what I am saying is that if the resolution that was made on the 11th has no legal backing, these two resolutions cannot stand because – then hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Kutesa and hon. Hillary Onek were not in contempt of any resolution and  secondly, you cannot suspend them basing on nothing. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.11
CAPT MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I am a member of the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of the NRM and I am raising very key issues. Let me put it on record that the matter before us is both political and legal and we should be very clear about it. 

I was not in this House when the initial motion was raised; I was not privy to some of the discussions that took place. But let me put it on record that in the accusations that were raised and mentioned on the Floor of Parliament, the NRM as a political party wasn’t accused and wasn’t mentioned in this matter at all, nor was the Government of Uganda mentioned as a body accused on the Floor of Parliament. This was a matter of individuals that were mentioned in the motion that was debated on the Floor of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I have been on a matter of corruption and colleagues here know that a matter of corruption on the Global Fund, which was adjudicated by a judicial commission of inquiry led by Justice Ogoola - where we appeared - and in that inquiry, I am happy that the commission of inquiry made certain recommendations; the DPP was requested to go into deeper inquiry and I am happy to report to this House that at an appropriate time, I will lay on Table documents that cleared me on the Global Fund accusations. (Applause) 

Another matter that I was involved in, but cannot again go into is that of GAVI, which is before courts of law. I cannot discuss it because that will be subjudice. But I will raise it at an appropriate time. 

What I am trying to raise here and let it be clear that last year in August, the President landed on some of the documents that were displayed in the House and laid on Table here. The President investigated with the help of the Police and I am happy to note that a number of issues that the President at one time said he had forgotten came back to his mind when the matter appeared on the Floor of the House, and he followed them up. Let me say that he sent the Vice President here to present the Government position. 

But Parliament and the Members who were here had landed on some of the documents that they felt were authentic. What they did was to bring the matter before the House and all the 10 resolutions were passed. As it is now, Parliament in its own wisdom - comrades felt that this matter which was brought before it was authentic. 

Now, the point is, in the separation of powers, the Executive investigated this matter itself and the President satisfied himself with the report that he received, but unfortunately, it was not shared with the other arm of Government, and that is, the legislature. Now, Parliament would also want to satisfy itself on the matter that was raised at that time.  The point is very clear that the documents that were presented here are superfluous; they are irrelevant and they cannot stand in any court of law. That is a point. 

But Parliament, in its wisdom, has also taken the appropriate action to put up an ad hoc committee to investigate this matter.  The matter, which becomes now political and not legal, is that when you are making an inquiry, can you inquire on a matter of great importance to the country when my honourable colleague and great friend, hon. Hillary Onek, is holding an office? That is politics. Can you? 

The problem that has arisen is the issue which surrounds humility and being courteous, and it is that it will not be possible for the investigating officer - the IGP staff, to investigate their minister. It may not also be possible for the Minister of Foreign Affairs to write recommendations for some of these key people to go to those offices. It may not be possible for the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister to carry out the oversight function of supervising Government, but what is important for you to note is that when it comes to law, this motion is incurably defective. Why? (Member timed out.)

5.19
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion, which is before us, and in making my submission, I want to peg my issues to those of the Attorney-General as he made his submission.

In the number of years I have stayed in this august House, we had the late Francis Ayume as the Attorney-General. He was succeeded by hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi. Later on, he was succeeded by hon. Makubuya, and now we have hon. Peter Nyombi from Nakasongola.

Having listened to the legal advice given by the predecessors and having heard from the present Attorney-General, I have a lot of disappointment registered in my heart. I really thought that hon. Nyombi, as Attorney-General, would be professional and give professional and legal guidance that will bring all of us on board. I am really sorry.

The honourable Attorney-General is telling us that our resolution has no legal basis. I want to assure him that as a member of the Executive, you belong to two worlds. You are first a Member of Parliament; that is the Legislature to which you belong as a family first and foremost, before you are a minister.

Your second home is that of the Executive and, therefore, for you to imagine that your allegiance and respect can only be given to your second house is very misleading, Rt Hon. Attorney General. Therefore, what I can tell you is that the issue before us is about contempt of Parliament in which case, therefore, your allegiance should be to the first institution to which you belong as a Member of Parliament. Being in the Executive, you can discuss your issues in Cabinet. We are not interested in knowing what is there. You can refuse our recommendations and resolutions in Cabinet, we do not care, but the moment you come here as a Member of Parliament, you are bound by our Rules of Procedure and, therefore, we will deal with you as a Member of this House.

It is on record and in the Hansard of 11th of last month, where I was very passionate when I made an appeal to the ministers implicated in this saga. I made it very clear that they should appeal to their conscience and not be seen to be pushed out of their dockets, miserably and in disrespect. That was the time when I said, if they do not respect themselves and this institution, this Parliament will have no option but to invoke Article 118, which provides for a censure motion, and we do not want to go that far.

We are, therefore, asking you, please, as Members of this Parliament, to show respect to the resolution that we all passed, and honourably step aside. You can remain in your flashy offices, you can continue to go to your Cabinet meetings, you can continue being responsible and answerable to the appointing authority, we do not care. What we care for is the integrity of this institution. What precedence are we setting?

Earlier on, I alluded to the fact that in the last Parliament, five of our Members were suspended from this institution for two weeks over misconduct. That did not mean that they were not accessing their constituencies, which is their place of work. In a similar vein, when we ask and find these ministers in contempt of Parliament, we are saying you can stay in your offices, but we do not want you to come here because you have shown disrespect to this institution to which you belong. (Hon. Ongalo rose_) Okay, let me see if there is anything from Kalaki.

MR ONGALO: Thank you very much for recognising me by my constituency. I thank you very much. What I seek guidance on has nothing to do with trying to cut down the point that the honourable gentleman is trying to make. All I am trying to ask is that we are being told that this petition is about these individuals as individual MPs, and not about the portfolios that they carry. 

Now, the Constitution in Article 108A (2)(a) says that the Prime Minister shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. All I want to know is, if he is suspended as an MP, can he continue coming here as a Leader of Government Business? You know, this gentleman from Kalaki has been very quiet in this House for five months. I have allowed everybody to talk without even shouting them down. Please, let the gentleman have his one minute.

I am just asking, if he is suspended and allowed to come back as Leader of Government Business, then what is the point of the suspension? It is all I am asking and I just need to be guided. Thank you very much.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With a lot of humility I said, yes let me give an opportunity to see if there is anything coming from Kalaki and I have seen it come.

We are talking about individuals and not offices. That is the reason why in this Parliament, we have got three deputy prime ministers and one of them, Gen. Moses Ali, is the deputy Leader of Government Business. In which case, therefore, even if Rt hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi steps aside or he is found guilty of having shown contempt to this institution, it does not mean that there will be no Leader of Government Business. Government will continue to operate as normal although after the resolutions, radios were awash with the voice of hon. Mbabazi that if he stepped aside, there would be chaos in this country. I do not know what kind of chaos there will be –(Member timed out.)

5.27
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request this Parliament to put this motion in its proper context. The movers of this motion are inviting this Parliament to do two things, namely, to find hon. Mbabazi and hon. Onek liable for contempt of Parliament and if they find them liable, then the two Members be suspended from the House. And the ground or particulars for contempt of Parliament are clear in the preamble; that is, the two ministers - Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs - did not step aside as resolved by Parliament. That is the context of this motion.

Now, what is contempt of Parliament? It is defined in the Appendix G of the Rules of Procedure on page 309, paragraph 10: “Any abuse of the Rules shall be contempt of Parliament.” The question is whether –(Interjections)– yes, indeed, we could stop here. The question is which of these rules -(Interjections)– yes, we would like to be clear. This motion should have quoted the rule which the Members have breached. (Applause) My understanding is that the grounds which constitute contempt of Parliament in the context of this motion do not exist and the Attorney-General was very clear. He said that you cannot use the failure or refusal by the ministers to step aside to constitute contempt of Parliament because stepping aside is not known in our laws. What we know in our laws are two things, namely – (Interruption)

MR MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Mwesige for giving way. As I said earlier on, the two issues of law and politics are now at play. In Tanzania, the Prime Minister was mentioned in a corruption case and he stepped aside. (Applause) Again in Tanzania, the Attorney-General was also mentioned in a corruption case and he also stepped aside. Moreover, that Prime Minister is one of the front-runners of the presidential office after Jakaya Kikwete. For me, who may be on the queue with my brother hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Laughter)– I want to say that it may be important and prudent at this time for my colleague to exercise humility and courtesy and he could come back much stronger and even give me a run for my money. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I stand up on a point of information. Hon. Mukula has rightly stated that the Prime Minister of Tanzania stepped down – as a matter of fact he resigned – but this was after a report of investigations had been tabled in Parliament. Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, hon. Members, for your information. I had just said that stepping aside is not known in our laws. (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_) I have not yet made any point.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a point of order. Our motion is based on Rules 7, 22(2)(u), 46(1)(k), 185(2) of our Rules of Procedure. However, I listened to the minister very well and he was talking about the contempt of Parliament on page 317, which says, “Any abuse of the Rules shall be contempt of Parliament.” But this is under the “Rules of Television Coverage of Parliamentary Proceedings”. (Laughter) Yes, it is here on page 309. We are not talking about television coverage; we are moving under our right rules. Madam Speaker, is it in order for the whole respected hon. Mwesige to confuse the House that we are proceeding under “Rules of Television Coverage of Parliamentary Proceedings” when rules under which we proceeded are clear?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the part of the rules quoted by hon. Mwesige, Appendix F; “Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament”. It talks about public duty, personal conduct, openness, honesty, leadership, public interest, accountability, integrity, objectivity, public trust, corruption, declaration of interest acting as a paid advocate, improper use of payments, use of information received – it goes next to Appendix G; “Rules of Television Coverage of Parliamentary Proceedings” which talks about dignity of the House, restricting filming of certain parts of the Chamber, style and presentation, special camera techniques, disorder in the Galleries, disorder on the Floor of the House, use of signals by the broadcasters, coverage of proceedings and supply to users, and contempt of Parliament. 

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that for anybody to charge and for that matter, this Parliament to charge anybody for any offence, civil or criminal, that offence must be codified in the law or the Rules of Procedure. And I am saying that the only area where you can find the remotest reference to contempt of Parliament is in “Rules of Television Coverage of Parliamentary Proceedings” in Appendix G. So, even then –(Interjections)– yes, that is the only area where you find that definition. So, it is really out of place and in contravention of our Rules to charge our Members with an offence –(Interjections)- this is charging because you are suspending them – with an offence which is not defined in our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, let me make a substantive point. I want this House to understand that Government respects the resolutions of Parliament, but there are two types of resolutions of Parliament. There are resolutions that are mandatory which are clearly stated in the Constitution in Article 74. For example, if Members of Parliament pass a resolution to call for a referendum, that resolution is binding. Article 85, if MPs pass a resolution to determine their emoluments, that resolution is binding. The resolution that was passed on the 11th of October calling for the Prime Minister and hon. Hillary Onek and others to step aside was advisory. Advisory to who? -(Interjections)- yes, indeed, it was advisory to them and to the person who appointed them. 

Even in extreme cases of resignation, a minister cannot resign just by tendering his letter of resignation to the appointing authority -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to complete.

MR MWESIGE: Even in cases of resignation, which in my view are more extreme than suspension, the appointing Authority must accept the resignation of a minister. So, a minister cannot on his own volition say, “I am stepping aside”. He must do so with a concurrence of the appointing authority. Of course, the appointing authority can revoke the appointment of the appointee without his consent, but the appointee cannot resign or step aside without the concurrence of the appointing authority. 

Now, the appointing authority has been very clear. He is on record as saying, he investigated the matters which were placed before this Parliament 15 months ago and found the ministers innocent. I find this motion misconceived. There are no grounds for contempt of Parliament and, therefore, there are no grounds for suspension of the Prime Minister -(Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is making reference to alleged utterances by the appointing authority, which, have not been communicated officially to this Parliament. There is no way we are going to debate on hearsay, which we do not have being laid on the Table of this Parliament. Is he in order to come and bring rumours to our debate tonight for us to make judgement on an important situation in this country? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just concentrate on the motion. Do not go beyond the motion.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, it is on record that his Excellency the Vice President who is number two in the precedence of this country, brought a report here and informed this Parliament that the President investigated and found the ministers innocent. 

In conclusion, I think it is an abuse of the Rules of Procedure of this House to create the offence of contempt of Parliament, which does not exist in the rules. It is an abuse of the Rules of this House - the only instance where a Member can be suspended is where the Speaker names -(Interruption)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, Rule 22 and 195 are very clear. Rule 22 talks about order of business and the manner in which the order is determined. Part of (u) is in the order of business - complaint on contempt of Parliament - and it is operationalised under Section 195, which reads; 

“Complaints of contempt of Parliament. A Member may, at any time appointed for complaints of contempt of Parliament under rule 22, bring to the House any complaint of contempt of Parliament if he or she has previously notified the Speaker”

Is the honourable minister in order to state that this rule does not provide for any issue of contempt of Parliament when it is very clear and this motion is brought under the rule of contempt of Parliament, and it is on the Order Paper on the basis of rule 195, and undermine the Speaker? Is the honourable minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, our Rules of Procedure permit Members of the House to bring complaints on contempt and I think this is what the Members have done.

MR MWESIGE: I am submitting, Madam Speaker, that it is not enough to say contempt of Parliament. You must particularise what constitutes contempt of Parliament. The only instance where a Member can be suspended from the House is where the Speaker finds a Member guilty of misconduct and names that Member -(Member timed out.)

5.43
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, I have been listening patiently and faithfully and all I can see is legal gymnastics. All I hear is we do not have a law saying this; we do not have a rule saying this. What about the unwritten law of human conscience? Does it exist? If it does not, let us assume that now we are talking about people who have their conscience erased and then we can put to table the reason why we are in such a fix.

I am on record in this House saying with oil coming in place and with oil coming as heavy revenue base for this country, this country needs a big resolve on separation of powers. That as long as Uganda still continues to have Members of Parliament who are ministers, it will be very difficult and exceedingly difficult to manage corruption. Why? Today, we are debating whether suspending a Prime Minister will derail Government business. Take a scenario where being a minister did not warrant you to be a Member of Parliament. What would have been the alternative situation in this House now? Look at what is happening at the moment. We have this fusion. Parliament is fused with the Executive, so you do not know who to persecute for which wrong, because everyone who is a minister seemingly seems to be a Member of Parliament. I think our own country needs to take a step forward and say, once you are a minister, you stop being a Member of Parliament and this way, I think we shall try to clear such an impasse.

Coming to the integrity of Parliament, you need to be an honourable member in order to do an honourable job. When your name is tainted and when there is suspicion surrounding your integrity, what does it take to say, “Let me just go away for these few months; do your work, when you find me clean, I will sit in that chair. When you find me guilty, I will quit with gratuity.” What is difficult?  

What is so special about my friend hon. Amama Mbabazi, and what is exceedingly special about my friend hon. Hillary Onek, that they cannot step aside and must continue to sit in one way or the other to undermine the committee that will do the work that you have requested them to do? That spells one thing; that it is difficult for this regime to operate transparently without some people. It begs one question: Why is it that the Executive cowardises when it comes to managing corruption? 

I am very happy that the seconders of this motion, hon. Ssekikubo -(Interjections)- I will take it.

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Sseggona.

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. I have been listening with great attention and the information I now want to give to my honourable colleague and the House is as follows; one is, whereas we are all aware that under Article 28(12) of the Constitution, you cannot charge and convict somebody with an offence, except if it is written under the laws, and except for contempt of court. We are also aware that under our Rules of Procedure, provision is made for contempt of Parliament. What we are doing here is not to set into motion a process for a criminal conviction, which requires the drafting of a charge sheet, in which case you would have to give the particulars of the offence to the required criminal standard. What we are doing here is civil action; the first is that in our rules, we have something called contempt of Parliament. 

Secondly, look at rules 22 and 195 if you are interested in reading and if you have been attentive. I have learnt a lot from hon. Amama Mbabazi in terms of listening and I do not know whether I still have reason to continue learning from him on that. The point I am making is that when you look at this motion, it sets out the particulars that are known to this Parliament and to our honourable colleagues. What is stated here is that resolutions were passed by this Parliament, binding, advisory or otherwise, they emanate from this House to which our colleagues are Members. In the mind of those that drafted this motion, our own could have committed an act of contempt and it now remains for us substantively and factually to say, yes, these actions constituted an act of contempt or otherwise that it did not. It is as simple as that.

MS BAKO: I thank you very much for the information. That said, the point I am making is, now what is the trade-off between human conscience, human judgment and the law books that we have as far as this matter is concerned? I am happy that hon. Mukula said that this matter is both legal and political. I want to appeal to him that he should not also use this platform as a way of launching his presidential ambitions here –(Laughter)- because we know that power can easily shift to the East, but you being the candidate is another matter.

Back to my friends, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek; it will cost you nothing, but actually restore integrity in you. If you step aside, that will be one honourable thing, hon. Amama Mbabazi would have done for the first time for this country, because all along in all the corruption scandals that taint your image, you have always been protected, insulated, approved and upheld. But today, Uganda is watching you keenly, including that manifesto that you presided over –(Member timed out.) 

5.52
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we are deliberating on this important matter for this country, there are very important
structural challenges that we are facing. When we are talking about corruption, which has become very endemic within our society - it is has become part and parcel of our livelihood - the people out there are yearning, looking for leaders and Ugandans who can stand and shun corruption. Corruption is nasty and we have to accept that corruption kills and retards. So, any society that accommodates corrupt tendencies can never progress and this is the reality. We can debate here until the cows go home, but the onus remains on the individuals because legally, hon. Adolf Mwesige has shown a legal position; you know the lawyers are very good. So, what we are now looking at is that the issue which this august House is bringing to the attention of our leaders is to adopt a new culture; the culture that is so much in the Western world, where individuals find it very easy to make a personal decision and say, you have said this and so let me step aside and we see what happens. 

Of course, that is Western culture, but what I have found in the Ugandan culture  –(Laughter)- I will limit myself to Uganda. In Uganda, when any politician is implicated in corruption, the tribemates will come out and everyone will rally behind them saying, “You are being persecuted.” So, what kind of culture can we set for this nation? That is a question -(Mr Kakooza rose_)– let me use my time because I rarely get the chance to speak. What is disturbing us in this House is for us to have confidence in our leaders and to believe strongly that our leaders are supposed to do the right thing at the right time. 

I woke up and rang the vice chair of NRM because I was very annoyed when I read in the papers that the IGG had withdrawn charges. This really from the bottom of my heart affected me. I rang the vice chair and I said, “Is this what we are doing to our party, NRM?”  How can they just withdraw charges when the IGG had already indicated that he had a strong case against the former Vice-President, Gilbert Bukenya. Why withdraw charges? 

Our hon. Amama Mbabazi is now suffering because we have lost confidence in him. Why can’t we follow proper procedures? Why don’t we have respect for the organs that can enable this country to move forward? These are fundamentals and this is the crisis that I see here within us. We are grappling with each one of us trying to find solace and support, but for me, the bottom line is that it is high time, in this country, that we really learnt how to respect institutions. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming citizens from Budoma Village in Luuka represented by hon. Bagoole and hon. Kaabule. There were also students of Nkozi, but the message arrived late. 

5.57
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 11th we debated this and came up with resolutions. But we had a background as to why we made those resolutions. One of the resolutions was advising the Prime Minister and hon. Onek to step aside. I think it was not legally binding, so we sent it to the President. Now, the appointing authority, which is the President, has not acted and the ministers implicated have not taken our advise to step aside. So, there is no way we can force them because there is no yardstick for measuring morality. 

In other countries, it is true they step aside. But that is after committees have investigated and found them wanting. To me, there is a case –(Interjections)– I do not need information at this point. In Kenya, the Prime Minister, Raila Odinga has been accused of a big project scandal of Kwazi; but he has not stepped down. 

We said we could not trust the Police because hon. Hillary Onek is the Minister of Internal Affairs, and that is why we came up with an ad hoc committee of Parliament. Unless our ad hoc committee says that these officials are interfering with their work, I do not see why we should insist that they step aside. Let us give chance to our committee to come up with a report; we trust them. After that report, we can then tell them to step aside. But at the moment, I do not think we should rush to ask people to step aside. We have accused them and we are investigating; there is no case of contempt of this Parliament. It is basically a requirement of political politeness and that depends on an individual. If other individuals are polite, like Kutesa and others, that is well and good. But if these ones are not polite, there is nothing we can do. Let us wait for our committee to bring their report and then we can act. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I am one person who often fights corruption and I really hate corruption. But I would like to beg your pardon on the genesis of this matter. We have seen the three ministers being accused. In their statements, they say there is some amount of money which was deposited on hon. Sam Kutesa’s account and the account number was given; the same was said for hon. Hillary Onek. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is also named in the same case. But I want to know how much money was deposited on hon. Amama Mbabazi’s account and in which bank –(Interjections)– I need your protection, Madam Speaker. 

We made resolutions and you said the resolutions were sent to the President; we now await a response from the President. So, I stand to oppose the motion which was laid on Table. I feel this is not the time for it. Before we get a response from the President we can do nothing. We need to get that response from the President and then we can take action.

So, I advise that the motion be withdrawn and we wait for the response from the President. I would like to move a motion – [MEMBERS: “No! No!”]– the motion be withdrawn until we get a response from the President. I rest my case.

6.04
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to debate the motion. Madam Speaker, you very well guided that the motion we are debating should be restricted to section II of the motion: “The said Members be suspended from the House until such a time when the ad hoc committee reports to the House on the outcome of the investigation”. 

I construe that guidance to mean that Parliament did its work on the 11th of the other month, passed its resolutions and handed them over to the Executive. Your ruling on that matter is very clear. So, the debate now restricts us to the suspension from the House. And on that ground, I object to this motion and my objections are on principles. And I base this on three reasons –(Interjections)– hon. Members, we should respect each other, regardless of whether we agree or not. Today we may agree on this matter and tomorrow disagree on another one. 

Hon. Adolf Mwesige made an argument, which some people thought is legalistic because he is a lawyer. But let me also ask a question; if you charge me of contempt of Parliament, the question is, what is it that I did that amounts to contempt of Parliament? Did I use the Speaker’s door? Did I disobey the ruling of the Speaker? I think that should be defined such that the people who are accused of that offence defend themselves –(Interjections)– no, please reserve your information. 

Two, we have a committee for rules and discipline. The rule which talks about complaint for contempt of Parliament defines what amounts to contempt of Parliament and those complaints should be investigated and you should be found to have committed the same. The good work we did on 11th in a non-partisan manner will be spoilt if we are seen to be engaging in personal issues and witch-hunting; I cannot be associated with that. 

Madam Speaker, the second last point is –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, hon. Frank Tumwebaze just stated a couple of seconds ago that we will lose the point if we are seen to be fighting personal wars and witch-hunting – (Interjections)– Madam Speaker, please protect me from the Woman MPs of Otuke and Bundibujyo who are shouting permanently in this House. (Laughter) 

Our rules are clear that when a Member makes such serious statements, he must substantiate. I do not think it would be right for this Parliament to allow hon. Tumwebaze summarise his submissions without stating who is taking the whole debate personal and who is witch-hunting who. So, is it in order for hon. Tumwebaze to make serious allegations without substantiating on who is witch-hunting who? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwebaze, can you substantiate? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I can do that very well. In the statement I made, I said, “We should not be seen to be construed to be witch-hunting.” What do I mean? The resolution we passed was that the affected ministers were advised to step aside. You wisely ruled that, that is according to their conscience and according to the will of the appointing authority. Conviction by my own conscience is not induced. It comes out of my own conscience, indeed. Maybe, the question we should be asking the Executive is, how did you interprete our resolution? It is on that basis that I say, we should not be seen to spoil our good work. [HON. SSEKIKUBO: “Order.”] Hon. Ssekikubo, you can allow me to voice my views even if they form a dissent to yours. 

Finally -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, it is you to rule -

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was listening attentively when hon. Tumwebaze made adverse comments to the effect that there are people fighting personal wars in this House. An appropriate order was raised to which you ruled that the Member substantiates. [MR TUMWEBAZE: “I did.”] Is he in order, to proceed without withdrawing his statement and continue as if nothing happened in total disregard of the order that was raised and your ruling that you made? Who is personal towards whom? Can he substantiate lest he withdraws. These are the rules of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I asked you to substantiate on the issue of witch-hunting.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, with your full protection, which you accord to all of us equally, you asked me to substantiate and I did so -(Interjections)- in our work as Parliament, we should not be seen - because the motion here is on hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek, who were advised to step aside. Okay? That was a resolution already done. Now, if we continue to force our way, a mandate you have actually ruled on that it is their responsibility – the reason I was saying we are in danger of being misunderstood is; why don’t we allow the resolution we passed to work -(Interjections)- yes. Being misunderstood by the people we represent is a likely occurrence. This Parliament is for all of us and we enjoy the same privileges -(Interjections)

 Finally, my final objection to this motion – a committee of Parliament can summon anybody to be a witness -(Interjections)- the chairperson of the committee -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, I beg your protection to voice my views -(Interjections)- I am entitled to my views. 

The Chairperson of PAC, for example, who considers reports from the Auditor-General, has been summoning witnesses to appear before PAC, including ministers. We have not seen a precedent where a minister has refused to appear before a committee because he is in office. The ad hoc committee we set up chaired by hon. Werikhe has not reported to this Parliament a limitation on summoning the concerned witnesses. We are speculating that the committee will get problems. So, to protect our good resolution; let us give them time, let us allow the ad hoc committee to come up with resolutions and then we can - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to appeal to all of you that this motion has been moved. Let Members freely give their views. Whether they are palatable or not, listen to them and then we shall take a decision.

6.12
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Unlike some of these Members here, I was in this August House and we passed a resolution that an ad hoc committee should be put in place to investigate ministers, hon. Hillary Onek and the Prime Minister while they step aside. Part of this resolution was implemented. An ad hoc committee was put in place. Why is it that these friends of ours have not stepped aside? Because, for sure, inside their hearts, they know that when they are in their offices, they will influence investigations. It is my humble request that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, if you can take this piece of advice from me -(Interjections)- outside there among the public, your name has been spoilt -(Interjections)- because you have been named in different sagas. Now, you have only this chance to recollect your name. If you insist and you do not step aside, you will be cursed for life. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking the information? 

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. My colleague, hon. Kyeyune, has made a statement on the Floor that your name has been tarnished outside - I think even that of Parliament. We are looking at this matter in a very critical manner. For him to say that what matters is the people outside, whether we do the wrong thing or the right thing yet we are Parliament, is entirely wrong. I think -(Interjections)- we represent Ugandans, but we should do things in the right, legal manner. That will be the only way we shall do these things in the interest of the people not to do them as politicians to popularise ourselves and forget the entire reason as to why we are fighting corruption. 

On my point of order -

THE SPEAKER: Is it order or information? 

MR BAHINDUKA: I have been -(Laughter)- yes, I know. I am concluding my point of order. In this August House, all of us hate corruption and all of us are doing whatever it takes to fight corruption. But the way things are moving; it seems that in this House, only three individuals are concerned and the rest are not. When someone stands up to give an honest opinion, those who think they are the only people who are supposed to fight corruption shout and yell at others. 

Back to my point of order; is it in order for the Member of Parliament on the Floor to go ahead and say that we should do what is wrong just to please the people outside instead of doing what is right in the right manner? Is it in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he was giving his evaluation of the situation, both in the House and outside. I do not think he said the wrong words. He was only talking about what is also happening outside so that we get to know of it.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I am here, the whole of Kyotera County is here because I am their voice. I consulted my people and that is what they said. Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Hillary Onek, please can you step aside? I am saying this because it is true, you know that you have no case to answer and that you are clean, but for purposes of clarity and enabling this ad hoc committee to investigate and perform its duties smoothly, please step aside with immediate effect. I rest my case.

6.18
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am totally in line and I am going to base my contribution on the motion on the Floor. The motion on the Floor quoted Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure. I beg to first read –(Interjections)– okay, people are saying they already read it. If you read it, then you should know that it clearly states that when other laws are to be followed, the Constitution takes precedent because it is the supreme law. 

Last week –(Interjections)– can I read it again? But when you read it to the end, you will come across the Constitution being mentioned. Okay, let me read rule 7: “Procedure in case not provided for and precedents: In case of any doubts and for any question of procedure not provided in these rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practice of the House, Constitutional provisions and practices of other Commonwealth parliaments, in so far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.”

Last week, I participated in the debate on the motion, regarding the mentioned ministers to step aside. But I would like to say that the Speaker rightly ruled that she had consulted and submitted the names for further action. Basing on rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure – I know that the Constitution is supreme – but last week, I quoted Article 28 which says –(Interjections)– should I repeat it? Even if I do not read it again, I guess you know that it is about the right to a fair hearing. Let me say it again; that I particularly read out sub-clause (c), which states thus: “Every person should be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his or her defense.”

Madam Speaker, basing on the Constitution, the supreme law of the land - let me read Article 2, which talks about its supremacy and part two that says, “If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail and other laws or customs shall, to the extent of the inconsistency be void.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall the issue of ministers stepping aside and I remember I talked about it after some Members said they should resign. And I still stand by that. We had allegations of bribery in the oil sector. Parliament debated the allegations, made resolutions and sent them to the President. On that day, we agreed that the Speaker had done the right thing by sending the resolutions to the President.

From that, I notice that we are moving very fast. We need to get a response from the President for us to get a basis. I am not saying that the President should determine what this Parliament should do. If we knew that we are so independent and we cannot work with the Executive, we should not have sent our resolutions to him. The fact that we sent those resolutions shows that we need his input. So, my idea is that we should wait for his response. Maybe we need to ask the Speaker to fast-track the developments from the President before we can come up with another action.

To bathe is to strip yourself of all the clothes. Now that we have sent the resolutions, we should not be the mouse that ate itself. We sent these resolutions to the President. Let us wait for his response before we think of another course of action –(Interjections)- some Members are saying that they do not trust that, but remember we sent these resolutions to the President after agreeing. My belief is that we should hold on. Otherwise –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Stephen Kasaija, for giving way. It is a kind gesture. The information I would like to give to you is that hon. Adolf Mwesige today stated on the Floor of this House that the President investigated the two ministers and found no evidence. Now, Parliament being an autonomous institution headed by the Speaker - just like the President heads the Executive - it would not be prudent for this Parliament to be steered by the President from a safe distance. This institution must show its independence the way the authors of the Constitution put it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me make this clear. From the beginning, I told you that the resolutions were directed at the Executive. Who was supposed to stop the signing of the agreements? It was the Executive. Who was supposed to produce the agreements? It was the Executive. Who was to account for the money? It was the Executive. So, nine of the resolutions were for action by the Executive. Only one resolution was for our action. And as you know, I have already taken action by setting up a committee. So, I do not want that confusion. It was not us who signed the agreement.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I received the information from my brother, Hon. Odonga Otto, in good faith. That hon. Adolf Mwesige presented what he presented, that is true; but remember, we sent that resolution to the President and we agreed with our Speaker. So, maybe let us ask our Speaker to fast-track what the President is saying.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I find it very unbecoming of the honourable member to keep repeating exactly what you have ruled on and stated on several occasions. That one resolution was to be acted upon by this House and the rest were to be acted upon by the Executive. What we are doing here hon. Members, is to act further on our own portion. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to keep derailing us and repeating the same thing, therefore, causing us not to move forward? Madam Speaker, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are concentrating on resolution 9, which was for this House to take action. The others are not our business. Concentrate on that one only. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, that day we did not segregate. We said we had sent all the resolutions and that was my basis of argument. 

6.29
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you. I still would like to reiterate and add my voice to that of the previous speakers that the question of law that has been pointed out by my fellow learned friends is that of contempt. And what we are here to establish today is whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Hillary Onek, through their actions - explicit or implied - to this House, are acting in contempt. 

It is true that this resolution had two phases. One, the establishment of the ad hoc committee, which is our own committee, as a House; and in its smooth-running as a committee, it would be necessary that the committee feels it is operating from a point of independence and from a point free from interference. 

Yesterday, we were met with a situation when one of the Members pointed out that for us to travel, whether it is practice or by law, the Prime Minister has a contribution by signature. In case of investigations, in as much as we are the legislature, we have to use the organs of the Executive and these organs of Government include the Police. 

I can see my friend, hon. Hillary Onek - in as much as we are saying that these issues are advisory – yes, it is true. When we were in school, they would write on your report that you have been advised to repeat a class. It was only a polite way of informing you that you failed your exams and you have been advised to repeat or change the school. 

In this case, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the minister, truly as stated in law, in case they would wish to vacate their offices, they have to seek consent of the appointing authority. There is no question about that. But equally, you are our own Members in this school called Parliament, where you have been advised to step aside. Therefore, it is a polite way of only calling upon you to tell you that if you do not do this, as Members of this House, you are operating in contempt of the House. 

Therefore, it is us here now to establish the ingredients of contempt. Amongst others, it is acting against a resolution made by Parliament that you were part of, because if it was done in your absence or without giving you a right of fair hearing –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for giving way. I had reserved my comments, but when you talked about politeness, I had to give information. The information I would like to give is that it is politeness of the highest order in this world when you sit with 10 people around you and say a phone gets lost and they say, “Please, can you stand up and we check under your seat to see whether the phone is there.” 

Hon. Onek, the grandson of the first African Bishop, South of the Sahara, it is politeness of the highest order to stand up and we check for the phone under your seat. (Laughter) If that is done, it will leave you as the most polite person in this world. Thank you, hon. Nsereko. 
  
MR NSEREKO: Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like us to move in such a manner – because there is a complaint that has been presented and some of us are stating the case for the complaint, and others, in their opinion, think the complaint is not substantive to amount to contempt. We impute the right – because at the moment we are becoming a body that is judicial - the right to a fair hearing privy to Article 28 of the Constitution, whereby the two accused step forward and present their cases or their case thinking, whether they are acting in contempt or not in contempt of Parliament according to the resolutions that were passed inter alia by this august House. I beg to move. 

6.34
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to contribute to this motion brought to this august House. On the 10th and 11th of this month, we had a very lively debate in this House following a calling of a special session of the House. I would like to propose that the live coverage, both in radio and television, was the most widely watched and listened to debate all over the country and beyond the borders of this country. People raised their hats for the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. 

In actual sense, Madam Speaker, you were found to be one of the best Speakers ever in the history of this country. (Applause) Some of us, coming from the previous Parliaments, faced castigation by the population as to what we had done over the last so many years. The people of Uganda suggested that this is their Parliament. 

We made 10 resolutions in total. Nearly all of those resolutions have been fulfilled. Whether it is the laying of the agreements here; the formation of the ad hoc committee; explanations to be given by the Minister in charge of Energy and Minerals; name it. All of them except one resolution, has not been fulfilled. At a certain point during the debate, I was under the impression that hon. Onek was about to step aside and I thought he was about to do the most honourable thing. 

Why are we discussing this motion today? The President of Uganda, whom you rightly pointed out had been informed to take action, has not taken action. In any case, he came out equivocally to say, during one of his press conferences, he was asked whether the resignations of hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. John Nasasira and hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana were influenced by him and he said that that was their personal decision.

If we keep waiting for His Excellency the President to pronounce himself on that, the answer has already been given to us.

I would like to implore my two honourable friends, one in the profession and one in politics, to take the example of hon. John Nasasira, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana and hon. Sam Kutesa and step aside. It is common practice even in the Civil Service. (Interruption)

ENG. BYABAGAMBI: I am on record that this is not my maiden speech and I think I am a good debater on this Floor. The hon. Member has made a very good point about hon. Nasasira and hon. Kutesa, but these two are suspects, and according to our law, a suspect is charged in courts of law. Therefore, they were bound to take leave. They did not step down, but they took leave from their jobs.

About the civil servants, it is the same story, the moment they are charged, that is when they are asked to take leave. They are not supposed to take leave when they are not yet in courts of law.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much and I wish you could listen to what I am about to say. We had a debate related to mishandling of funds meant for 70,000 bicycles for LC officials across the country, and statements were made here, including by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is the topic of discussion this afternoon. Tell me whether Mr Kashaka is still in office. Tell me whether Mr Kashaka is in court?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think we have what we call the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders. There is what we say when an officer is temporarily told to leave office for an investigation, and that one leads to what we call an interdiction.

This is what it says; “Interdiction is temporary removal of a public officer from exercising his or her duties while an investigation over a particular misconduct is being carried out.” This one goes ahead and says that this work is supposed to be done in three months and this involves any inquiry and does not say whether you are in court.

These are public officers; a public officer is someone who holds a public office. Public office is an office that you hold when your salary and allowance is being charged on the Consolidated Fund and that is what we are trying to tell you that these are public officers. The three months we are talking about do not require one to be in court.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for that information. (Member timed out.)

6.42
MS BETTY BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I have been properly represented by my colleagues who came before me and I want to use my time to raise something which I feel is very important. Under our rules - rule 57, “A Member desiring to speak shall raise and address the chair and shall only speak after catching the Speaker’s eye.” That is our rule, but the other time we were here on the 10th and 11th. after the deliberations, some people went out of this House and started accusing us of not giving them time to defend themselves. Even today, as Members stand up to address this august House, people were quoting the Constitution about the need for a fair hearing. 

It is bad that I am addressing you about this matter when the honourable colleagues who are being accused have for one reason or another chosen to get out of this House.

Football players know of a trick which is called the offside trap. That a person can choose to leave one player to move ahead and then a red flag is raised that you are offside yet it is just a trick. I have a feeling that this House is being tricked into not according the people who are being accused, a chance to be heard, and as I said, it is not proper that I am raising this matter when these two people are out and I do not know for what reason. I do not want them to turn around and accuse this House of not giving them a right to be heard. 

It is coming to 7.00 p.m. and I know we shall not be here for long. I do request that this House tries to find out where these two colleagues have gone. If at all they have chosen to step aside, then we say that time be saved and this matter is settled; but if they are trying to lay a trap for this House and then turn and accuse you, Madam Speaker, of not giving them time to defend themselves, then it is too bad and it should be put on record.

They have not stood up under rule 57 to catch your eye. I am putting this on record so that this record can be referred to in future. These people chose to leave the proceedings when a matter had been brought against them instead of standing up to defend themselves. Let them come and submit and defend themselves as to why they should not be held in contempt of Parliament.

6.57
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been very keen and patient right from the beginning of the oil debate and it has made me a good student of this Parliament. Right from the beginning, when the petitioners laid their petition, they presented it very well and of course, those who were being accused said we did not understand this and it was upon this House to save these Members. We decided to move ahead and institute a committee, and if these Members are not guilty and have never been involved in the acts which were mentioned, then as hon. Mukula said, this was a golden chance for them. 

My question now comes, really, if these Members have been very clean and have never been involved in this and that, why should they persist and say they are going nowhere? As a Member of Parliament and with the people of Budadiri behind me, I now believe that these honourable members - Mbabazi and Onek - are not as clean as they are telling the House. If we go back to the history of corruption in Uganda, it brings me back to the vicious cycle of these Members who were involved in “Temangalo.” The same Members were involved in CHOGM and now the oil debate comes up and the same Members are again involved. In my mind, I suspect them. 

I have been following the media and what again puts me off is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has been in the media saying that whatever they say, he is going to stand and look for them. If he is a very innocent man; why should he start intimidating them, and if he can do so to Members of Parliament here, how will it be to the junior staff under him who are going to aid the investigations? How will it be to hon. Onek, given his conduct here today? How will it be to a junior staff who will help this committee to carry out the investigations? 

This reminds me of the thief and the reverend. A thief went and stole the reverend’s oranges. The reverend was staying near the diocese and there was a graveyard. The thief took off at night and moved up to the graveyard and as he was moving, the oranges were dropping on the way and when he saw that the reverend was near the gate of the graveyard, he hatched a plan and began calling the names of the dead, as though he was distributing the oranges. He said “One mine, one yours; one for Ssasaga, one mine; one for you and the reverend at the gate…” and the reverend took off. Instead of catching the thief, he thought they were the ghosts who were dividing the oranges amongst themselves. There are scarecrows of Members if we do not stand firm. 

I know some of you love your President and the President loves you so much, but at this time, he could also be a little confused. He must be asking himself, “What do I do?” I think he is also praying in his heart that Parliament should now help him today to get rid of this name of corruption. So, Members, stand firm to make sure that the President is also helped –(Member timed out.)

6.53
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. It has been about 11 minutes that both ministers, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek, are coincidentally at the same time out of the House. This is very serious because Article 28, which one of the Members quoted, should not be taken lightly. Where are these ministers? The toilet is just here -(Laughter) - and water is just in the lobby, and it is now coming to 15 minutes. We are not talking to ourselves; we are appealing to their conscience. 

So, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating when the two ministers are coincidentally out of Parliament? I do not know if it is in contempt of Parliament or whether they are receiving calls from our “Father in heaven”. So, how do we proceed in the circumstances? 

THE SPEAKER: Can I require hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Onek to return to the Chamber? I do not want to be accused that the proceedings went on without them. They should come back into the Chamber. 

MS LANYERO: Madam Speaker, can I proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Hold on. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. Are we allowed to proceed or are we waiting for the ministers to come back? 

THE SPEAKER: We are waiting. I also require the presence of hon. Onek. 

MR NGANDA: Guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I want hon. Onek back in this Chamber. 

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, let us proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: No, there was a Member on the Floor. Where is the Government Whip? (Mrs Masiko rose_) Can you please bring the body of hon. Onek here? (Laughter) Okay, hon. Lanyero.

MS LANYERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. I am Hillary Onek’s Woman MP - (Interjections)- what we passed on 11th October, we said the three ministers should step aside. What does that mean? I have looked at this Constitution and I have read the Rules of Procedure, but there is nothing that talks about stepping aside -(Interjections) - there is nothing. I saw censure and others, but there is nothing that talks about stepping aside. 

If we as Parliamentarians have requested the three ministers to step aside and they have not stepped aside, then who are we to force them? (Interjections) Yes, why should we force them? According to our Constitution, they are innocent until proved otherwise. Article 28 of the Constitution states, “Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall -
(a)	be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty.” 

Hon. Hillary Onek has not pleaded guilty of what he was accused of and hon. Amama Mbabazi has not pleaded guilty. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Information.”] I do not take it. Please let me finish. 

So, there is no provision in our law that requires that the ministers concerned should step aside. And what does stepping aside mean? Under which law or under which rule? Is it in order for us to force them to step aside when they are innocent? And why do other Members want -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, please protect me.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected. 

MS LANYERO: Where is that contempt of Parliament? It is not there. There is no contempt of Parliament and Madam Speaker, I want you to guide me. If Members produce documents in the House which are not signed and we Members of Parliament have never looked at those documents and we were not given copies, is it really right to ask people to step down based on forged information? Is it right? 

And finally -(Interjections)– no, I am not taking any information. Members, you who are of the school of thought that hon. Hillary Onek should step down are talking about conscience -(Interjections)- nobody has the monopoly of ideas, my sisters and brothers. Nobody has the monopoly. I am going to talk. [Dr Omona: “Information.”] Yes.

DR OMONA: I thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the honourable member is that the motion before us today, in the prayer of the petitioners, part 1 says, “Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hillary Onek be found liable for contempt of Parliament.” Madam Speaker, I have also been asking the same question. 

May I kindly refer this to the way we do our work as medical doctors. Any procedure or activity that we do follows a prescribed scientific or empirical way. We need a point of reference that tomorrow we will say, “Yes, we found these hon. Members in contempt of Parliament because of A, B, C, D.” I have read the Rules of Procedure and I have also tried to read our Constitution. There is nowhere where contempt of Parliament is defined. 

However, the information I want to give here - which I expected our learned colleagues here to have given us - is falling back to rule 7, which says, “Procedure in case not provided for and precedents.” In this case we look up other practices in other Commonwealth practices. May I give one or two examples. The United Kingdom, which is also a member of the Commonwealth, defines ‘contempt of Parliament’ as follows: “Contempt of Parliament consists of interference with parliamentary privileges and of certain acts that obstruct the House and its Members in their business.” That applies to both the House of Commons and the House of Lords.” (Applause)

I have not heard anyone in this House or committee of Parliament report here that any of these Members have obstructed their activities. If I had time, I would still quote the Parliament of Australia in their Parliamentary Privileges Act of 1987 and it is defined -(Power blackout.)  

Finally, what I want to say here is that we need this defined. How do we judge whether these Members will be found to have committed contempt of Parliament or not when we do not know what exactly contempt of Parliament is? 

I pray that this Parliament - or probably that you use your discretion as the Speaker in reference to this so that we are able to see exactly whether these Members have been found in contempt of Parliament or not. I have not heard anywhere, according to these definitions here, that any of these Members has obstructed any activities of this House apart from speculation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MS LANYERO: Thank you. I want to conclude, Madam Speaker. I am requesting - Member timed out.)

7.06
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): I represent Sembabule district, which consists of Lwemiyaga County, which is represented by one of the seconders of this motion, Hon. Sekikubo; and Mawogola County, which is represented by one of the accused, Hon. Kutesa. So, you can see the situation I am in, but to set a neutral ground, I am going to confine myself to the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, issues of contempt of Parliament, in my view, have been addressed well by the Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, and the former Attorney-General, hon. Adolf Mwesige.  I would, therefore, like to move to Articles 43, 44(c) and 24 of our Constitution if time allows. 

The framers of this Constitution were extremely conscious and I am proud to have been part of those who participated in the Constitution-making exercise. Article 43 says, “General limitation on fundamental and other human rights and freedoms... (2)(a) political persecution;”  Madam Speaker I am at pains because many times on the Floor of this House, we have had Members who have come and said that there is political persecution of some leaders in our Government and leaders outside here.  

In the same spirit of my preamble that this Parliament, which I am at pains to say that we are turning ourselves into the complainant -(Interjections)-  I am saying, the seconder and the person being accused - I do not need to substantiate any further - we are turning ourselves into investigators, prosecutors, agitators, condemners,  and all that. 

Article 28 of our Constitution - “Right to a fair hearing,” we laboured as much as possible to express our views as far as human rights of individuals and persons are concerned. Article 28(2) is very clear; “ In the determination of civil rights  and obligations or any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy and public hearing before an independent and impartial court or tribunal established by law.” There is nowhere in the Constitution where it is said that one will step aside. Why are you putting things in the Constitution? You could maybe amend it and we move ahead.  But because of time, I am asking Members to read those articles further.
 
Article 44(c), “the right to a fair hearing” is what we have all been talking about. Madam Speaker, I would now like to go to the mother of all wars. Article 24, which says, “Respect of human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment. No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment and punishment.” What I am saying here are my views; I am seeing a move of ill-treatment, degradation and inhuman treatment of people -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, hon. Kawooya is by innuendo or insinuation saying that you are presiding over a Parliament which is politically persecuting and subjecting ministers to unfair hearing and yet you even recalled them from outside after stopping the proceedings from going on.  She is saying that we are participating in degrading and inhumane treatment by innuendo and insinuation. Is she in order to degrade this House, which is still sitting at 7.15 p.m. and being presided over by the honourable Chair, to bring such wild and baseless accusations against Members representing all constituencies in this country?  Is she in order to continue submitting air to this august House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one of the reasons I allowed this debate was that all the views could be heard before taking a position. So, I do not accept that anyone is being ill-treated because Members are speaking freely.

MS KAWOOYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to have misunderstood Article 24.
  
MR TANNA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity.  I have been here all afternoon, like many of my colleagues and I have quietly heard and watched this debate.  I was part of the debate on the 10th and 11th and I was also part of those Members that passed those resolutions.
 
When this motion was brought on the Floor, I personally thought that the minister and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would stand up to say something. The motion is omnibus. There were documents presented here to show, whether true or false, that hon. Hillary Onek received money through EFTG, whereas the one of the Prime Minister said there was somebody who told the American Ambassador, who in turn relayed the information to the Embassy in Wikileaks.  So, I believed that these two gentlemen would tell us their side of the story. 

The motion that is on the Floor now is about contempt of this Parliament and we passed these resolutions.  To quote a general who said: “We shall not swallow our own vomit”; rule 149 of our Rules of Procedure is very clear regarding contempt of Parliament. Allow me to read; “Functions of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline 
(1)		It shall be the duty of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline by order of the House - (a) to inquire into any complaint of contempt of Parliament or breach of privileges of any matter of privilege which may be referred to it and to recommend, thereafter, to the House such action as the committee may consider appropriate.” 

Madam Speaker, this House is fairly charged. It has reached an extent where an honourable colleague says that we are presiding over torture. The previous speaker has just said so.  I would, therefore, like to move that this matter be sent to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that they can sit and subsequently report to us. I beg to move.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, throughout the debate, I think the question has been: “What is ‘contempt? Has there been contempt?” There are those who are saying, “Yes, there was contempt.” And there are also those who are saying, “There was no contempt.” So, I think that we should task our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to sit, because this is their work, and concentrate on it, do the research, find out the circumstances under which contempt arises and then report back here and then we take a decision. I have been listening to yes and no. I am hearing both views.

Hon. Members, I think that would be the way forward; that we task the rules committee to do the necessary research, taking into account all the arguments here from all sides and give us a report urgently in one week. Let me hear from the chair of the rules committee.

7.18
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi): Madam Speaker, we have a pending assignment; the amendment of rules, and we propose to report to the House during the course of next week with our proposals for the amendment of rules. I would, therefore, request that you give us two weeks so that we dispose of the first business and then handle this one. Please, give 14 working days.

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, I think the decision that you have just taken is better; referring the matter to the committee but, of course, my request is also that I think the ad hoc committee should stop its operations first until we get the report from the other side. This is because the issue is about investigation. The matter here is about investigation and the Members are also being investigated. So, what I am requesting is that the ad hoc committee should stop, and then we go by the suggestion of hon. Fox Odoi that the period should be shorter.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. Your motion did not touch the other terms of reference of the ad hoc committee. The allegation of bribery is only one out of ten; so you cannot subject this one activity to hold the others. Let us defer decision on this matter pending the report of the rules committee on the issue of what is contempt, and whether contempt has occurred.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General’s Chambers has carried out research on what amounts to contempt of Parliament in the Commonwealth countries –

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, are you suggesting that Parliament should not inquire and satisfy itself about what is ‘contempt’? Are you suggesting that we should not inquire?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give you the definition from our research.

THE SPEAKER: The mover of the motion says he has no problem with deferring a decision until our committee has reported in a fortnight.

MR CHEMASWET: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, by consent of the House, we defer decision on this matter until our rules committee reports in two weeks. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
