Tuesday, 1 November 2011 

Parliament met 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you back from the weekend and I look forward to work being done expeditiously during this week. However, on a very sad note, in the last one week, a number of prominent Ugandans have passed away. 

I want to start by informing you that Dr Esele, who used to be a Member of Parliament in this House and a presidential advisor, collapsed and died suddenly on Friday last week. He was an eminent scientist with NARO and is credited with generating the Epuripur grain of sorghum, which is used to make Eagle Beer, for those who drink beer.

I also wish to inform the House that this morning, Major Gen. Sam Nanyumba, former Chief of Staff of the UPDF, and former ambassador of Uganda to the Republic of Rwanda, died at Mulago Hospital. 

Again closer to home, Mrs Aisha Ali, the fourth wife of the Third Deputy Prime Minister, died when she was travelling for treatment. She will be buried this week in Adjumani. 

In view of all those problems, I want to request the House to stand up for a moment of silence in their honour. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

UGANDA ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION COMPANY LIMITED (UETCL) INSTITUTIONAL COOPERATION BETWEEN UETCL AND STATNETT PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2010

2.36 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 31st December 2010 for the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) institutional cooperation between UETCL and Statnett Project. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. The statements are committed to the committee for scrutiny and report back.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.37 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since 2008, our economy has continued to face challenges arising from a combination of global factors, including the international financial crisis, economic slowdown and volatility in commodity markets. These shocks have had an adverse effect on exchange rates and inflation pressures in many countries, including Uganda, where they have continued to feed on each other. 

The risk of the pass-through effects into future inflation and the need to avoid adverse second round effects on the supply side of the economy, require a prudent monetary policy stance and fiscal discipline, especially in light of Uganda’s shallow financial markets. The objective of this statement is to update the honourable members of this august House on the recent developments in the economy and provide the measures the government is undertaking so far during this fiscal year. This is not to understate existing challenges, but to remind us that Uganda has done it before and Uganda can do it again. 

Notwithstanding the present challenges, Uganda remains one of the fastest growing economies in the world over the past 20 years. Indeed, during the second half of the last decade, Uganda was not only the fastest growing economy in East Africa but was one of the 10 fastest growing economies in the world. This information is from none other than the IMF Annual Economic Outlook of April 2011. Over this period, Uganda’s economy had an average GDP growth of about 8 percent per annum, well above the East African average of 6.4 percent and the sub-Saharan Africa average of 5.6 percent.  

Madam Speaker, I give this piece of history not to understate our present challenges, but to say Uganda has done well. It did well in the past and Uganda is going to do it again.

The first major challenge we have grappled with in the recent past is inflation, which has risen to new levels. The inflation rate of 28.7 percent and 30.5 percent recorded in September and October 2011 respectively, is the highest level experienced by Uganda in more than 10 years. By all means, this is not desirable as it has reduced real incomes and increased the cost of living and doing business in Uganda. 

The increase in prices has been driven by domestic and global factors. On the domestic scene, the low rains and drought experienced in some parts of the country during the last planting season, affected food production and consequently, the resulting low harvests led to inflationary pressures on food prices. Annual food inflation decreased to 45.8 percent in the year ending October 2011, from 50.4 percent registered in September 2011. However, non-food prices’ inflation went up to 22.8 percent compared to 18.1 percent recorded for the year ended September 2011. High regional demand for Uganda’s agricultural products has also contributed to the rise in food prices. 

Secondly, the weakening of the Uganda shilling against major international currencies in the recent past has had negative consequences on the prices of imported commodities. The higher import costs incurred by traders were passed on to consumers in form of higher prices. 

Inflation is a challenge being faced by all economies, developing and developed, including East Africa. Exogenous factors like the drought in Uganda and the Horn of Africa, higher international commodity prices, especially food and fuel prices. International crude oil prices have risen substantially. This has caused domestic pump fuel prices to rise. Ultimately, the increase in fuel prices pass through to domestic costs of production and, therefore, to domestic inflation. 

Global inflation remains high also, due to the international commodity prices, especially for agricultural products and oil, as well as strong growth prospects in the emerging market economies like China and India, which are two of Uganda’s major trading partners. For regional partners, Ethiopia recorded headline inflation of 40 percent in September while inflation in Kenya rose to 17.3 percent in September and in Tanzania it rose to 16.8 percent in the same month. As costs go up in partner nations, they charge more for products and that means Ugandans pay more. Therefore, factors causing high inflation in Uganda are also affecting our neighbours.

The second major challenge to economic management today is the weakening of the shilling over the past 12 months. Since September 2010, the Uganda shilling has depreciated against the dollar by 25 percent, most of this over the last five months. However, we observed exchange rate stability in the months of September and October, which could be as a result of the tight monetary policy that we are implementing.

The main factors driving the depreciation of the exchange rate are: 

a) 	Slow and mixed recovery of advanced economies, especially our European partners, from the global economic recession, thus constraining our traditional export market. 

b) 	Global financial crisis and recession resulting in high unemployment and fiscal constraints, leading to slow growth in remittances from the Ugandan Diaspora and foreign direct investments.

c) 	Recent economic and debt crisis in the Euro zone has resulted in a strong US dollar against many other currencies.

d) 	Depreciation of currencies of regional trading partners, which puts pressure on the Uganda shilling to depreciate for the export sector to remain competitive.

e) 	Faster growth in imports which is far higher than growth in exports leading to the widening of trade deficit. 

f) 	There have also been speculative attacks on the foreign exchange market.

All the East African currencies have suffered more or less similar rates of depreciation against the US dollar. The depreciation of the currencies of our trading partners also puts pressure on the value of the shilling. Right now, the Uganda shilling standing against the US dollar is Ugshs 2585 per dollar. In Kenya, it is at 2623, Tanzania 2644, and in Rwanda 2675 Uganda shillings equivalent. 

The current depreciation of the shilling stems from the underlying weaknesses in the balance of payments and volatility in international capital markets. Other East African countries have also seen their exchange rates depreciate in recent months. 

Instability on international markets has also contributed towards investor nervousness about frontier market economies like Uganda. This has reduced export demand and caused global exchange rate adjustments, leading again to the depreciation of the Uganda shilling.

The most recent data from UBOS shows that real GDP growth during the last fiscal year was 6.7 percent, which is good compared to many African countries. Growth in Uganda in the recent past has been driven mainly by services, manufacturing and construction relative to agriculture, which is an indication of development.

This good outcome was mainly due to the sound macroeconomic policies that Government has consistently pursued and successfully aimed at. For instance, last financial year, tax revenue performed at 13.2 percent of GDP, an improvement over the previous years, although we still have a long way to get to our partner nations like Kenya where it is 20 percent of GDP.

The share of the budget financed by donors continued to fall to 21 percent in this existing budget. Budget deficits have been modest and monetary policy has been successfully aimed at maintaining low inflation and a flexible exchange rate to allow us to adjust to external shocks.

Our external debt is relatively low and sustainable. We have implemented a careful debt management strategy geared at ensuring we never again fall into a situation of debt distress experienced in the 1990s. As at the end of the last financial year, our external public debt was less than 18 percent of GDP and our debt service ratio was very low at about 1.6 percent.

At the same time, thanks to Uganda’s flexible exchange rate regime, we have a surplus on our capital mainly from foreign direct investments, which has been financing the deficit on the current account. This is a key source of stability and confidence in a volatile international environment. Our open capital account is a sign of macroeconomic maturity.

To confirm our conducive investment environment, early this month the London based rating agency, Fitch, which is one of the three international rating agencies, reaffirmed Uganda’s sovereign B rating with a stable outlook. This is comparable to our African peers in the region, Kenya and Ghana, who are rated B+ and Mozambique B stable, respectively. Uganda’s rating is, therefore, a good outcome given the current economic circumstances.

We do recognise that Uganda, like many other economies around the world, has faced shocks, which will impact on the economy negatively. The economy is thus projected to slow down to about five percent in financial year 2011/12. However, given the fiscal and monetary policy interventions that Government is implementing, it is expected that the economy will recover over the medium-term to an average GDP growth of 7 percent per annum. Inflation is expected to fall during next financial year, 2012/13. 

For a way forward, we need to maintain our focus on restoring macroeconomic stability, which is a foundation of our solid economic performance over the last two and half decades. This is critical for continued robust growth, employment and poverty reduction. We, therefore, have no choice but to maintain tight monetary and fiscal policy to minimise global economic shocks to our economy. 

The way forward on overcoming the current high price levels in the economy and the exchange rate volatility, will require a combination of both demand and supply side measures. In the short-term, Government has taken measures to reduce inflationary pressures through reducing aggregate demand by using monetary policy instruments and Government Treasury Bills.

The monetary policy tool which the Bank of Uganda uses to influence aggregate demand is the Central Bank Rate (CBR), which is set at the start of every month. The Bank of Uganda raised the CBR from 13 percent in July 2011 to 14 percent and 20 percent in August and September 2011, respectively. This is aimed at liquidity in financial institutions, which constantly curbs the growth of bank lending in the economy, and is meant to rein in inflation. 

Let me also clarify on concerns that have arisen from borrowers, the issue that has arisen about interest rates charged by banks. We wish to ensure that consumers of financial services are made aware of and understand all the information relating to the terms under which loans have been granted. Bank of Uganda, in consultation with financial institutions, has developed consumer protection guidelines to ensure that financial institutions provide adequate information related to provision of financial services to consumers of financial services. These guidelines have been issued to commercial lending and in addition, Bank of Uganda is to undertake financial literacy and awareness campaigns.

We remain committed to ensuring that inflation is brought down to the single digit level. Government will, therefore, continue that tightening phase of monetary policy, including fiscal discipline as long as it is needed, to break the back of inflationary expectations. Private sector credit growth will slow down, including lending in foreign currency; and decline in aggregate demand will, therefore, help to bring down inflation. Caution is being exercised in the conduct of the monetary policy so as not to hurt the economy unnecessarily.

With respect to the exchange rate, Government will continue to maintain a flexible exchange rate, which is determined by demand and supply market conditions. The Bank of Uganda will continue with cautious interventions in the foreign exchange market to deal with temporary sharp fluctuations arriving from speculative tendencies.

A depreciation of the exchange rate is one of the mechanisms to bring about these necessary adjustments because it makes imports more expensive, therefore, encouraging domestic consumers to economise on their use, and makes exports more profitable. The alternative of allowing the exchange rate to float would be to use our international reserves to push the exchange rate to a level that is inconsistent with the balance of payments. We would simply use up our international reserves and end up with a weaker balance of payment to show for it. 

On the fiscal side, Government has tightened liquidity through reducing non priority Government expenditures. This financial year, efforts to synchronise quarterly spending with implementation or work plans will be strengthened to ensure that funds are released for immediate use. These actions will have an immediate effect on reducing aggregate demand and thereby reducing inflation. 

The budget deficit is under control. There is no room to cut taxes as our tax to GDP ratio is the lowest in the East African Community. We shall be balancing the need to boost domestic revenue and the incentives for investment promotion. Indeed, it is this determination which we have shown over many years to maintain macroeconomic stability and a friendly business environment, which have contributed to our continued good ranking of investor confidence. 

On the supply side, and in the short to medium terms, Government has clear priorities to address income distribution by increasing household incomes, especially in the rural areas, and promoting economic growth. These priorities are being implemented through: 

a)  Increasing agricultural productivity;
b) Encouraging agro-processing especially upcountry;
c)  Encouraging market diversification;
d)  Increasing appropriate skilling of Uganda’s workforce to meet the new challenges; and 
e)  Facilitating the private sector to continue as the engine of growth for Uganda’s economy. 

These priorities include increasing agricultural production and productivity in order to ensure food security and to supply surpluses to the market. Increased agricultural production will also mitigate pressures on the Uganda shilling as increased exports of food and other agricultural produce will be made to regional markets. 

Other measures are in skills development and improvement of infrastructure, including rural electrification, road development and maintenance, and to ensure proper accountability for public funds. Government will adhere to the strategic medium-term plans for building the infrastructure needed to unlock the growth potential of this economy. 

To increase food security and also meet the high regional demand for Uganda’s food, the government has embarked on improving productivity of both agricultural and food processing sectors. A conscious effort is also being made to broaden the availability and range of food staples to meet the food demands of our regional markets. 

Madam Speaker, Government will adhere to the strategic medium-term plans of building the infrastructure needed to unlock the potential of the economy. Promoting agricultural exports, especially processed foods, will require building the necessary infrastructure in order to create the value chain and reduce the transport costs of access to markets, and to improve the efficiency of border and customs posts. 

Additionally, Government has also prioritised water for production in this financial year. This will facilitate provision of affordable irrigation technologies like simple water harvesting technology. In the medium-term, Government will facilitate the establishment of a processing unit at sub-county level, among other measures. 

The commissioning of the first 50 megawatts of Bujagali Hydro Power Project is due this month, November, and the remaining 200 megawatts is due by the end of this fiscal year. Bujagali plus the planned utilisation of crude oil in the generation of power is expected to mitigate both the fuel import bill and the demand for foreign exchange that arises from fuel companies supplying thermal power generation as will still be required. It is planned that over the next 12 months, existing thermal power plants will be converted to use crude oil from wells in the Lake Albert region. The energy deficit will further be reduced by the Karuma Power Dam whose construction is expected to commence this fiscal year. 

We must now implement the plans in the budget and we all have a role to play to ensure our medium-term plans and targets are achieved despite the temporary shocks to our economy. 

The budget for financial year 2011/2012 is being executed and incorporates accountability of use of funds focused on key areas as highlighted in the budget strategy. These include the following: 

Road Development, Rehabilitation and Maintenance

In order to ensure there is access to production areas as well as the market, Shs 1.2 trillion is allocated to the road sector to undertake road rehabilitation, development and maintenance among others. 

Under road rehabilitation and development, the ongoing road rehabilitation covers the reconstruction of the 150 kilometres of the Masaka-Mbarara section for which Shs 40 billion is allocated; the 155 kilometres of the Mbarara-Katuna section with Shs 70 billion allocated. The sections covering Busega-Masaka, Busega-Mityana and Bugiri-Malaba; Kawempe-Kafu; and Tororo-Mbale-Soroti are being rehabilitated using part of the Shs 189.7 billion allocated to the transport corridor project. 

In regard to road development, a number of roads are being upgraded from gravel to bitumen. These include Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika Road; Fort Portal-Bundibuigyo-Lamia; Gulu-Atiak-Bibia; Vurra-Arua-Koboko to Oraba; Nyakahita-Ibanda-Fort Potal; Hoima-Kaiso Tonya; and Ishaka-Kagamba among others. To date, Shs 198.1 billion out of the Shs 360 billion Government of Uganda funding for these roads programmes has been released on account of settlement of outstanding certificates. 

Road maintenance is funded under the Uganda Road Fund through designated agencies which include the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for national roads and the local governments for the district urban and community access roads. In this respect, Shs 181 billion is allocated for national roads maintenance and Shs 91.2 billion for district urban and community access roads countrywide. To date, Shs 90.5 billion has been dispersed to UNRA and Shs 45.5 billion to the local governments for road maintenance. 

Colleagues, I am also aware of the challenges now posed by the current heavy rains across the country. We have tasked UNRA to fix the bridges and road sections that have been swept away by floods to ensure that no part of the country is completely inaccessible. The Uganda Road Fund has also been urged to timelessly to disburse road maintenance funds to designated agencies. Indeed, the Fund has today run media notices for second quarter releases to those agencies. In this regard, I urge my colleagues in the road sector as well as you, honourable members in the House, to monitor these interventions and to bring us reports. 

Agro-processing

Madam Speaker, we all recall that the policy of Government is to add value to all our production in order to increase domestic and export receipts and to raise household incomes, especially in the upcountry areas. The construction of the Kabale Tea Factory in Kabale is ongoing with Shs 0.8 billion allocated under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Elsewhere, Shs 1.9 billion is allocated for the Buhweju Tea Factory; Shs 5 billion for the Soroti fruit processing factory; and Shs 0.5 billion for the Luwero fruit drying factory. 

To mitigate post-harvest losses, Shs 2.1 billion is allocated to support the warehouse receipt system under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. These funds are for rehabilitation of stores and to facilitate establishment of storage in areas where they do not currently exist. 

To provide the energy for agro-processing, Government is implementing several rural electrification projects across the country. In this financial year, Shs 67.5 billion is allocated, of which Shs 19.5 billion is from Government of Uganda while Shs 47.9 billion is from development partners. To hasten this intervention, I have just signed an agreement with development partners from the Saudi Fund and BADEA worth US$ 21 million to cover 650 kilometres of rural connectivity across the country. The areas covered by this intervention include among others completion of the Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto power line; Sironko-Nakapiripirit –(Interruption) 

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to close his eyes during this important statement and appear as if he is sleeping in the House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, from here I could see that he was reading very carefully. (Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: The Sironko-Nakapiripirit and Amudat line; Kitgum-Palabek line; Rwengendo-Kaziba in Bushenyi District; Nyakagyeme-Nyakabitete in Rukungiri District among others. This financial year we are commencing on the Arua-Maracha-Koboko-Yumbe line, Nyapea-Zombo-Zeu line, Katugo-Ngoma line in Luwero and Nakaseke districts, and Maizimasa-Doho in Butaleja District amongst others. 

Madam Speaker, to visualise the 650 kilometres of rural electrification transmission lines, this is a distance greater than that covered from  Tororo to Iganga, Jinja, Kampala, Masaka, Mbarara down to Kabale. It is to be a major increase in our coverage. Actual progress in the implementation of these lines will be provided in the half-year budget performance report that I will publish in January 2012. These interventions will, therefore, continue to catalyse private sector investments in agro-processing.

Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET)

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Government places emphasis on vocational education to complement UPE and USE under the Ministry of Education and Sports. In this regard, this financial year, Shs 69 billion is allocated as recurrent and development expenditure in support of 56 business vocational and technical education training institutions.  The BTVETS will supply the carpenters, plumbers, machinists, electricians and welders needed for expansion of the agro-processing sub-sector as well as job creation across the economy in the medium to long term.

Agricultural Production and Productivity

The Agriculture Action Plan which has been formulated has many important areas. It has adopted a commodity-based approach to increased agricultural production and productivity in this fiscal year. Eight commodities are targeted for food security namely, maize, beans, bananas, rice, cassava, dairy cattle, beef cattle and fish farming. On the other hand, seven commodities are targeted for export within the region and beyond - maize, beans, cassava, rice, coffee, tea and fish.

These commodities have been chosen while in no way undermining the importance of other commodities, but rather in realisation by our technical people that these are the commodities most sought after both for food security and for sale. 

This commodity-based approach has linked available resources to measurable sector outputs. With this approach, Government will know how many inputs (seedlings, chemicals, extension services, etcetera) will have gone into the projected outputs (tons, bags) to be produced by the end of this fiscal year. 

This is also an area where several ministries have come together to support agricultural production and productivity. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, the Ministry of Energy under rural electrification, the Ministry of Local Government under farmer mobilisation and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have all come together to work with the Ministry of Agriculture to formulate this plan and will work together to make sure it is implemented and the outputs compared against performance indicators. 

In relation to NAADS activities, in enhancing production and productivity, Government has continued to invest in the National Agricultural Advisory Services. In this financial year, Shs 183 billion is allocated to this activity out of which Shs 131 billion is a conditional grant to local governments for extension services. In line with the policy of releasing funds according to seasonality, 50 percent of the budget has already been released to the local governments to date. The focus on the commodity approach defined above will be emphasised for the remainder of this financial year. 

Accountability

Funds are disbursed to ministries, departments, agencies and local governments on a quarterly basis in accordance with the Appropriation Act of Parliament. With respect to accountability, a budget monitoring and accountability unit was established in my ministry in the financial year 2008/2009 to monitor Government expenditure in five key sectors: Agriculture, infrastructure, social services, microfinance and industrialisation, and ICT. It produces reports on a quarterly basis for all stakeholders to know whether the resources have been utilised in accordance with the work plans and that the funds reached the targeted beneficiaries. The evidence guides resource allocation in subsequent periods. 

During the first quarter of this financial year, for example, we visited 1657 primary schools in 26 districts to undertake a headcount of teachers, pupils, and physical infrastructure to assess the level of any wastage so we could identify areas for efficiency gains. Close to 60 percent of the districts covered had some ghost schools and/or ghost teachers, and the 11 districts that were fully covered had at least 2000 ghost pupils each. The policy briefs arising from the study have already been shared with you for action. 

An expenditure tracking study was commissioned simultaneously to establish how long it takes for funds, once appropriated by Parliament, to reach the intended users, and to propose remedial actions. It was established that for all grants, severe delays in funds transfer of over 30 days continued to occur after the start of the quarter. The report will soon be published to inform Parliament about the release processes and to solicit Parliament support to ensure that resources are delivered to users in a timely manner.  

Here I would like to report that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has now implemented a new system whereby education funds are now released directly to the schools in the districts. For this, we need to get the financial information on all the schools which are Government supported. So, I would urge the honourable members to make sure that all the schools in their constituencies have submitted their information to this ministry. 

For the second quarter, we have today published in the media the central and local government release for this financial year. Colleagues will appreciate that this publication in the media is to promote transparency and accountability and to enlist support from stakeholders including you, honourable members, to ensure that the money released in line with the Appropriation Act reaches the targeted beneficiaries. 

Madam Speaker, we recognise that the private sector plays a key role in sustaining our economy. The private sector currently contributes 80 percent to GDP. Government’s interaction with the private sector is not so much as financiers, because the private sector contributes 80 percent of GDP, but to facilitate by: 

(a)  creating an enabling environment for lowering costs of business operations through appropriate legislation etcetera; 
(b) providing public goods, for example, infrastructure, health and education that the private sector is not equipped to do; and 
(c) strategic interventions to unlock resource constraints and improve coordination between the private sector, Government and development partners. 

In all this, Madam Speaker, the government undertakes to maintain fiscal discipline in pursuit of a stable macro-economic framework for the economy.

As a way of boosting employment opportunities, Government is building the necessary infrastructure required by the private sector to provide the necessary business environment. A number of strategic areas identified and planned for implementation in the medium-term will require public-private sector participation. The refurbishment of the railway line (Tororo-Packwach) and construction of some highway roads, hospitals and some small energy projects, will be designed to allow for public-private partnership arrangements. To effect these arrangements, Government will be presenting to this august House the draft Public-Private Partnership Bill for consideration.

I would like to point here to one instance where the government has managed to help the growth of the economy at a very low cost. I point to the Rift Valley Railways, which came under new ownership two years ago. They have now raised a total of US$ 300 million on the private market and they brought in an operator from Brazil who is familiar with operation of small gauge railways such as ours. As a result, and at almost near minimal cost to the government, freight movement went up by 25 percent by rail last year and is planned to go up another 33 percent this year. 

Other ongoing or upcoming private sector led initiatives encouraged by Government include the agriculture credit facility, the youth venture capital fund and the proposed agri-business finance initiative. This is where the EU and the government have come together with the 17 leading banks in Uganda to see what stops them from providing more financing to the agriculture sector and how we can overcome those constraints. All the three parties are working very closely together and continue next week with a roundtable discussion. 

Development Partners’ Participation

Madam Speaker, Government appreciates the continued support received from our development partners. A significant share of the budget continues to be funded by development partners. 

Implementing the above mentioned interventions will count on the continued commitment by development partners to allocate resources to the priority areas identified by Government. As we begin the next budgeting process for financial year 2012/2013, we will ensure that the grant aid and soft loans are directed to supporting our infrastructure development in energy, roads, agriculture, health, education and information technology.

I wish to conclude by asking the honourable members of this House and all Ugandans, for their support as we tackle the complex situation we find ourselves in. Let us be realistic, but not lose perspective. The coming year will not be the easiest in Uganda’s modern history, but we will get through it. Uganda’s economy is well managed and it is growing. Inflation is high now, but it will come down with all our concerted efforts.  

The global environment is particularly dangerous at the moment but there is little we in Uganda can do about that apart from taking sensible steps to provide room for manoeuvre. The need to bring inflation down will require some sacrifice, that is, somewhat slower growth in the medium-term.

Madam Speaker, the solution to our problem or our situation will not be instant. We took some years to get where we are and it will take us some time to get out of it -(Interjections)- May I not improve as I go, Madam Speaker? Our recovery will require intervention from all of us and it will take us to a new equilibrium, to the good new days, not the good old days. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is something I find unprecedented. It appears to be a medium-term review of the budget and it appears to be a report on the state of the economy. We were expecting a report which we commissioned our Committee on National Economy to bring. Last Thursday we had a motion on the interest rates. So, I find all these things intertwined. I do not really think we can start debating this matter today. (Applause) It may even call for a response. So, can I propose that we send it to the Committee on National Economy, but for how long? 

HON. MEMBERS: One week.

THE SPEAKER: One week. This is very important. Please, chair of the national economy, can you tell me where you are on our other business? Let me hear from the chair since we tasked him to do some work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would love to report that the Committee on National Economy has done its part and we are ready to present our report to this House. We are only waiting for space on the Order Paper. I would like to assure you that we shall be ready to submit early next week, maybe on Tuesday.  Thank you.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Just like you said, on Thursday there was a motion, which was adopted by this House and I can see that this is almost a response to what that motion was seeking. Can I suggest that possibly this is handled concurrently with the team that will handle the “Ekanya motion”?

THE SPEAKER: We had already committed that motion to the Committee on National Economy and we were expecting a report until this came. 

3.18
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the report is on economic performance, but from the content of the report, it is on budget performance. I would like to urge the minister to go back and actually come back to report on the economic performance. She should actually report on economic performance by looking at all the economic parameters in this country and report on all of them. In this report she is just reporting on the budget performance, but not on the economic performance of our economy. 

3.18
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance on this matter.  This is very unprecedented, but now that you have asked the Committee on National Economy to review it and report to Parliament next week, I do not know if in their report they could consider one of my observations, which is almost related to what I raised last week.  

Last week, we sent a loan for building a technical school in Nakaseke to the committee. I shot a bullet in the air to say that the way the things are being distributed does not reflect the national objective No.7 of the Constitution.  Now, on page 10 - maybe the committee will advise us - these roads which are being upgraded from murram to tarmac –(Interjection)- No, this is very important. On page 10, paragraph 41, out of the 11 roads being upgraded all over the country, eight are from Western Uganda –(Interjection)- no, for heaven’s sake, we are from one country! Eight are from Western Uganda; three roads are from Central, one from the North and one from the East. Is this how we are going to continue with allocation of the national resources and yet we all pay taxes? 

The committee should advise us on why we are tarmacking the majority of the roads only in western Uganda and yet they are feeder roads, while the ones in the rest of the country are highways. This is not how national resources should be divided. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not get into the details of this paper. Let us send it to the Committee on National Economy and all Members are free to go there and give their views so that they can report back to us in two weeks.  We also want our report on the state of the economy. Let us hear from the chair; he is the one going to handle the task. 

MR MBAGADHI: Rt hon. Speaker, earlier on in my communication I was trying to inform the House that as a committee, we were working on a report that we were supposed to furnish to this House concerning the performance of our economy. However, given the report that we have received from the Minister of Finance, I do agree with you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, that we shall be in position of incorporating the views that have been articulated by the minister, and we shall be ready to report to this House in two weeks’ time. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since the chairman of the Committee on National Economy is coming next week, I might not have a chance. I do not know whether it was an oversight or the minister was not informed properly, but while opening the regional Bank of Uganda office in Mbale, His Excellency the President told the gathering that hon. Wamai was talking of bad roads. I said it is true, Your Excellency, I was talking about bad roads. The President promised that he was going to do work on Nalugugu-Mutuffu-Budadiri-Buwalasi-Namagumba Road. He said he was also going to work on Bududa-Magale-Lwakaka Road. What the minister has just presented does not reflect these roads. 

I do not know whether it was an oversight, but this is exactly what the President said -(Interjections)- It was during the time of elections, but I hope that next week, these roads will appear on the list because the people of Mbale are waiting for these roads to be done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are not debating; clarifications only but no debate.

3.24
MR IBRAHIM NGANDA SEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The chairman of the Committee on National Economy says there is a report ready on the state of the economy to be presented to Parliament and he is waiting for a slot. There was a motion in this Parliament almost on a similar subject and it was referred to the Committee on National Economy. Now, the Minister of Finance has also made an attempt to make a presentation on the same subject and it is also referred to the Committee on National Economy.

Madam Speaker, before I seek clarification on the arbitrariness of the Executive and the attempt to pre-empt the consideration of the motion before the Committee on National Economy, I am seeking guidance from you on how we are going to move as a Parliament. First of all, you have observed, and rightly so, that this presentation is neither here nor there. It is not a report on the performance of the economy neither is it a report on the performance of the budget. Would it be proper for this Parliament to begin referring a document that almost none of us can comprehend to a committee of Parliament to waste its time?

3.25
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two basic clarifications I seek and I appreciate that the committee is already handling this. It seems that the minister’s intention was also to prove to us that she is doing something. Sometimes our committees have a lot of work and they take some time. 

The minister has said here that Bank of Uganda has been working with the financial institutions to regulate issues to do with lending rates. Businesses have closed down, mortgages have been revised, people have been arrested and things are terrible there. It is not the way we are seeing it in theory in these papers that are being presented. Out there, this is about real life for businesses and families. I am wondering whether the minister can just assure this nation and this House that the guidance she is referring to as having been given by Bank if Uganda is actually being implemented.

Secondly -(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way and receiving the information. Within the last three months, the commercial interest rates have gone up from the range of about 18 to 19 percent to 26 percent -[Hon. Members: “30 percent.”]- I am talking from an informed point of view and I am informing. 

We are talking of bank interest rates and the honourable colleague that has been on the Floor has been raising it to the honourable minister. I would like the minister to explain that the interest rates, as honourable members have just heckled, are going up towards 30 percent, whereas the official policy – and the President has been quoted on several occasions as saying that these commercial banks are actually profiteering from our people. He has consistently fought for the reduction of interest rates for business loans. Why are the ministry and the Central Bank Governor encouraging the increment of the interest rate unabated?

Secondly, when you look at the impact of the increased interest rates on the balance sheets of these banks - the balance sheets that were published - all the commercial banks except Barclays Bank have shown profits in billions and tens of billions. Can the honourabale minister enlighten us? Is the ministry working against the government policy and what the President is trying to say? What is happening exactly? I would like to thank my honourable colleague.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I treasure the information my colleague has given me. These are the issues, which we think are not even going to go to the committee. The minister ought to respond to them now because of what happened the last time a similar statement was made in this House. The House wondered why URA was charging taxes in dollars and why rent in Kampala was being paid in dollars. The minister promised this House that she was going to address the situation, but she is coming back when the situation is the same. I want you to know my feelings. I really pity the minister, but I want her to do something about this if she can.

The second concern that I have, and which is principal before we even send matters to the committee, is that the minister must agree with the President. The minister cannot come here and say the economy is doing badly whilethe President is telling the nation and addressing the media that the economy is doing well. Who of you is telling Ugandans the truth before we consider this statement? Otherwise we seem to be wasting time if the President is saying, it is okay, Ugandans are getting rich, and the minister is saying, things are terrible. Who is telling what to this nation?

3.31
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I strongly agree with hon. Alaso’s views. 

As you have guided, it seems we will push this entire issue to the Committee on National Economy and the chair has confirmed to us that by next week, they would be ready to present the other report. My point of dilemma seems to be that they will be coming with that other previous report whereas we have this one, and this statement has actually generated many more issues. I see the situation is actually getting worse, especially as far as the sky-rocketing inflation is concerned.

These are issues which would rather be debated today and not tomorrow because by the time we give this work to the committee, things will have changed and most of the matters will have gotten worse. 

Regarding the issue of interest rates, I want the minister to clarify why specifically Stanbic Bank. I heard this complaint from mainly teachers who got salary loans from this bank. Teachers from my district have been calling me to ask why they keep receiving text messages on their phones, after borrowing at – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last Thursday we had a debate on that matter on a motion brought by hon. Ekanya. The matters you are raising were discussed in that debate. Please let us not go back. Let us have clarification only without debate.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

3.33
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point for consideration to the minister, perhaps to be taken back even to the committee to consider, is in form of questions. The first question is: What is the state of our foreign reserves? That will answer pertinent issues related to financial discipline. 

The second issue concerns our gold reserve. I appreciate the fact that the international trend is that most currencies are now not gold backed. Therefore, a simple statement like “legal tender” against a paper will give legal consideration for that note. That takes us to a very serious issue of considering our foreign currency reserves. That report must come out very clearly next time they are coming to the House, so that we are saved from fiscal policies which are making life harder for Ugandans. 

Much as we say that our economy is doing well – like a report stating that our economy is growing very fast which was given in Kyankwanzi by a gentleman who works in the World Bank - a fast growing economy which cannot translate –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, just seek clarification. Please! Now you are taking us to Kyankwanzi and yet I do not know what was there. If you are abusing the privilege, I will end this debate. If there is anything else you are adding, let it be a clarification but not a debate.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, just one last point. I want it to be made clear that when you consider the road network of Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Raba, the President made it very clear when he was in Nebbi that this road network would start from Panyamur-Parombo-Goli-War-Vurra. So, that should also come out clearly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we go on like this, I will have to allow everybody to raise the pledges by the President. Therefore, I am referring this matter to the Committee on National Economy which should report back within two weeks. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the Gallery we have Mr and Mrs Jack and Linda Klenk from Washington. Mr Klenk served under presidents Clinton and Bush. He is a board member of Uganda Christian University, Mukono and most important, he taught at Busoga College Mwiri –(Applause)– and also at Sebei College Tegeres in 1964 to 1967. He is up there. Could you please stand up? There he is. (Applause) We also have children from Mpigi Parents School in Mawokota North. They are represented by hon. Amelia Kyambadde.

The chairperson of the national economy committee should note that we want that report in two weeks and please take into account the issues raised in the motion by hon. Ekanya. Thereafter, come back to us for debate. 

Hon. Members, earlier, there were two Members who had indicated that they had matters of national concern, but they arrived late. I invite hon. Muwuma and hon. Nakato.

3.37
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. In the recent past, there have been several issues taking place at the NAADS Secretariat. The staff and employees there have been thrown out of office by the board, especially the chairperson, who has been doing this single-handedly. 

Recently, we passed a lot of money that is now in the hands of the NAADS Secretariat. For the reasons of institutional memory and continuity, all of us appreciate their problems, but the way the restructuring process is being handled is really wanting and leaves a lot to be desired. Here, I have correspondences where the Permanent Secretary was advising the board chairman and the Minister of Agriculture regarding the way the whole process should be phased. Five senior officers from the NAADS Secretariat had their contracts terminated without clear terms, beginning with the Executive Director, Dr Silim Nahdy, Dr Oriokot who is a consultant in the agriculture sector, Dr Byekwaso and Alice Nakagwa who had been in charge of the East. 

I request this House to ask –(Interruption) 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. Muwuma speaks about NAADS, I remember what I said here that in most districts NAADS is in place just in words. For example, when they say they are giving assistance to only six families, those could be only LCs. When it comes to the appointment of NAADS coordinators, you find that of the 112 districts, only 60 could be having coordinators while others use the services of idle people at the districts who do not know anything about agriculture. So, I request that NAADS should be streamlined and if need be, it should be restructured. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Kabaale, for that information. Like I said before, we all appreciate the problems NAADS is facing, but the way the restructuring process is being handled is irregular. Recently, I learnt that the Acting Executive Director of NARO was also suspended. I wonder whether there is a crisis in the Ministry of Agriculture, especially at NAADS. Can we get a statement or a report from the Minister of Agriculture, explaining to us how they are handling this process? 

There are some names of people who have been irregularly recruited like Rehema Turyakira as the finance manager. Some people are getting concerned how she came on board. We have Edbat Oyesiga, the chief auditor. I want to appeal to this House to attach a lot of interest to this matter; otherwise, we shall lose a lot of money if these people are out of office irregularly. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I ask the Minister of Agriculture to make a commitment because NAADS is very important to Ugandans.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for raising these matters. However, I want to clarify that it is not true that Dr Silim Nahdy has been terminated. His contract expired, we extended it and he wrote to the minister saying that he is no longer interested. The other senior managers had their contracts extended many times and we have advertised for the jobs and allowed those who are eligible to also apply. The process is ongoing. 

It is also not true that we are re-structuring NAADS. In that exercise of recruitment, when we restructure NAADS we shall bring the law here to Parliament for Members to debate and for their input. What I see is that the honourable member is a front for some people who are disgruntled and they do not want to go through competition -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honourable minister, Bright Rwamirama, has just stated that hon. Muwuma Milton is being used as a front for disgruntled people in NAADS. Our Rules of Procedure, specifically appendix F, say: “Members of Parliament should not place themselves in any position that makes them easily compromised”. 

What the minister has just stated is a very serious allegation and a very serious statement against a Member of Parliament who is raising an issue of national importance. Is it in order for the honourable minister, a member of the NRM, to raise such serious allegations about a fellow member of the NRM in the national Parliament of Uganda? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the outgoing staff of NAADS cannot come to this House, therefore, they must have some people to speak on their behalf. So, minister, it is not proper for you to impute wrong motives on the Members who have brought their issues here. (Applause)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- you have already ruled. Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

I want to also inform the House that what is true is that we are having a problem of extension service delivery, especially in new districts. We are working with the Ministry of Public Service to make sure that we streamline extension service delivery versus NAADS and we shall bring -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What has been raised here, especially by the minister, infringes on the right and freedom of Members to raise issues of national importance and you have rightly ruled, Madam Speaker. I would demand that the minster, for the purpose of the record, apologises and withdraws the statement to set precedence right in this Parliament so that we are not bogged down with such allegations.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, withdraw. (Laughter)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very sorry if my language hurt my colleague because I had no ill motives certainly and, therefore, I am sorry and I withdraw it. (Applause)

I want to say that what is going on in NAADS is a recruitment exercise for people whose contracts expired, most of whom are eligible to apply for interviews. I thank you very much.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For the record of Parliament, I have correspondences here that I wanted to lay on the Table so that as the minister brings a statement, he has a basis on -(Interjections)- we have requested for a statement. 

This one was written on 31 August 2011 by hon. Tress Buchanayandi, Minister/MP, to the Chairman NAADS Board - “Advertisement for posts at the NAADS Secretariat”. That is one copy and I lay it on the Table.

On the 9th September, VR Rubarema, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, wrote a letter to the Chairman NAADS Board entitled: “Advertisement of posts at the NAADS Secretariat”. These are correspondences that were being exchanged. 

The chairman of the board of directors of NAADS wrote a letter to the Executive Director NAADS entitled: “Preparation for end of staff contracts and handover”. Here, they were asking them to prepare - even for those whose contracts were still running – they called all of them back. So, this is the document I am laying on the Table.

Finally, there is a complaint outlining the anomalies and the irregularities in this particular process, written by the outgoing Executive Director, Dr Salim Nahdy, to hon. Tress Buchanayandi, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This one highlights the anomalies within the whole process. I also lay it on the Table. There are so many issues.

HON. MEMBERS: Read.

MR MUWUMA: Okay. Madam Speaker, thank you.

It says:

“Re: The Recruitment Process for NAADS Organisation

I have had the privilege of leading the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) as its Executive Director and Secretary to the Board from its formative years to the current organisation that it has become. 

During this time spanning 10 years, significant achievements have been registered. The organisation has also, during this period, faced considerable challenges. The achievements registered have to a significant extent been as a result of the good and supportive relationship between the board and management, two of the three institutions of the NAADS organisation. 

In the last couple of months and more specifically after your directive, ref. 31st August 2011 to the chairman to advertise all positions, I have observed several challenges in which the staff recruitment process has been handled at the board level. I would, however, wish to go back a step and document some broad agreements we the board as well as the Government of Uganda and key stakeholders had reached on staffing prior to your letter of 31 August 2011.

The ATAAS Design and NAADS Structure

The agreement between Government of Uganda and the World Bank enumerates several effectiveness conditionalities before funding can be accessed. One of the key conditionalities is on the new structure of NAADS, which should be agreed on by both parties. This, therefore, implies that recruitment of new staff would only occur after the agreed structure. 

Taking into account the above and aware that the functional analysis of NAADS may take long, the board in its meeting of 31 October 2010 agreed to renew expiring staff contracts for up to 31 October 2011. It was agreed in the meeting that after the new structure is developed, job matching of current staff into the structure will be undertaken and thereafter, the remaining gaps will be filled through advertising. Subsequently, all staff contracts that expired between April 2010 and October 2010 were renewed up to 31 October 2011 based on the above conditions. 

Aware that many staff contracts will be expiring on 11 August 2011, I wrote to the PS, Ministry of Agriculture, giving my concerns of the impending end of many contract yet little progress had been made on NAADS structure and staff placements. 

Hon. Minister of Agriculture directive to the Board Chairman to recruit all staff 

As you may recall, hon. Minister, on 31 August 2011, you wrote to the Chairman NAADS Board, Dr Mwalimu Musheshe, asking him to immediately advertise all posts under the Secretariat. You requested him to work with the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, on this issue. I did respond to your communication through the PS, Ministry of Agriculture in my communication of 5 September 2011, and again on 20 September 2011, attached and copied to the Chairman NAADS Board, who had gone to the USA for treatment.

In the letter I raised serious concerns and pointed out the anomalies, possible consequences and a way forward. As a result of your directive to the chairman and the concerns raised by myself, the PS, Ministry of Agriculture in his letter dated 9 September 2011, requested for an extraordinary meeting of the board to consider the matter. I consequently called for the meeting of the board, which was held on 14 September 2011. 

Below is how I felt the meeting was managed:

1. I was forced to take minutes which had never been the case as there was always a minute secretary. I was, therefore, denied the role to contribute to the meeting and provide technical guidance as is mandatory and as has always been the case. 

2. My concerns and that of the management, as well as advice and options that had been communicated to the PS Ministry of Agriculture as submitted to the board by the PS, and which was the reason for calling the meeting were rejected and never considered by the board. 

3. The board erroneously agreed that there were no running staff contracts beyond 31 October 2011. Therefore, all staff positions had to be advertised.

4. The board moved to advertise positions as per the 2001 structure that is not now suitable for adequate implementation of Phase II. This was also in disregard of the agreement between Government of Uganda and our development partners who contribute to the funding of NAADS. This also left out a number of staff who were in approved positions, but in place as an interim measure while Phase II structure was being awaited. 

5. The timeframe given for staff recruitment was inadequate yet this was clearly pointed out too by the PS Ministry of Agriculture. 

Board Advertisement of NAADS Secretariat Positions:

On 19 September 2011, the NAADS board advertised all jobs including the Executive Director’s job in several newspapers. The advert was characterized by several anomalies some of which are as follows:

1. 	The advert was placed in the papers before the recommendations of the select committee put in place as per the 14 September 2011 board meeting, which was considered, approved and endorsed by the whole board. 

2. 	The advert was put by the chairman instead of the Executive Director as is the requirement. 

3. The advert requested all applicants to forward their applications to the chairman’s personal address on Rubaga Road. 

4. 	The order form to authorize commitment of funds and approval of expenses for the advert was given by the board and not the Executive Director, who is the appointed accounting officer of the organisation. This is a grave breach of accounting practices and is bound to raise an audit query.

5. 	The chairman further directed the Executive Director to direct all staff to submit their handover reports by 31 October 2011 regardless of the outcome of the interviews. 

The Minister’s Response to the Advert by the NAADS Board:

The honourable minister, following the anomalies in which the matter was handled, did write to the chairman noting and directing as follows: 

a) That it is not true that all staff contracts expire on 31 October and thus it should be rectified. 

b) That directing all applications to his personal address was wrong.

c) That directing all staff to hand over is wrong as staff are still working; they would re-apply and it was assumed that they would still be re-assigned. 

d) That the chairman was to work closely with both the PS, Ministry of Agriculture and the ED NAADS. 

Unfortunately, very little action was taken in response to your letter. 

Shortlisting of Applicants for NAADS Jobs 

Between the 4th and 7th of October, the board chairman with a few selected board members sat at Hotel Africana and shortlisted candidates for interview. This was also flawed with several anomalies, key as follows:

a) Some application letters were picked from NAADS Secretariat and others from unknown sources, showing lack of transparency.

b) The committee that did the shortlisting did not include competent authorities to help it professionally handle the work. Note that the ED was not invited to the process and did not participate.

c) Some candidates who never qualified for some jobs were shortlisted and many who qualified were unfairly left out; and as most staff believe, this was for personal reasons. 

d) Although current staff members were not barred from applying, many who are highly qualified and experienced were never shortlisted. There are many disgruntled staff members who have noted that the process was faulty and not transparent and flawed with ill-motives. 

Selective Extension of contracts for a few by the Chairman
 
On 19th October, the chairman wrote to the honourable minister seeking approval to extend some staff contracts for two months from 1st November to 31st December, and nominating an acting ED. The letter purported that NAADS is the one that made the recommendations to extend staff contracts. The following are some of the shortcomings in the letter:

To my recollection the board has never sat to consider such an agenda neither did its secretary as required by law. 

Even if the board sat, I have not seen the minutes to this effect. 

The lack of an objective and analytical criteria or tool to selectively pick only five staff out of the so many whose contracts expire on 31 October…” –(Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I appreciate my friend, hon. Muwuma, the issue of NAADS concerns everyone in this House. The letter he is reading is more or less a report. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to lay it on the Table and we send it to the Committee on Agriculture to handle the NAADS issues properly? What he is reading is actually a report and not a letter. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he was giving a summary and then Members said, “You read”. Complete it.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I am about to conclude and it is due to public demand that I went into details, especially since the minister wanted to get the details, I thought it would be prudent to present this information. 

“On 24th October, an interview panel was constituted in which I opted not to be part of. I, however, attended the briefing session of the interview panel. During the briefing session, I tried to present to the panelists the anomalies highlighted above, but was denied the opportunity. I did, however, present a minority paper to the panelists for their information.

Hon. Minister, in as much as I would like to see NAADS have competent and professional staff for effective delivery, and would like the recruitment process to proceed in a speedy manner to avoid gaps, in the same vein I would not wish to abdicate my duty to see a transparent, fair and appropriate recruitment process. 

I believe that the purpose of this process is to put in place a competent human capacity that would take the organisation beyond where it is. 

My Continued Dedication and Service to the Country and the Agricultural Sector
 
I have served my country and specifically the agriculture sector for nearly 30 years now, in both research extension and at operation and strategic levels. I have also contributed to agricultural development at continental and global levels. My term of office as ED, NAADS ends on 31st October and it is my wish that even while in another position I would be called upon to contribute to our national agricultural development.

Lastly, I would wish to most sincerely thank the ministry and Government for according me the opportunity of serving in the position of Executive Director, NAADS.” 
                                   
Signed, Dr Silim Nahdy, Executive Director/Secretary to NAADS Board. 
  
cc. All Ministers of State, Minister of 		     Agriculture
cc. The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of   	    Agriculture
cc. The Chairman, NAADS Board.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. When the minister comes to respond, he should respond to those issues and then after that, we shall send the issue to the committee. Thank you. Hon. Kyabangi, you had a problem with the roads. 

4.02
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. Members, as you are aware, the country has faced heavy rains and as a result, several parts of the country have been affected. 

In Gomba, four sub-counties have been affected in such a short time and crops and animals have been destroyed. The first sub-county to be affected was Kyegonza; I was able to obtain assistance from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness then. The second incident was in Mpenja sub-county and the third was in Maddu. Kabulasoke has experienced the same problem. The problem seems to be going on and on. I also heard over the radio that other parts of the country, namely, Rakai, Wakiso, Butambala, Mpigi and many more have been affected. 

I want to appreciate the assistance given by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to the people of Kyegonza sub-county. However, I would also like to ask the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to come up with a national plan, indicating how it is going to address the problem at the national level. 

Also, whereas the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness comes in to give short-term relief, the Ministry of Agriculture, through NAADS, should arrange for an emergency supply of seeds to the affected areas so that they can replant and become self-sustaining in the shortest time possible to avoid famine. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I ask the minister to see how he can help all those sub-counties of Gomba. 

4.05
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. We have tried as much as possible to respond to all the disasters in the country. Soon, we shall come with a paper to guide the honourable Members of Parliament on how to deal with disasters in their districts. 

In summary, a disaster system has a chain of command. We start from the village, sub-county, district and then the ministry. In cases of disaster like lightning, where the only service needed is first aid and subsequent management, the district or the people in the village can take the affected people to the nearest dispensary for care and they are managed from there. That is all that can be done; there is not much the ministry can do. Eventually, implementation will be to install lightning conductors on all buildings and newly-constructed ones. The Ministry of Education has been in touch with us and we have advised that that should be done. 

There are areas where there is need for planting materials after hailstorms. We, in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, do not provide seeds. It is the Ministry of Agriculture which provides seeds. We have attempted to guide the honourable members to that end. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when are you bringing that statement so that we can have a full-fledged debate? 

DR MALLINGA: I am coming with the statement, maybe next week. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE INVESTIGATION AND FAILURE TO PROCURE AND DELIVER BICYCLES FOR CHAIRPERSONS OF VILLAGES AND PARISH COUNCILS BY THE MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report was presented, but because of the volume, we decided that debate will begin this week. I hope the Clerk has distributed sufficient copies. The debate can now begin.

4.08
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to this important debate. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. 

What we are looking at, as we examine this report, is blatant corruption and theft. The $5.3 million contract for the procurement of bicycles is dogged by wrong and rush decisions to select a broke contractor to provide this service. In fact, in the report, it is observed that the shareholding is $150,000 yet these are people who are given a job of supplying bicycles to the tune of $5.3 million. 

There is suspicion, stated in this report, and indeed anybody can observe this - a total of $1.7 million was transferred from the account of the contractor, AITEL, in this case, to individuals without Stanbic Bank raising the red flag because they were once holding this cash in the accounts of AITEL. 

The Ministry of Local Government turned a blind eye to the Accountant-General’s advice. There is suspicion even in the change of ownership of the individuals who were running this company. This change came on 25 February 2011, a day when the delivery of the bicycles was supposed to be done. 

I would like to express my slight disappointment with the committee. You will recall that this matter came to this House last year and there was a lot of suspicion about the timing. Questions were asked, “Why were bicycles being given to LCs at the time of elections yet LCs have been around for all this time performing an excellent duty? The government chooses an election year to give bicycles to LCs. My disappointment with the committee is that there is no mention of political influence in this process -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: It was three minutes. Okay, one more minute to conclude. Hon. Members, it is just three minutes. Just choose the important things to say.

MR AMURIAT: A memo was written by the PS of the Ministry of Local Government stating that they were under pressure from His Excellency, the President. This memo was brought before the committee and the committee, for some reason, does not report this memo. I think it is not incompetence; rather, it is due to political pressure that all this mess that has caused the country a loss of $1.7million has resulted.

Madam Speaker, that is my submission, but let me add that whatever you want to say, I feel that had it not been for the politics of the day, maybe we would not have lost this money. I thank you.

4.12
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the effort of the committee in giving us the report on this bicycle matter. But I would also like to point out that somehow, the committee fell short of certain issues. For instance, there should have been a copy of the valuation report attached to this report, to help us tell whether that was the right company to be awarded the contract or not. But we can’t do that because that valuation report is missing.

Two, I would have wished to see the amended letter of credit. This is important, because while we see the copy of the earlier one, there is no copy of the amended letter of credit. This would have enriched their report.

Three, let me also point out the fact that I have not been satisfied with some of the committee’s recommendations because they are very weak. If it is a policy in this country that LC I chairpersons should be given bicycles during their term of office, I think we should decentralize the procurement of these bicycles. That is why the permanent secretary in his wisdom chose to change the delivery point of these bicycles from the parishes and villages to his office. I also would like to think that that is why we got into this mess. We would have gained a lot if we had decentralized the procurement process for these bicycles. If we had done this, maybe we would not have lost hundreds of millions.

I think the permanent secretary over reacted and made a lot of decisions unilaterally. Let me refer you to something similar to this that has happened in one of the neighbouring countries. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works in Rwanda one time extended a contract by one month. At the end of that term, the road was well done and completed properly. But you will wonder when I tell you that this permanent secretary was arrested and has been in prison for years. The contractor was blacklisted. (Applause) But despite the fact that this permanent secretary acted unilaterally and made us miss out on these bicycles, he has continued to work. My thinking is that if we had a normal government, this permanent secretary would be out of office by now. (Applause)

So, I would have wished this committee to make a recommendation that the permanent secretary be interdicted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakecho, what is your point of order?

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order in respect to what the Member holding the Floor has just said. He said that if we had a normal government, then whatever he wanted to say, would have happened. So, is he in order to use such words or to insinuate that we don’t have a normal government yet he is enjoying all the freedom, the peace and is sitting in this House because of this Government being in place?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the Member has gone overboard because the government was formed after an election. It was duly sworn in; the head of government has been here to address us on the state of the nation and the economy. So, it is a normal government. You have gone overboard, hon. Omolo. 

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, all the time, we keep talking about fighting corruption, but when I look at what we are doing –(Interjections)– by the way, nobody is perfect. This means that we can copy many things including laws from other countries. I want to think that we can take the examples from our neighbours.

I would like to term this bicycle issue an organised theft and with the permanent secretary at the steering wheel. Let me refer you to the way the money that was released for the 30,000 bicycles was used. I would have expected Rajasekaran, who owns 99 percent of the shares with his driver owning only one percent, to take the largest amount of money. But when you look at the mode of payment, you realise that this majority shareholder was given only 20,000 pounds for his personal use. Now, if this was a business – even if he had been just a manufacturer, he should have taken the larger amount of money to recover the manufacturing costs. And it is shocking that Patrick Bagarukayo, who is mentioned only as a witness, was paid three times – an equivalent of Shs $400,000 –

THE SPEAKER: What is it? Okay, just conclude.

MR OMOLO: Anybody would wonder; if this was Bagarukayo’s money, why did he pick it in three installments? (Mr Ogwang rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure, hon. Ogwang?

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, a point of order was raised and you made a ruling on it. But instead of the honourable member holding the Floor withdrawing that statement, he has just continued to contribute to the issue. I still think that the honourable colleague should withdraw the statement that he made following your ruling. He should also apologise to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omolo, can you withdraw that part about a normal government?

MR OMOLO: Madam Speaker, I clearly remember that in your ruling, you did not ask me to withdraw that statement; you did not. But in any case, for the sake of comforting those who wish to be comforted, I withdraw it.  

Anyway, I was talking about Mr Patrick Bagarukayo that if this money belonged to him, he would have taken it at once. However, this did not happen; he picked the money in three installments. He also took the largest amount of money compared to the majority shareholders. If we are to get the right information about these bicycles, Mr Bagarugayo should be arrested forthwith. Actually, the police should go for him tomorrow morning and have him investigated; we shall get the truth about these bicycles. I am saying this because he seems to be the centre of this vital information. But he also seems to have been an agent for some people. That is why he picked that money in three installments. If that had been his money, he should have picked it at once. 

From that point, I would like to say that this bicycle issue is just an organised theft with the permanent secretary at the steering wheel. So, we should not waste time, but just to recommend that this permanent secretary be interdicted and arrested to help with investigations -(Applause)- and that should have been one of the recommendations by our committee.

On this Asian, I would like to suggest that Interpol should come in to help us arrest him so that he can tell us the truth about these bicycles; we cannot be defrauded to this extent by a person I would call a foreigner and it is the Ugandan taxpayer working at a loss. That is why I said that while the report is okay, the recommendations are wanting; they are a bit weak. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for expeditiously disposing of the assignment that Parliament gave to them. I would like to appeal to all colleagues that this is a matter that touches all of us – indeed, all LC Is and LC IIs in this country are wondering about the hot air that they got – and it is only this House that can do due diligence to answer their anxiety. 

If I may start on page 4, the contract was signed on 25 November 2010 and some of the people who were involved in the addendum to that contract were not involved in the initial contract; the Bagarukayos. The Solicitor-General approved the contract and about three months later, on 25 February, they changed ownership of AITEL. That already was a signal of fraud. 

As if that was not enough, the Permanent Secretary of the Local Government Ministry – in fact as we speak in this House, we should be identifying the culpable persons in order for them to vomit the money. The Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Local Government with a few of his colleagues decided to make what they called an addendum - an amendment to a contract which substantially changed everything that the Solicitor-General had approved in November.

The issue of changing the port of origin, changing the consignee, changing the destination for the bicycles, changing even the shipment to allow for partial shipment; this already substantially amended the original contract. In fact, those who were involved in making that amendment to the contract should be held responsible. 

I question myself, what is the value-for-money that we got in this. We were to spend $4,298,636 for 70,000 bicycles. My simple computation is that the unit cost per bicycle would go to about Shs 175,000, without taxes. How much does a bicycle cost locally? It is between Shs 100,000 and Shs 120,000. What then were we looking for in this kind of arrangement? This matter requires thorough surgery. We just should not gloss over it and handle it with emotion with a view of protecting anybody. I think we must go to the bottom of this and rid this country of corruption. Otherwise, at this rate, I shudder. 

A Member alluded to the fact that even the timing itself was suspect, but that notwithstanding, these LCs surely deserved some facilitation. But what have we given them? Hot air! And when we want to go to the bottom of the problem, I can see some Members appear to be uncomfortable with the seriousness with which we want to handle this matter. I think we need to dig deep into this. As we speak now, some of these people ought to be cooling off in the “University of Understanding”, here in Luzira. Some of these people ought to be there as we investigate them. I don’t know whether the PS is still holding his office; and because of the bad timing, the Minister of Local Government was also busy running up and down looking for votes back home to defend his constituency. 

With all due respect, let’s accept that this was a rotten deal. The members who were involved should all be held responsible, and we need our money back.

4.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the job well done. Whereas this was a good project, it was brought to this House at a bad time when we were going for elections. The bicycles were going to benefit all the LC chairmen across the country, but right from the word go, anybody who has done a little bit of business could have known that this was fraud. 

While expressing my disgust and listening to the report, I was being attacked by a minister from that side, which was very sad indeed, because anybody in his right senses could see that Government was defrauded, money was taken and there are no bicycles. 

When I look at my good friend, my former colleague in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, hon. Adolf Mwesige, I feel sad for him because he is the political head in that ministry and this happened in his ministry during his time. And moreover, the President directed that these bicycles be procured. I have not heard any political statement from Government about this daylight robbery – daylight robbery because these people kept changing documents. 

First of all, this company came into existence after the advert, which appeared in the papers on 7 September and from nowhere, this company went and registered on 14 September. This committee of the Ministry of Local Government went ahead and shortlisted this company and awarded the contract. Moreover, we have got missions representing us abroad. I remember in the early 1980s, I saved this country $17 million on Sheraton Hotel, when the late Hon. Wapakhabulo, may his soul rest in eternal peace, was Minister of Housing. A one-man company, with his wife in Denmark, had bidded with some people here and had been awarded a contract to repair Sheraton Hotel at $17 million. I went to the Chamber of Commerce of Denmark and did due diligence and I was advised that this was a one-man company. I wrote a report and that saved this country $17 million. (Applause)   

The Ministry of Local Government, with a Permanent Secretary, “so called” - we know his track record which is very bad indeed. He did not even check to save this country millions of dollars. 

A company with $150,000 - how do you award it a contract of $5 million when they don’t even have capital? And they kept changing – I don’t know whether the Attorney-General is in this House. He kept changing documents when bicycles were to be delivered in February. They went and changed the ownership of that company. What a shame!

What disgusted me was on the bill of lading, where you always indicate the port of origin; it stated a port in China. Can you imagine? And when I showed my disgust to what the minister was trying to show me, I said what is wrong with this minister who does not even feel ashamed that when you are a government and people are stealing - we are in this country approving loans day after day, and these loans are being stolen. Ugandans are losing money and you are not even embarrassed. You should feel embarrassed that our people are not getting what they should get out of these loans -(Member timed out.) 

4.32
MR ANDREW ALLEN (INDEPENDENT, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): I want to thank the committee for its good report. I believe Members have read the report and internalised it fully. It is now my humble appeal that Parliament accepts the report and we adopt it the way it is so that we give other Government institutions opportunity to help us find out more and then further steps can be taken relating to the matter. 

4.33
MR SANJAY TANNA (INDEPENDENT, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I thank the committee for the job fairly well done. I would like to raise a few issues that I think they missed because of the volume of work and the time we gave them. 

The purpose of changing the bill of lading and the port of loading from China to India, meant that there was a difference made.  Bicycles in China are more expensive than bicycles made in India. A phoenix bicycle on average costs about $30 CIF to Mombasa. The average cost of a Hero bicycle from India costs $23 CIF to Mombasa. That means $7 per bicycle was made in between there. So that was the purpose of changing the bill of lading and the port of loading.

I want to further raise three fundamental issues here; change in directorship. I would like to disagree with the report. The change of directorship was designed in such a manner that smelt dirty, but these people came and changed the directorship as per the law. They followed all the requisite procedures, so they did not go and change these issues on the Indian Ocean somewhere in the middle of nowhere. They came to the registrar of companies, their lawyers launched the requisite documents and the changes were made as per the law. The agents that accepted to support those changes should be reprimanded.

I would like to raise the issue of the letter of credit. I disagree with my honourable colleagues on this matter. I am somebody who has been consistent on this Floor that ministers must be held politically culpable for any act, but in this case, I beg to differ because a letter of credit is something that I regularly use. A letter of credit is designed in international business specifically to protect the supplier and the buyer. A bank is the middleman in this case. An irrevocable letter of credit is a document that means that the person issuing it cannot withdraw or change without the consent of both parties.

This letter of credit was changed; I would like to refer to documents attached to this report. Appendix 11 was signed by Henry K. Bamutura, head of accounts; it was also signed by Hellen, head of Internal Audit; it was signed by John Kashaka Muhanguzi, the accounting officer. All three consented to the change of the letter of credit. I would like to read verbatim:

 “I further confirm that I am satisfied with the quality and quantities of the goods and services rendered and they are as per the contract. No such payment has been previously made on this matter for this particular letter of credit.” Three members signed and they must be held culpable. 

There is appendix 11 on the same group of letters. A letter signed by the same Hellen referring to the same letter of credit. “This is to forward to you photocopies of additional documents on the procurement of bicycles from AMANI Industrial Tools and Equipment, please find hereto attached, a Bank of Uganda letter and the contract.

Further on the appendix, a letter written to the Permanent Secretary by Dr Fixon Akonya Okonye for the Secretary to the Treasury. “Reference is made to the above subject; Internal Audit has observed the packing list of the consignment.” 

A packing list of a consignment is a document that is put on the inside of a container showing what has been packed. This is broad daylight robbery. If a packing list was attached and this Secretary to the Treasury attached it, he or she must answer as to where they got that packing list from.

Furthermore on the same appendix, a letter signed by the same John Kashaka Muhanguzi, Permanent Secretary: 

“Reference is made to your letter; please find attached the photocopy of the packing list as requested.”

That was the movement of those documents. I would like to read appendix 13; this is the final nail in the coffin. Like I said, if I have issued an irrevocable letter of credit, received the goods and I tell the bank that I have the goods and they are in good condition, then the bank pays the supplier.

A letter dated 13 May 2011 was written to the permanent secretary: “In your letter dated 3 March 2011, you confirmed that the goods and services for which the letter of credit was opened were rendered…” I would like to bring to the notice of this House that that particular letter is not part of this report. Why? We are not aware, but you know when God wants things to come out, they will.

It goes on to say that, “You and other officers in your ministry confirmed that goods and services rendered were of satisfactory quantity and quality. On this basis, I want to request the release to Bank of Uganda to honour the letter of credit and accordingly release $1.719 million to AMANI Industrial Tools and Equipment. Vide reference letter AGO83/.” 

I beg to move in this August House that these civil servants be interdicted, arrested, prosecuted and these monies recovered. 

We still have about $7 million seated with the bank - 60 percent of the letter of credit is still seated with the bank. I would like to urge that the Ministry of Local Government moves expeditiously to an international arbiter so that the banks can refund this money and we still get the 60 percent of the bicycles. 

I would also like to urge honourable members that we have resolved in this House again and again, and when we go out, we come back and then turn our tunes. This is a matter that affects all LC I chairpersons, including mine and yours. If you are taken for a retreat and you come back and change your positions on this matter, not only shall it be a shame to this Parliament but to all of us -(Ms Nambooze rose_)- I will take the information. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that 60 percent of the money which would have been with the bank as of now, has already been given out to Nile Fishing Company to supply the bicycles as the second highest bidder.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for the information. I would like to urge the honourable minister who is on the front bench, to maybe enlighten us as to how the contract was re-awarded to the Nile Fishing Company, but I read in the newspapers the day before yesterday, that the permanent secretary was busy receiving some bicycles - I think 1,000 of them - if at all the media reports are to be believed. They are definitely trying to cover up. I would like to request that this august House resolves today that these people are held responsible and these monies recovered. Please, I would like to emphasise that the monies are recovered. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.45
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the time they took to come up with this report - a fair report. I ask myself, what has happened to this country? It has become a habit or practice for most Ugandans here, including leaders and civil servants, to steal. It is as if as a country, we owe some people something and that they can get it or have it in whichever way they want to get it and this is very bad. During our campaigns, we assured the LC I chairpersons because they were asking, “What have we benefitted from this Government? We have served them and we have kept the villages in order…” and we assured them that the bicycles would come and that that would be something to really appreciate their service for the country. Right now, we are here and we have been told that no bicycles were delivered. 

Hon. Sanjay Tanna has read a letter which the permanent secretary wrote to the Accountant-General assuring the Accountant-General that he had received the bicycles and they were of good quality and that they were satisfactory to the contract as it was signed. I want the permanent secretary to tell me where he put those bicycles. Where are those bicycles that he received so that he can assure this nation that the bicycles were delivered to him and that they were in good condition or of good quality? What happened? Where did he take them? If he distributed them in the campaigns, then we should know because according to the letter from the permanent secretary, these bicycles were delivered. The contractors delivered the bicycles because they were acknowledged by the permanent secretary and if he cannot show us a single bicycle, then he either ate them or sold them. Somebody has to be responsible for this. My LC chairpersons are not going to walk during night and day when their bicycles are seated with the permanent secretary and his accomplices. 

When we speak, people say we are speaking on issues of forgery. I hope this committee is not bringing another forgery to this House –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I want to be guided. We may be debating another forgery, but I hope the committee did not put any forgery in this document. 

Corruption - even our children now know that why there are no teachers in class it is because their salaries have not been paid because somebody has taken the money for the increment of teachers’ salaries. Somebody has to come out now and tell us whether we owe him something. We can solicit it amongst ourselves and pay him off so that we can save this country. I am ready to contribute; I can sell off all my property to pay that person who this country owes something, but we cannot see people stealing day and night and we keep quiet. 

I want to support the move by hon. Sanjay Tanna that whoever is implicated in this should be held liable and all his property including his shirts and trousers be attached. (Laughter)

4.49
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I don’t know the direction Uganda is heading to. It is unfortunate. Each and every time we debate in this House, the issue is on corruption. When shall we ever stop the discussions on corruption? It is too much for us and it is appalling. When members are put into offices, they are supposed to perform. It is sad to find that people are acting in the way they do. I wonder whether this ministry has a Minister of Local Government; transactions were happening and I assume that copies were being sent to him and if copies were not sent to him, it is incumbent upon him to check what transpires in his ministry, but these things are happening as if there is nobody to take charge in the Ministry of Local Government. 

The overall issue started around October. You wonder! The bidding date ended on 26 October and that was the exact day that bids were supposed to be opened, but it was the same date that AMANI Impex wrote a letter to the head of the procurement and disposal unit about his powers of attorney. A letter was sent on that particular day when the bids were to be opened at exactly 10.30 a.m. Couldn’t these people identify the mistake here? 

Not only that; Madam Speaker, do you realise that there was also a decision from the contracts committee? The contracts committee’s decision was that the accounting officers should seek a waiver from the PPDA for displaying of successful bidders from 21 working days to only five working days. Isn’t there something fishy here? This is terrible. If it were left within 21 working days, at least they would have detected where the problems were. But five days, what was the hurry about? This means that there was some connivance somewhere somehow, of which we have already learnt. Check on their annex 10; “Authorisation to honour the letter of credit value to AMANI Impex, worth 1.7 representing 40 percent.” They are saying they have already approved that the services have been rendered; they are satisfactory; the quality is okay and the quantity is okay. After two weeks, somebody writes a letter to say, “No, the delivery is not there.” What do they mean? Are they sane? We need to question them.

Here again, you realise that on that same annex 10, AMANI was already paid around March, but around 15 April, the Ministry of Finance is still directing the banks to pay. What transpired here? (Member timed out.) 

4.53
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for having rendered us a service to have this report with us. I also wonder what is happening to our country Uganda. This is not the first time that people are disappearing with money, and actually, it reminds me of the so-called Byakutaga who up to now cannot be traced. Now here comes another person who has connived with a group of people in the ministry to steal from the country.  

The committee has identified a capacity building need in the ministry. I want to disagree with the committee because every financial year this Parliament approves money to build the capacity of several ministries including the Ministry of Local Government. I cannot agree and accept that it was the officers that we recruited in the Ministry of Local Government who were not capable to handle this transaction. 

I want to request that the ministry, which is supervised by our dear minister for local government, must be given an opportunity to explain why this money has disappeared in the ministry. He must be given an opportunity to tell the public why these bicycles were not procured and money was paid. It is becoming a culture - because we do not want to cling so much on politicians. The honourable member said that the minister must be responsible. I want to disagree with the Member because Section 164 of the Constitution is very clear. We must just give the minister the opportunity to explain why maybe he has failed to supervise the ministry. 

The bureaucracy in the procurement process has really brought corruption in this country. With a single transaction being handled by almost a full ministry, one office after the other, by the time you get a service, the transaction has moved through the hands of so many people. I think it is the responsibility of this Parliament to amend the PPDA Act such that we can have services with the quickest means possible without this unnecessary bureaucracy. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is one of the greatest scandals we have ever had in this country because stealing from the poorest man on the ground is grave even in the Bible. You have an air conditioned car, you get fuel, housing allowance and then you go and steal a bicycle of a chairperson of LC I like in Mpumudde Village in my constituency. How do you expect this country to continue running smoothly when even the lowest person is being cheated?

If you look at this report - in fact I want to thank the committee for opening our eyes on this - this is not the only tender with these problems in the country. If we start carrying out our oversight function, we are going to get so many tenders of this nature. Like hon. Wamanga-Wamai said, the actual cost of a bicycle on the retail market is less than Shs 200,000 - it is actually Shs 140,000, but you are procuring at a price which you can even get at retail. 

So, we should have given the LCs money instead to buy themselves a bicycle each. (Applause) What is the use of procuring from a company from India when we have a local company we are supporting in Namanve to start bicycle production here? Why do we have to procure from overseas when there is a factory in Namanve that can produce these bicycles?

If you look at this whole system of procurement, there is what they call the evaluation team in every ministry. We have to move very fast and fight what they call evaluation teams because they sit and evaluate documents after having meetings in the night. If you look at these documents, there is a company from India which is assuring Government that it is the leading company, but when it comes to awarding the contract they award another company. Even when we go to court we shall lose because this document is from India. It is here and it is written committing to Government that, “We are the leading company. We further confirm we are the leading partners and are jointly liable for anything -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and my colleague, thank you for giving me the opportunity. The information I want to give is that they said they had formed a joint venture and the letter of the joint venture was brought on the day they were opening the bids. To form a joint venture, all of you must agree and it is the joint venture which bids not individual companies. But what is of interest that all you Members must understand is that this company which was the lead was registered on 14 September when the advert was on 9 September. It was registered basically for this offer, and you know in bids, you will say, “Where is the trading licence? Where are your accounts for the last three months?” And you mention it. This is very clear. 

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, you can imagine that. But also, if you look at this company, the headed paper does not have a telephone contact -(Interjections)- this one here. This is their headed paper. How can headed paper not have a telephone contact? No, you have to have a telephone contact because here they have put their email addresses and whatever because they know that email will take long. It may even go to the archives and it never comes back. But there is no telephone contact. There is only a fax. On top of that, the ministry has already opened an LC of four point something million dollars. There is no way they are going to retrieve it and say, “We are just going to cancel.” In business they have to consent. So, these people still have an upper hand because the LC of $4 million was already opened so the terms were saying, “Remove only 40 percent,” but these people already have a contract signed. So, if hon. Nambooze says that they are saying that they have awarded a second company and the PS wrote and said, “We are cancelling the contract,” these people will respond and say we wrote and asked for more time which is showing in their documents. So, that is another grave mistake; to award another company when this whole process is not yet concluded. I would like to appeal to this House to suspend and cancel this bicycle contract so that the whole process is started afresh in order to get serious and reliable companies that are answerable to the Government of Uganda and not these companies picked from the streets.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Member from Butambala, who was making a statement that she thought that the bicycles were delivered, but we see in the document – in one of the letters, I believe is Annex 13 - that the permanent secretary who actually signed a letter saying, “The bicycles have been rendered in good order,” is the same person who in Annex 13 is writing to the Director of Stanbic Bank stating that he had uttered a false document - the bill of lading etcetera  to the fact that the bicycles had been shipped. So, he is shifting the blame from himself to the Stanbic Bank manager for uttering a false document. Therefore, he is actually turning around and confessing that the bicycles he previously stated had been rendered in good order - he is now stating that Stanbic Bank made a mistake to say that the documents had been received and, therefore, sent instructions to pay to the Bank of Uganda. Obviously, the bicycles never arrived in Uganda. 

I wish to state that after reading all the documents, I don’t think that there was ever intention to procure the bicycles, and that is why we find that many documents that would have come with the shipment like a packing list, were in the country when actually the shipment had never been ordered. So, you can see that documents were “manufactured” here in Uganda simply to perpetuate the fraud that had been deliberately planned never to purchase the bicycles. 

We see that when the 40 percent of the total amount of the money was paid to the supplier, it was immediately divided among the ten or so people without the looters ever sending the money to the pre-supposed supplier. You can see that there was never a plan to procure the bicycles. They got the money and divided it amongst themselves. So, I would like to recommend that Parliament takes this very seriously and recommend very terse acts to have these people arrested. (Applause) Because the culprits are known and they ate in this country. We don’t see why we don’t take action against them to see them apprehended and have the monies recovered. 

On the second point, I would also like to bring the attention of the House the fact that when the permanent secretary cancelled – I know the previous speaker was wondering whether the order was cancelled; the contract was terminated. But when the contract was terminated, some money should have remained on the account in Stanbic Bank to the tune of - I think it is $14,000 - which should be returned to the Consolidated Fund. As we speak now, it is being eroded by the bank through management fees –(Member timed out.)

5.08
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin by asking one question: Where are we taking our country? It is really absurd, as one Member of Parliament mentioned here, when we have our leaders in the local governments - LCIs - after serving this country with all their efforts and we promise them bicycles, which have been swindled by a person at the level of a permanent secretary. We need to do something as Parliament; we should not only be cosmetic; action should be taken to recover our bicycles. 

Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- before I take this information, in my constituency, whenever I go for mobilisation, especially during the recent recess, you could not hold any meeting because whenever I told the chairpersons to organise meetings, of course to do our role as MPs, the first question they would ask was, “Where are our bicycles?” So, if Parliament were to act, I would request that these persons be brought to book and not only that, but also to recover the money. I will take the information.  

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Today is yet another day when the honourable member comes out clearly to state that this country has loopholes somehow somewhere in form of thieves. This is broad daylight theft and the reality is – I was trying to see whether some of our people were involved, but in this case I think the hon. Adolf Mwesige was very busy in the constituency. I tried to search for him in any way, documentary wise but really I would like to be open and say, these gentlemen and ladies called the “permanent men and women” in ministries are trying to do a disservice to this society. (Applause)  Therefore, as I inform you, I wanted to say that just like in recommendation 7.1 on page 10, it would be prudent that in this report, our honourable colleague only stated that this matter be investigated thoroughly. This is a loophole in these permanent men who want to escape liability. If you say you did not investigate thoroughly, this means you have left a gap for them to say that the investigations that led to your interdiction were not thorough. 

Therefore, the information I want to give him is to say that in this report, we carried out proper investigation and we found that financial loss was caused to the country. There was collusion and connivance between the officials of the ministry and people like Bagarukayo and others, to mention but a few. We should clearly mention these people and their names and not simply say permanent secretary; but whom? Office of the Accountant-General; who? Their names should be mentioned clearly in this report.

THE SPEAKER: You have smuggled in a contribution.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, hon. Member, for the contribution. Secondly, one would wonder whether there was actually procurement because apart from not going to India - I think this is for the purpose of documentation, but these people must have connived regarding this money. They just sat somewhere because this money was shared in one day between 11.00 to 12.00 where each one took Shs 300 million - it is not just that we failed to get bicycles. You could even ask these people who went to procure these bicycles; they may not even know the price of a bicycle because the issue was not about bicycles but about sharing this money.

I appreciate the minister because if he had not shown this in his statement, we were going to be very furious with him. Regardless of being in the campaigns, because this does not save you, he informed us in time that there was this in his ministry but it was not procured. If the members of the front bench can learn from him; inform us in time, you will not be implicated; but if Parliament goes ahead and discovers this when you as a Member of the front bench are seated, definitely, we shall say you are part of the racket.

We want to request the honourable members on the front bench to first of all be very keen. You are there as the political supervisors, and as our eyes. You should always inform us about these anomalies. 

THE SPEAKER: You are taking a lot of time. There is information from hon. Panadol; he might take away our headaches.

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a point of information on what he has said; on Saturday when I was in Iganga, I was advising my LCs that since it is a municipality, years keep on changing. Therefore, since the government failed to deliver the bicycles in time, we are of the view that they should even deliver motorcycles; we no longer want bicycles but motorcycles. Thank you.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, hon. Panadol. Finally, we needed clarification on the 60 percent of the money that remained with the Ministry of Local Government. We know 40 percent is under investigation and is being demanded from the people who ate it, but we need clarification concerning the 60 percent that remained in the Ministry of Local Government. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done for us. My observation is that we are tired of lamenting. We lament everyday that money is being stolen; it is time to act. The action I suggest is this; that we have the head of Public Service, Mr Mitala - I do not know whether he is also listening, but he should act by interdicting these officers who were mentioned because he has the legal powers and he can interdict even when other investigations are being done. Let him act so that the public, which has somehow lost hope, can also gain hope by seeing that action is being taken.

In the Sixth Parliament, Shs 6 billion was secured to put up dams in areas which did not have water; Karamoja and some parts of Western Uganda. A committee like this one went and found out that there were no dams when the people who took the money were saying the dams were there. We went and the dams were not there.

I do not want this experience to happen again because the person who was contracted to put up those dams was paid money later on instead of him paying the money that was lost to Government. You know, they know how to use legal ways for those who went to school. They changed everything and the man was paid a lot of money. I do not want this kind of thing to happen because as I said, we are tired of lamenting.

When these people are interdicted, they should pay back and also pay for the money that we have put in. Madam Speaker, look at the volume of the reports. Count; we are 385 Members. How many reams of paper are those? Count the time the MPs took when they were looking for these thieves. That money should be paid by the same people -(Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and hon. Kabasharira for giving way. I would like to inform the House and the hon. Kabasharira that my LC I chairpersons in Kyegegwa still expect the bicycles. The fact that a woman has lost her husband is no excuse for her not to breastfeed the baby. Therefore, can we still expect bicycles anyway this notwithstanding?

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you very much for the information. I do not know whether the committee tried to find out whether the balance of the 60 percent is still on the account. We might be here following the 40 percent, which is already gone when the 60 percent is being also taken as we talk. I want to be sure and be clarified as to whether that money is there so that I can rest assured.

I conclude that we should stop lamenting and act. The Prime Minister is here and I request him to instruct Mr Mitala to write the interdiction of the permanent secretary tonight and not even tomorrow, so that he goes. I thank you so much.

5.21
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From lamentation, I would like to move to action points. I have perused through this report, and under Article 164 of our Constitution, all permanent secretaries account to Parliament. Consequently, we have realised anomalies in the expenditure with reference to the procurement of bicycles for our LCs. In this report, there is incriminating evidence against the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Local Government and other Government officials on abuse of office, which is contrary to Section 11(1) of the Anti-corruption Act, 2009. 

Furthermore, there is incriminating evidence on all involved Government officials for causing financial loss to this country, which is contrary to Section 20 of the Anti-corruption Act, 2009.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament is debating what I consider a criminality and the fundamental question is whether we have this mandate. We have played our part in investigating and the findings and recommendations are very clear. The best option we have for the LCs as a result of this injustice – this Parliament has established constitutional institutions like the IGG under Article 223 of our Constitution, and the DPP under Article 120. If it means organising a formal handover of this report to these Government institutions, we must do it because we cannot prosecute the culprits. If it means organising a formal report, whether you are going to hand over to the IGG or the committee chair, we must do it because many times, Ugandans think Parliament can do everything. This is not true because we have where we can stop and in this –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Thank you, hon. Obua, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give him is from our Constitution. The national objectives of our Constitution spell out clearly in Article 26(3) that, “All measures should be taken to expose, combat and eradicate corruption and abuse or misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices.” 

The rise or fall of the Ninth Parliament will be determined by how we handle corruption and as a generation, this has to come out clearly. On a number of occasions, we have had several cases of corruption come up and I am sure more will come up. This ministry is – I do not know – maybe, number two or three and I know there is a long journey to go. This will determine how we shall handle other cases to follow,which, I am sure, will be very many. 

I would like to give more information to hon. Obua. It is indeed a criminal case already pronounced. The recommendations are very clear and we have a law in place. So, this is a criminal issue that should be forwarded to the DPP and appropriate action taken. I do not know why we should debate further on it. We should, as Parliament, clearly pronounce ourselves on this matter. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is this: The argument hon. Obua is raising seems to suggest that criminal prosecution should take place against the implicated officers. But Parliament is a political institution. Since we have a minister for local government here plus the Prime Minister, wouldn’t it be prudent for them to come up and make concrete statements as political heads on what they are going to do about these people? Otherwise, we shall keep talking until cows come back home. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are you proposing that we end the contributions and invite the Minister? [Hon. Members: “Yes!”] Okay, hon. Obua, please, conclude.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that all these Government officials implicated in this scandal should face sanctions.

Finally, as Parliament, there should never be any moment that we should postpone the fight against corruption. Once we do it, it is like postponing delivery of an expectant mother; even if the doctors are not there, the baby will eventually come out on its own. Therefore, as Parliament, we should send a signal to the people of Uganda that we have the will and potential to stand with the relevant institutions of Government to fight corruption. Thank you.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I would like, at this stage, to make a preliminary statement and in case there are further issues of clarification arising from subsequent contributions, I will be ready to answer. I will not waste the time of this House because you have done a good job, especially the committee for the thorough investigations they did. I confirm, on behalf of the ministry, that I support their recommendations in total. (Applause) 

I express my regret on behalf of the ministry to Parliament and indeed to the local councils and the whole country for this unfortunate scandal. (Applause) Like the rest of you, I also have local councils in my constituency and I oversee all the local councils in the whole country. I did not only tell the ones in my constituency about the arrival of these bicycles, but all the others in other parts of the country. So, it is unfortunate that the undertaking that Government had made could not be achieved.

It is not true that no political statement has been made by Government on this matter. Ordinarily, reports of this nature should come to this House through the Auditor-General’s reports. That is the ordinary practice; the Auditor-General raises queries, queries come to PAC, PAC comes to Parliament and Parliament ends up debating the way we are doing it now. But I did not wait for the Auditor-General. 

When this happened, I came to the committee which supervises me and raised this matter. The committee, although I had already mounted an investigation with CID and contacted the Director of PPDA – all these people can be contacted to confirm that I complained to them to investigate this matter. In spite of the fact that I had already complained, PAC in its wisdom decided to investigate this matter itself. I never objected to it and here we are, discussing its report, which I support in total. I have already communicated to the Prime Minister –(Interjections)– Can I complete this point? I have already communicated to the Prime Minister, requesting him that as soon as the recommendations are adopted, he will direct all those responsible to take action.

Secondly, on the balance of the money which was not spent, I would like to confirm that it is on the account in Bank of Uganda. It is now $2.5 million. I have instructed the Permanent Secretary not to touch it and I promise I will bring the statement of the account from Bank of Uganda on Thursday or even tomorrow and lay it on this Table for every Member to see, but the money is not spent and it has never been paid to anybody. 
About the $14,000, that is 60 percent of $2.5 million -(Mr Mpuuga rose_)- can I complete my statement? You will speak. I do not take the clarification.

I have said the $2.5 million is on the account and I will bring a statement from Bank of Uganda to this House tomorrow afternoon to confirm that that money exists. Parliament, with its own mechanism, can go back and confirm if the money has been spent or not, but I will make that statement tomorrow.

Finally, I have nothing more that is useful, to add. I support all the recommendations even with the amendments that will arise from these recommendations. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is an area that has not been touched. I would like to know what would happen to the people who are not in your control like Stanbic Bank. For me, as a civilian, just these withdrawals raise my attention. What will happen to those supervising this kind of activity? 400, 100, 50, 240 on the same day?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, your observation is absolutely correct. Those people although they are not civil servants are not above the law. Even if they were out of Uganda, they would not be beyond the reach of the laws of this country as long as they committed a crime here. As soon as this Parliament endorses the recommendations tomorrow, I will take it up with the Prime Minister and ask the DPP, CID and IGG to take action against them.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Prime Minister. Let us finish with the government and then I come back to the Members.

5.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for their report and a job obviously well done. (Applause)

I think the findings of the committee are clear and they need no further interpretation. The minister yesterday wrote to me sending this report and accepting the recommendations of the report and proposing that Government takes action and I have since done the following:

One, I have written to the Attorney-General instructing him to immediately take all the necessary measures to recover the money that has been paid out. (Applause)

Secondly, I have also written to the investigative agencies of Government to finalise their work of investigation and as soon as this is done, for those who have responsibility to take action, to take action against all the culprits for this unfortunate occurrence in Government.
 
I have talked to the head of Public Service. We have been talking about what happens in Government in case of senior and other staff being involved in these kinds of acts that we have seen here. The head of Public Service as of today has not received the report of the committee and I have discussed with him even as we were deliberating here. We are going to give him this report and my expectation is that by the end of tomorrow, the head of Public Service who, under our arrangement of Government, has responsibility over his staff, will have taken action. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, for giving me this opportunity. The information I would like to give you so that you verify with the head of Civil Service is whether this Permanent Secretary, the Mr Kashaka John, was the same accounting officer that was chased from Kapchorwa for financial impropriety, and then the head of Civil Service went ahead and, instead of penalising this accounting officer, promoted him to Permanent Secretary. I would really like you to verify that.

The second thing that I would appreciate is - if Government did to cause us to move in tandem - to understand why, while the law provides for the Attorney-General to scrutinise all contracts Government gets into above Shs 50 million, why was a contract of close to Shs 15 billion not scrutinised?  (Interjections) Yes, by the Attorney-General; and then a handful of people sat down, scrutinized it, shared the money and caused the taxpayer to lose.

The other thing I would like the Leader of Government Business to work on is that of permanent secretaries who are too big for political oversight. (Applause) The information we have is that hon. Adolf Mwesige is powerless before this particular PS. That is the information we have and that is why when the President issued a policy directive written to hon. Adolf Mwesige, the PS became so powerful that the honourable minister was not able to follow up anything from the moment he received his report to the final moments when the money was shared on a single day. 

I think - so that I do not come back on the Floor - my submission is this one. Why do you run after a man somewhere in India whom you cannot see? The person you see is the Permanent Secretary, Mr Kashaka. There is evidence here that the man acknowledged receiving bicycles. Forget about running - looking for anybody else. Get hold of this guy who received the bicycles. Let him pay the money owed to Ugandans. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: That was information, but she smuggled an updated submission.

MS KABAALE: The reason I am rising on a point of procedure is because as the minister responds, I think he might have a solution. I am rising on a point of procedure that in this case, we have got some culprits in the report and those can be dealt with, but what about the bank which took Shs 100 million as commission for doing the work which was never done? Thank you.

MR ARIDRU: Madam Speaker, I was in the constituency over this weekend and everybody knew that this debate of the bicycles would be today. Most of you will remember hon. Buyuma; he served I believe in the Seventh Parliament. He got so much interested in this issue of the bicycle and this is the message he said I should deliver to you, Madam Speaker, “The Ninth Parliament is doing a great job under your stewardship and you should keep it up.” He said that they are waiting to see what is going to happen to this issue of bicycles. And he has promised to give this august House a cow which will be delivered at the appropriate time. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I just want to assure this House, in conclusion, that as I said before, definitely, action is going to be taken. And I would like to extend our gratitude to the committee and to say that this is the right way to handle issues. When there are allegations, let them be investigated; let the facts be laid bare and then you see action. And we are going to do so. 

I want to assure you that Government will take action as soon as we have the entire report. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have heard the commitment from Government. But I had promised Members that I would give them time. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. The matter is very critical and the issue I am raising is that Parliament is in a dilemma. We have a critical matter on our hands regarding civil servants. It should not be forgotten in this Parliament that the Member standing here to castigate and tell us that action is going to be done and how this is the right way of handling things is not a judge. You cannot stand here to be a judge and I am really worried. You cannot stand here and try to superintend over matters of corruption and even get judgemental that this is the right way of doing things whereas you are also to blame. (Interjections) I am very uncomfortable with this. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the Leader of Government Business procedurally right to pass judgement when he is also under scrutiny? Who will put him to order in this case?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Minister of Local Government who is in charge of the sector and who brought the matter here has said he accepts all the recommendations and that action will be taken. Let us not split hairs please. 

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I sympathise with my colleague and friend, hon. Adolf. But in the report, it was pointed out that there was laxity in the supervision of the bicycle business. And according to good management practises, when anything goes wrong in your docket, you are supposed to take political responsibility. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for my innocent friend, with the mess under his docket, to take political responsibility and apologise to this country? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think in his submission, he regretted and apologised to the country; he did. 

5.44
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In clear analysis of this report, it is sad that we are again discussing corruption. I am worried that corruption might become a Leukaemia that is eating up our economy and if we do not come out strongly as the leaders in this country, we may lose the economy and the country. 

When you look at the report in annexure eight and nine, it is really sad because Annex 8 indicates clearly that Mr Anthony Musumba, who is the Assistant Director, Payments and Settlements Department, brought out clear indications of the anomalies in the transaction. But the Permanent Secretary went ahead and confirmed that everything was fine and that payment should be done. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to refer you to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, under Supervisions, Control and Management of Public Finances, Section 4(1) sub-section (2). It says, “The minister shall ensure the exercise of regularity and propriety in the handling and expenditure of resources of public money and in particular that goods or services are procured in a fair, equitable, competitive and effective manner.” 

I do sympathise with my colleague the Minister of Local Government. But this is a clear indication that our colleagues on the front bench should not forget this provision. In view of that, I have learnt that the first consignment of bicycles has been delivered. I have not read, but I heard. I heard this from the Permanent Secretary himself. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister; in view of the responsibility of the political leader, please tell this House the truth behind that. 

Maybe the bicycles have come through the back door and probably, they will reach our LCs without our knowledge of their quality. I raise this so that the minister can help us and let us know whether or not this rumour is true. 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order – order! Hon. Mutyabule – order from Namutumba - 

MRS SENINDE: These people should be interdicted.(Interruption)

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to give a point of order to hon. Seninde. Is she in order, to base on rumours and assumptions that the bicycles have arrived when I am a Member of the committee and I am sure that the bicycles are not here? Parliament should not be made to work on rumours.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know I do not always watch the news, but there is a day I saw news on TV and the PS was receiving 1,000 bicycles. Is it a rumour? Please conclude.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to take the information.

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Seninde is that even when we were in the committee - I am also a Member of that committee - we were given information that the ministry is still in touch with AITEL and 1,200 bicycles had been received at Mombasa Port and were on their way to Uganda. It would not come as a surprise to me that the said bicycles have been delivered to this country. 

MRS SENINDE: I thank my colleague for that information. I am glad this Parliament passed the Whistle Blower’s Act. It is not merely about rumours. We have seen that all these rumours have become true in the end. In this aspect, I think it is in good faith if we raise this kind of question to the minister to let us know – with all that we have read in the newspapers and all the information colleagues have given – to let us know whether it is true the bicycles have come or not. If they have come, is it the right quality? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.55
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not delay this Parliament, but I highly support the motion moved by hon. Sanjay that these mentioned people, especially in the names of the Permanent Secretary, Kashaka Muhanguzi, Henry Bamutura, Sam Erongot, the Assistant Commissioner, Planning, Hellen Owechi, Head of Internal Audit and by then the Solicitor General who cleared these fake items, should be interdicted and if possible, arrested and taken to the “university of understanding” so that they can learn a lesson and other people who are - (interjections)- in positions of responsibility should learn a lesson to offer good service to the people of Uganda. This is for -(interruption)

MR WAIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Ssemugaba for that friendly gesture. We should cry for this country Uganda - (interjections)- because the thieves are eating up our country to the bone marrow. But as we cry - first of all, the Prime Minister has already taken measures on the civil servants, but again, there is this Bagarukayo. Since the civil servants require writing some letters here and there, I think Bagarukayo should not wait for this. Bagarukayo should be arrested and taken to Luzira physically. (Laughter) Lastly, because we need to send a message to whoever is intending to steal - we have so many transactions in waiting -

THE SPEAKER: Information from the chair of the committee.

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, Mr Patrick Bagarukayo was handed over to the CID by the committee. When we hand over a witness to the CID, we are not responsible; the CID is responsible. 

MR WAIRA: Madam Speaker, the chairperson is still trying to mislead us. Let us move on principle that Bagarukayo should be arrested and taken to Luzira. This should send a message to whoever is intending to steal public funds.

We have another transaction of tractors coming in -Interjections)- You never know, we might even receive tyres instead of the tractors -

THE SPEAKER: Is that information?

MR WAIRA: Lastly, on the point of information -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waira, you are smuggling; you have really taken a long time.

MR WAIRA: The report is recommending so many arms to investigate; the CID, the IGG, the IGP, the PPDA. Madam Speaker, we have to be very careful here because in investigating, you might find that the costs are superseding the costs of buying the bicycles. It is important that maybe, we give one arm to do the investigation. Otherwise, the cost of investigation might supersede the cost of buying the bicycles. I thank you, hon. Ssemugaba.

MR SSEMUGABA: In conclusion –(Interjections)- this one has taken much of my time, but there is a lot of incriminating evidence on this matter. Since the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has assured us; the minister and the whole Executive should be serious so that the DPP who is supposed to help us – the Attorney-General, who has not been careful in many cases about our contracts - let them come up and help us. 

We appeal to all the judges that they sit in this corruption scandal and do justice to these Ugandans so that we can run properly and offer effective services. For us, as Parliament, we are serious.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.00
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira North County, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very critical matter and something we should not take as a joke or play with. This matter should not be a political issue of any party because people who are supposed to receive these bicycles were not of any – they were not FDC or NRM, but all these people, the LCs – whoever wanted to receive these bicycles did not receive them.

What is important here is that, this is direct robbery and authorised robbery, where the permanent secretary released money, the money was stolen and people have been identified. We must agree that these ministers, for instance, the Minister of Local Government, cannot control all the powers that were given to the Permanent Secretary. The permanent secretaries have become small kings in these ministries. They cannot be controlled because the powers they have are even more than those of the ministers.

Madam Speaker, I request that the House looks into this matter so that we can find a way on how to improve on the powers of our ministers to help them have control over these permanent secretaries. That is why the policies, for instance, are not being implemented. Some of these permanent secretaries are very arrogant. Look at what this particular one did. He allocated money without any consultations with the responsible minister.

I also want to support the motion as moved by hon. Sanjay Tanna that the mentioned officials be interdicted and taken to Luzira Prison. They must not only learn. This is to also make others learn from them. This is the worst scandal so far, we must not tolerate it. If we do that, it will encourage others to do the same. 

6.04
MR GEORGE STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): (Interjections) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your protection. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please allow hon. Stephen Ekuma to make his contribution.

MR EKUMA: I would like to begin by thanking the Minister of Local Government for revealing this information to the committee that supervises his ministry. I also would like to thank the committee for the good work it did on receiving that information from the responsible minister. In the same vein, allow me to thank the Leader of Government Business for accepting to take action against our civil servants who have decided to rape our economy.

As I stand to speak to this issue, allow me say that we need to expand on the list of the people who must face courts of law. I am saying this because from the time procurement was done – the adverts that were put in the press, the bid security at that time was Shs 300 million. When you get to the companies that won AMANI Impex you realise that this company had only $110 on the account. That alone shows that from the beginning of the transaction, there was connivance to do wrong things. From that perspective, I would like to move that the procurement officers be added onto this list. 

Let me talk about the Bill of Lading. This document was issued on 18 February 2011. This meant that the consignment should have left Mumbai by that time. But when you look at the documents again, you realise that on 13 June, another Bill of Lading was issued from Mumbai. And you may want to know that goods that come to Mombasa from Mumbai take only 21 days. All this is suspect. We actually need to include the private shipping companies on this list.

Just to go back to the Bill of Lading. The consignee was supposed to be Ministry of Local Government. But somewhere, there was another document that indicates the permanent secretary as the importer. All this creates a lot of suspicion.

In the circumstances, allow me to add my views to those of hon. Sanjay Tanna that we need to bring all those named in this saga to book. As Parliament, I would like to suggest that we do not recommend for the formation of another committee. Let us take action by recovering the money that Ugandans have lost. These people have constructed powerful buildings. Why don’t we recover the money instead of talking?

I am saying this because the LCs of Bukedea now need these bicycles. When you look at annex nine, you realise that it categorically states that the final destination of the Bill of Lading, packing list and the certificate of origin, were parishes and villages. But at some point in time, the permanent secretary made alterations that the consignment comes to Kampala. I need these bicycles in Bukedea. My LCs must get these bicycles.
 
That said, let me thank Government for being committed to fighting corruption. Since we have always said that the NRM Government is committed to fighting corruption, I want to ask you to prove this by taking these people to prison. I thank you.

6.08
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This plot to rob our Government was very well planned and professionally executed. I do not want to get into the background to this saga because the House has been very well briefed on it.

However, I would like to state two facts. One, if you look at annex 13, you notice that there was a performance bond of $489,650. This is a guarantee that NICO Insurance gave to the effect that if these bicycles were not supplied, this money would be forfeited.

So, much as we have already paid $1.7 million, there is still $489,650 which we can revert to in order to mitigate our losses from $1.7 million to $1.2 million. In the circumstances, I would like to move that this insurance money that was put in place as performance bond be attached. If not attached, action should be taken against NICO Insurance to make good of this money to the Government of Uganda.

Two, I would like to move that – we have adopted the decentralisation policy, so, I see no point why these bicycles were being procured from the centre. I would like to suggest that the money that has not been paid is sent to the districts to help them procure these bicycles. Thank you very much, Madam, Speaker.

6.10
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My question goes to the responsible minister. You realise that the minister has told us that there is more money in Bank of Uganda, which measures up to 60 percent. But my worry is about how safe that money is. Is it also going to – maybe, they have already awarded contracts. Won’t that money also go to these hyenas? Aren’t they going to eat that too? How sure are we about the safety of that money?

Secondly, the minister knows how big some of our districts are, for example, mine. How can you talk about 1200 bicycles when I, for example, have more than 1300 villages in my district alone? Just deliver all of them to Kibaale. (Laughter) Nze nve muddiro, you know.

6.13
MRS MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much. I also want to thank the committee for the job well done. I am rising on this issue, which is very critical, and this is what I have to say. Whereas many instances of corruption have been cited, this one in particular is very naked. I want to say that for the people concerned now, as we make these resolutions, action must be immediate. There is no time to waste over this. These people are known. They are with us. They are our civil servants. Let us set a good precedent. We have learnt that these permanent secretaries have assumed a lot of powers that the Constitution actually allows them. 

In my view, I suggest that maybe if it is possible, we amend and give ministers some authority over these agreements to oversee these procurement processes. Otherwise, the PS will always try to use that authority to undermine the roles of political leaders. In my language there is a saying that, “What I have been looking for and asked, the wind has blown it away.” 

This is the time for us to show the country that the Ninth Parliament is at work; that we are in action. This is the time to eliminate the rotten mangoes and dismiss corruption from this country. If we do not do this, this evil of corruption is going to continue eating up this country. 

If you looked at figures, you will find that the most marginalised constituency is Pallisa district. My people are very poor. They were expecting these bicycles. They would act as ambulances in the villages. So, we need these bicycles. We need this money to be recovered. Somebody said Bagarukayo was a witness. He is a key witness who should lead us to the bottom of this. He should show us the ghost companies. He should not be left free. I submit.
 
6.16
MR TONNY  AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the people who are supposed to help us in implementing Government programmes and fighting corruption are the ones who are planning to defraud this country; the Permanent Secretaries, the Chief Administrative Officers, Sub-County Chiefs and Town Clerks. In every transaction of Government that goes wrong, you will find that from the word go, these officers are normally the ones involved in defrauding the country; just like we have witnessed now by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Local Government. 

Many Members are saying that permanent secretaries are too powerful that sometimes they even threaten ministers. I want to confirm this; that I have heard some ministers complaining that permanent secretaries are always telling them that we have seen many ministers in these ministries; they have gone and you, who has come, will also go. This way, the ministers are normally intimidated. 

Therefore, I would like to ask Government to speed up the process of recruiting permanent secretaries and Chief Administrative Officers on contract basis. 
		
MS NANTABA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Mine is just to emphasise what he is submitting. These ministers on the front bench are sometimes even made to prove what they do not  know. You remember the honourable Minister of Energy, the other week when we were discussing oil; she laid on Table things that were not true. At the end of the day she was corrected and she agreed that it was wrong. 

I would love this Parliament to empower these ministers to interdict their permanent secretaries before we can even do it as Parliament. This will minimise the risk of Government losing money. If they just look on - like the honourable minister said, he was not involved in the procurement process. If he was given the power, maybe he would have looked into how the money was spent. But he just looked on because he didn’t have the powers. 

Let the ministers be given full powers to interdict their permanent secretaries such that in case money is lost from the government, they are also liable for that loss. Thank you.
 
MR AYOO: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information. To show how these people are powerful, in this very contract which was supposed to be overseen by the Attorney-General, the big man went ahead to do it without the consent of the Attorney-General. The PS took advantage of even the minister who was out for campaigns and did whatever he wanted and concealed all the information from the minister at the time of executing this deal. It was not until it had gone bad that it came to his attention.

Therefore, I am asking Government –(Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you for giving way. I am rising on a point of information about the Ministry of Local Government. I am well informed that some ex-gratia was given to some local leaders of the previous councils. For the case of Kasese Municipality, the people we had on the executive have never received their ex-gratia. They have written to the permanent secretary. I wish through this information to also ask for clarification from the Minister of Local Government as to why my people have not received their ex-gratia. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR AYOO: To conclude, I wish to submit that the head of accounts, Mr Henry K. Bamutura, Hellen Owechi and John Kashaka, who is the accounting officer, have all lost the legitimacy to continue sitting in those offices. And with immediate effect, as put here by the Leader of Government Business, these officers should vacate those public offices. 

The institutions of Government that we are going to refer this matter to, the IGG, DPP, while they are executing this particular case, they should note that Parliament is very interested and will continue to keep a watchful eye to see how they handle this matter. Thank you. 

6.21
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to draw the attention of this Parliament to looking at ways of how we can curb any little chance that accelerates the thieving spree. The timing of purchase of these bicycles also accelerated the thieving process. This is the time the honourable minister was away officially and by policy and he was not expected to come back to the office to do anything legal. That, coupled with our weak procurement law or Act, also accelerated the loopholes to the thieving of this money.

Under Section 26 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, there is too much autonomy given to the accounting officer and the procurement committee. Ten very salient areas are given to them to do without the interference of the minister.

To establish the contracts committee, to appoint members of the contracts committee, to cause establishment of a procurement and disposal unit, to advertise bid opportunities, to communicate award decisions, to satisfy the availability of funds, to sign contracts, to investigate, to mention but a few. 

It is my plea that the procurement laws be reviewed to give political heads enough powers. I think even in hard times, we should learn to motivate our friends and to give them more courage by giving them credit where it is due.

I think the minister tried to do something. The minister contacted the CID and raised a complaint about the anomaly. The minister informed the IGG about the anomaly, but what did we expect? Quick measures, quick attention because the matter was salient, involving a lot of money. Up to now, there is no report ready to be forwarded to Members of Parliament by the Director of Public Prosecution, which means that our weaknesses are squared and it is my prayer that Parliament also informs the CID, DPP about our disappointment in the delay to handle a case of this magnitude.

MR KIYINGI: The information I have, hon. Members, is that not all has been lost. I believe that in every contract, there is what we call a security bid. I believe this security can help to recover some money. In this modern era, I believe there is what we call insurance. 

In this matter of bicycles for our local chairpersons, I believe if the insurance is there, we have to look into this matter and recover Ugandans’ money.
 
MRS BUSINGE-RUSOKE: It is my prayer that we pass a law to give political supervision to procurements in Government departments. We should make a ruling about when the report will be brought to Parliament.

6.22 
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): I also rise to thank the committee for a very good report and for being very brave and investigating this matter to its logical conclusion. Although they fell short of recommending interdiction of the responsible officers, and up to now, I do not know why they did not come out clearly in that report when they had a lot of evidence.

There are many issues in this report. First of all, the capacity of the contractor ought to have been investigated. How do you award a contract to a company that was registered on the 15th September in response to an advert that was in the press on 5th September and the Solicitor General consents to the award of that contract? We know very well that the Ministry of Finance said that for my youth to access the youth capital venture they ought to have a registered business for six months, but here we are giving $4 million to a company that has just registered.

The second issue is; evaluation of this bid is based on a joint venture that could not be confirmed legally. Change of the consignee and other weaknesses in the contract, discrepancies in the documents, commitments to pay and paying for bicycles that were not delivered. I think all this points to collusion. There was collusion between the Local Government, the Solicitor General’s Office and somebody responsible for inspection and audit in the Ministry of Finance. So, there was a cartel; there was just collusion and this really points to why our economy has challenges. Our economy is bleeding. The country is bleeding because of people who believe in primitive accumulation of wealth who cannot have a sense of shame to steal money meant for a bicycle meant for an LC I chairman, who does not get a salary. 
That is collusion which we must tackle. I do not believe that these recommendations go far enough. 

It is understandable that they will be interdicted, those who are to be interdicted, but we also need a timeline. I think the Prime Minister ought to tell us when he will come back to Parliament to report on the actions taken.

The Solicitor General and the Attorney-General’s offices are pivotal offices in the management of contracts in this country. If they can commit such an offence, how about other contracts that we are not able to see and which people are not able to point out. 

This could just be a tip of the iceberg and, therefore, I do recommend that in reviewing, we should borrow a leaf from what is happening in other countries, because a PS is accountable to whom? How is he appointed? We have learnt from hon. Alaso that the same PS had problems as CAO in one of the small districts at that time, but he was appointed PS nonetheless.

In other countries, before somebody is appointed to such high level of responsibility, they require these positions to be advertised, people apply and there are public hearings before this position is given out. This is now taking place in Kenya and I think many countries are going to take up this approach. That way, we will be able to get good people for these positions that have direct bearing on the country and particularly the economy.

I also want to point out that even if the bicycles are delivered, as people have commented, these people should still account because it means they uttered false documents when they said that they had seen the bicycles, yet the bicycles were not there at that time. Even if the bicycles arrive today, that should not absolve them of responsibility to our country, and of course, quality. So, it is important that as we debate this, we should be clear on the timelines and we should be clear on what actions are going to be taken, and in order to avoid this, we should look at the way in which we appoint these people to these particular offices. I beg to move. I thank you. 

6.33
MRS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. What is happening is really very unfortunate. The people who are suffering and the people who have problems down there have their eyes on the government, and in particular, on the NRM, which is the ruling party, and yet all these problems are being caused by the civil servants. It is the NRM that is being labelled as thieves and as people who are very corrupt, and yet all this has been caused by the civil servants. So, we must fight these kinds of actions without any favour. 

Last week in my constituency, my husband and three others were picked up by the IGG. Sometime back, two or three years ago, they paid a contractor who was constructing the offices for the town council and somehow, this contractor disappeared with Shs 25 million without doing the work he was supposed to do. 

So, last week, the IGG went down on the ground and picked my husband and three others who were political leaders and they were held accountable. I told my people of Pader District that if my husband made a mistake and caused the town council to lose money, he must be held accountable, he must take up the responsibility and he must suffer the consequences. I am saying this so that we must learnt from it. If we are to fight corruption, if we are to ensure that Government funds are not mismanaged, we must not show any favours. We must fight it with a spirit of selflessness. My husband and the three others were made to pay the Shs 25 million, and then they were left to look for the contractor to recover their money. 

We are losing a lot of money, as the NRM, and we cannot walk down there in our constituencies with our heads high up because we are the ones who are being called thieves and yet it is the civil servants. We must take stern action to discipline these people without any favour. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.36
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to the rest of the speakers in congratulating the committee members for coming up with this very important report. I had the opportunity to look through the report and analyse it, and given the glaring evidence that was adduced by the committee members, I am left with no option, but to conclude that there was a conspiracy by international fraudsters together with the officials of Government to defraud Uganda a wholesome amount of money. I have also had the opportunity to peruse the documents that were attached to this report and I have concluded that the documents were actually created by scammers. Unfortunately, our officials in Government were passive and they failed to take appropriate action. The officers were put under pressure to make sure that the funds that the fraudsters wanted were processed very fast and they cannot, therefore, be free of this scam.

When you look at the document that originated from the Bank of Uganda and was signed by Anthony Musumba, who happens to be the Assistant Director Payments and Settlements Department, when the Bank of Uganda noted the discrepant document under the contract, this was a point at which taxpayers money would have been saved. But when you look at the response by the permanent secretary, John Kashaka Muhanguzi, he actually said that the final destination on the Bills of Lading, packing lease and certificates of origin, which is Kampala, instead of parishes and village councils in Uganda, is allowed. The alterations in the certificates of origin were allowed, but then what comes into mind is who allows this and under what arrangement? 

We all know the bureaucracy that exists in Government institutions, but when you look at the Bank of Uganda document, it was originated on 2 March 2011, and received by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government on 2 March 2011, but on the same day, a response was made by the permanent secretary implying that there was an inherent interest that the permanent secretary had in this contract.  (Interruption)

MR ASUPASA: I thank you, dear colleague, for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking through all this documentation and all these correspondences, I do not see a single copy given to the minister. When do we do our oversight role? How do you know what goes on under your ministry, in your district, in your constituency? As a politician, at what moment are you informed about what is happening? I simply see that we made a very bad law. Things do happen everywhere at every stage and we do not know about them. For this document, not even a single copy was given to the minister. 

So, much is happening in your district by your CAO and nothing is given to you as a copy. The information I really want to give you is that maybe this is an eye opener to us as Members of Parliament that for further action, we must put somewhere in our correspondences or in our work the stage at which we should know how things happen. We make policies here, but how do we follow up on them and how do we get feedback? I thank you. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, there is a report from the PPDA on the investigation on the procurement by the Ministry of Local Government of 70,000 bicycles for chairpersons, and page 5 of 34 of the report states, “On April 12 2010, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, wrote to the Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba, requesting for provisions of a supplementary budget of Shs 18 billion to the ministry for procurement of bicycles…” So, we should know that it is the minister who wrote the first letter asking for a supplementary budget requesting for Shs 18 billion, and if you divide Shs 18 billion by 70,000 bicycles, the minister in his own wisdom had quoted each bicycle at Shs 257,142. So, he is not totally innocent the way the House is trying to portray him. He knew! He only fell along the way with his junior staff. 

I want to thank the honourable members for giving information to this august House. Madam Speaker, allow me to draw your attention to Annex 11. This was a document that came from the head of accounts, head of internal audit and the accounting officer. It was a confirmation by the accounting officers that the letter of credit could be cleared. When you look at the first statement of this document it reads, “I confirm that goods and services for which a letter of credit was opened were rendered...” This morning I took trouble to try and understand the meaning of the word “rendered” and what I got from it was that to render means you can sit on your desk and confirm something merely by looking at the document, and not necessarily taking a physical audit of what happened. I find this statement wanting. These are some of the grey areas that we have in our procurement process that probably need to be addressed -

THE SPEAKER: Information from the committee. 

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you hon. Member for giving way. Madam Speaker, the honourable member is actually referring to a number of shipping documents, which were discrepant, where the Bank of Uganda said, “Where is the packing list? Where is the certificate of origin” and so on. You will see in that annex which he is referring to that we have a number of documents, including the insurance by Tata AIG, which the honourable colleague was referring to, and which was giving an insurance cover of up to $2 million.  There is also an alleged warranty by a manufacturer and so on and so forth. 

The information I want to give my colleague is that the committee in its investigation found out that at the time Stanbic Bank submitted these documents to Bank of Uganda, to trigger the payment, the reality was that there was nothing shipped at that time and all the documents thereto were simply forged.

We could have avoided this scenario if our officers in the Ministry of Local Government had not changed a certain basic condition in the bidding document. In the conditions of payments, they had given it as “Full payment on delivery” which meant that the company to be contracted should have had the capacity to bring all the bicycles without all this nonsense of shipping documents, and the ministry would pay. After getting this AITEL Company, the company comes and says, “We do not have the money to actually bring all these bicycles at a go.” So, they changed that basic condition to permit partial shipment: 40 percent on sight of those shipping documents. 

So, to me, the real problem started at the procurement level, by the ministry allowing changes in certain conditions, which should not have been made. Thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. Sincerely speaking, the documents which were presented by the officers were incredible and really difficult to doubt. However, the lesson we learn is a clear manifestation that there is a lacuna in our procurement processes, that needs to be reviewed and addressed with the view of improving sanity in our contractual process, thereby averting the possibility of this happening in future.

Kioga County which I represent, has got 435 villages implying that there are 435 Local Council I chairpersons. I wanted some kind of assurance or information from the ministry responsible, on what I can tell my people when I get back.

Madam Speaker, fraud is significantly under-reported in this country, and while various agencies are concentrating and trying to handle the issue of fraud, we need greater co-operation to achieve real impact, especially in the public sector. Most sectors that are affected currently are the banking institutions; you will find manufacturing and then the government. But then we should learn some lessons from some countries that were faced with this kind of scenario earlier.

Arising from this kind of problem, the United Kingdom established the Fraud Act of 2006 and today if you go to the United Kingdom, you will realise that there is a serious fraud office which is an arm of Government and is directly accountable to the Attorney-General. There is also the National Fraud Authority, which is a government agency coordinating the counter-fraud responses in the United Kingdom. And above all, there is a not-for-profit membership association responsible for the private and public sector, which is dedicated  to the effort of ensuring that fraud is gotten rid of in the United Kingdom.

So, hon. Members, it is incumbent upon us, as Members of this Parliament, to see what we can do and if we can borrow some of this probably it can help us because these are institutions that should be in place to help us fight fraud. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.48
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The House should note that the fraud or the shenanigan took place when the minister was away campaigning. I have been told that some civil servants - I think this one is directed to the ministers on the front bench. I am told that when the civil servants want to play some tricks, they organise foreign trips for the ministers so that the minister will be away while they are doing their business. So, to the ministers, this is a note of caution; please do not take too many foreign trips otherwise you might not know what is going on in your ministry. (Laughter)

The other issue is that the civil servants did not take basic steps to protect the ministry and the country against possible fraud. Yes, one of the ways could have been to say, “We shall pay you in full after you have made the entire delivery.” I have worked in the Civil Service, but I know that there are also other methods. For example, you can do what they call due diligence on the company that you are doing business with: Is this a reputable company? How long have they been in business? Has this company done similar work of a similar size with other similar organisations? In that way, you reduce the risk that could be involved.

Also, there are some other basic issues; for example, the joint venture. That is a very simple thing which they could have checked and ensured that there was actually a joint venture between the agency, here in Uganda, and the supplier in India, and that would have ensured that there would have been no loss.

So, when you look at - okay let me take information.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. My colleague is talking about the sector balances that could have been put in place so that the ministry and the government could not have incurred losses. But the information I am giving is in, I think, Annex 9 where this man called Kashaka Muhanguzi was given information from the Ministry of Finance that the documents had faults and this is what he wrote: “Confirming the delivery by the authorised agent of the applicant as per contract and LC.”

Two, “The destination is no longer villages and parishes but it is the ministry”, and it is not allowed unless he is saying that alteration in the certificate of origin is also allowed. So, the man was too authoritative; even when the board advised him he could not budge; he was serious in his business. He had to do it and he did it. And he is the champion and the captain of the deal. As such, he should be handled in the same manner as he did it.
 
MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the Members is that even this joint venture they are talking about between AITEL and Amman Impex is fake because Amman Impex is not legally known in India. It is not known by the Indian Chamber of Commerce. These are not my words, because when I was in India in September, I took trouble to talk to our ambassador to India; they know this whole saga. She actually told me that she had taken a step to investigate this company and that is what she found out. Thank you very much. 

MR JAMES KYEWALABYE: Thank you very much for the information. So, you can see that the ministry officials never took the opportunity to carry out any basic investigations in order to ascertain that the company they were dealing with was genuine. 

6.53
MR JOHN BRIAN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. I wouldn’t like to join the rest of the speakers who entirely appreciated the work of the committee. I would like to take a different angle. Although the committee did a very good job in terms of the findings and observations, their recommendations, in my view, were not guided by their observations and findings. It is as if they had the matter to direct the attention to but they kept on circumrotating. 
 
I would like to draw this House to the experience of the Sixth Parliament when we had the valley dams saga. Government acted the way it acted because of the way the report was presented on the Floor of the House. The recommendations were quite precise and they were explicit. They went ahead to name that, for example, recommendation No.1, so and so should take responsibility.  Now, in this matter, aware that a lot of efforts were put in to inform the permanent secretary who, by Regulation 8 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, is entitled under his duties to make sure that he exercises sufficient control in reference to protection of public funds, he did not adhere at all to these efforts as it is stated in all these annexure. Why should he go ahead in 7.2 and again recommend this matter to the IGG, DPP and PPDA?

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, let me thank the honourable member for giving way. Since this debate begun, I have gone through a lot of self-counselling. I know I am a member of this committee and I am not supposed to contribute on this debate, but I would like to give this information to the Members here. 

First of all, let it be appreciated that in the circumstances, the committee did a very commendable job. This was a committee comprising mostly of new Members of Parliament and we were depending on advice from the technical staff of this Parliament all through our deliberations. Madam Speaker, the legal officer you gave us told this committee that we should be very careful with whatever we say in the committee since this Parliament has a case pending before the courts of law, where individual Members have been personally held liable for things they have uttered in the committee. He told us, “Be careful with the things you say here, you will personally be held liable for your actions here.”  

During the time of making recommendations, the same legal officer came up and told us, “You don’t even have mandate to recommend prosecution; you cannot recommend interdiction; you cannot recommend anything apart from  advising that this matter be forwarded to the IGG or to the relevant officers.”  

This letter was written against me, but I was not given a copy. This letter was addressed to you, Madam Speaker. I was here nine months before my colleagues and I really believe that the time I was here assisted me. When I tried to raise some of the issues being raised here by Members, I was ruled out of order and the letter, which has just come to my attention today, was written about me that I am “A person of bad conduct.” And it was addressed to you without giving me a copy. I am trying to tell you the problems we went through as a committee. 

MRS BOONA: Madam Speaker, I happen to be a member of the committee and we thoroughly and seriously sat together while writing this committee report.  And there were chances for any Member to write a minority report, which was clear and certain. Is, therefore, our fellow honourable Member of Parliament of the same committee, in order to disassociate herself from what we decided as a committee and has been presented before this House? Is it in order for her to say that she is not part of what we wrote here for recommendations and, therefore, suggesting that she should have a minority report? Is she in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Bakeine before I make a ruling.
 
MRS BAKEINE: I am also a member of this committee. We sat all through our recess time and the committee was at all times well attended.  There was no intimidation; we were well guided by the parliamentary technical team. Maybe individually, some people don’t want to listen to technical advice, but I believe the parliamentary staff is there to guide us properly. We appreciated them; they helped us with the language -(Interjection)- I am not taking it.
 
THE SPEAKER: He is also a member of the committee.
 
MRS BAKEINE: Yes, but my point was that we were well guided and we appreciated the technical staff on our committee. There was no intimidation because we know our mandate and we knew our scope. 

MR  MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to concur with my colleague, hon. Nambooze. When we had the committee meeting and the advice from that legal officer, hon. Bakeine was absent, but I would like to confirm that intimidation was there. And to add on that, this morning an organ of this Parliament debated this report. I would like to lay this report here, which was debated outside this House though around Parliament and the resolutions which were made are here. That is why hon. Rusoke was presenting while reading this report, which we have here. So, intimidation was there and that is why when you read this report, some of us have refused to sign it.
 
THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, the report was presented last week by the chairperson. I have not heard any amendment other than what hon. Tanna brought. If something else was done somewhere, I have neither seen it nor heard of it. I am going by what the chairperson said and amendments moved by hon. Tanna. (Applause) 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, in light of those cases I have cited, I would like to propose amendments to 7.2. Instead of the committee recommending that relevant agencies of Government, that is CID etc. - we have been informed by the minister that before he brought this matter to the attention of the committee, he had already drawn the attention of the IGG, CID and other relevant agencies.

I would like to propose, therefore, that the recommendation should be that the accounting officer, in line with Regulation No.8 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, be interdicted and arrested immediately. This is so that we delete this hobnobbing of the IGG and CID because the minister had already drawn the attention of these agencies to this matter. I am being reminded that this should be done immediately and physically.

I am also aware that when Police or any other investigating body is pursuing lost property, in the absence of the person who did the act of stealing, whoever is got with that property is taken as the first suspect. In this case, therefore, the Annex 7.5 does inform us that one Mr Bagarukayo did withdraw the money to the amount of $400,000. Now that the investigators found that it was actually Mr Bagarukayo with the loot, what more would you want other than recommending that Mr Bagarukayo be arrested immediately? This is because he is the person that has been found with the lost shirt that we are looking for. So, I would like to provide that amendment to 7.5.

Finally, with the foregoing -(Interruption)

MRS BOONA: Madam Speaker, I wish to give him additional information as a member of the committee, in reference to Mr Bagarukayo. As a committee, we were at great pains when we were interviewing Mr Bagarukayo, because he admitted that he received the money. In addition, he told us that the company was paying him the money they owed him as an individual and as a money-lender or a business something. He also said he had been given money to spend locally. We did not understand what that meant. But I would also like to give you more information that this money was deposited on 15th March and it was on the same day 15th and 16th that the account got depleted.

It was not depleted by Mr Bagarukayo alone, but we also have other companies whose identities we could not trace. We have Vinsara Impex in India who received $110,000; we have a company called Infinity Exim FZE which received $600,000 in the same way that Mr Bagarukayo received. We have another company called WUYI in Trade Hong Kong, which received $400,000 on the same day. So, as a committee, we were at great pains to understand what these companies were receiving this money for and as a committee, we could not trace which companies these were, in addition to Mr Bagarukayo.

So, I would like to give you extra information, hon. Member and this House that we were at pains to understand and get to the root of the recipients of these big funds within just two days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the information simply enriches my proposal for this amendment; that whereas the committee was at pains to take a decision and they could not move in that direction, we are saying that now that the only physical person we can see and the physical suspect who also accepted that indeed he took the loot is Bagarukayo, let us not spare him.

Yesterday and the other day, a publication was run in almost all the dailies and they were publicising all the resolutions which were carried in Kyankwanzi. In particular, Resolution 12(h) says, NRM caucus in Kyankwanzi unanimously resolved to fight corruption. This is now the time to dance to the tune. This is the time for us to demonstrate that we actually have the will to fight corruption as was published. 

That said, I would like to move a motion that if those amendments can be seconded, and having been seconded, I now wish to move a motion that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Leader of Opposition has been quiet and listening; let us allow him to respond.

7.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank all my colleagues who have contributed to this motion. I think we are all in agreement.

I have been watching the Frontbench and I have seen the acting Leader of Government Business doing a lot of sleeping since he entered and yet he is in charge of Public Service. If a Minister of Public Service can sleep, what about the public servants? It is right to call a spade a spade. We may sleep hungry, but we need to understand why we have called it thus.

I also want to thank a colleague who said this is one of the reports we have touched, but there are more reports which are going to come to deal with some issues concerning corruption like the digital migration which my sister knows - Kinyara, among others.

Having said that, I have a report here by CID on the same issue. CID has already done the investigation, but I want to read the conclusion. It is dated 22 August 2011 and this is following a letter dated 26 May 2011 from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government. It is to the attention of Otim Joseph Stephan, Commissioner of Police, Anti-Corruption Department in respect to obtaining money by false pretence by M/s Amman Industrial Tools and Equipments Limited.

The conclusion is saying, “The evidence we have we pray is only a case to be sanctioned against the Director of Amman Industrial Tools and Equipment Limited, a certain Indian called Arijana Rajasekaran and the warrant of arrest be issued to the directors who are in India.”

If you took this case back to CID, the public servants are not there. This is one of the things I wanted to put across, but what the report investigated also found that this company was registered after the advert and they said that was wrong. Members, as you are aware, in procurement, when they advertise, they will always ask for three-year audited accounts as well as your past record before you can be given, but these ones were never there and they were given. In my thinking, there must have been other pressures on the civil servants.

I will go ahead to put another case. There was addendum zero. In my life, I have never heard of addendum zero, but it looks as if the numbers were finished then they came to zero. What were they amending? Addendum starts from one - it looks like they made one and then they discovered that there was a problem and then they went to zero.

There was an investigation by PPDA and it is very clear because it names people to be prosecuted. It says – this was dated October 14 2011, which my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, mentioned – “Summary of facts” On April 12 2010, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, wrote a letter and he was quoting Shs 18 billion –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, we are debating a report by a committee of this House, but the Leader of the Opposition is referring to a report by PPDA, which we are not privy to. None of us has seen the document he is referring to and none of us has a copy, and it is not officially before this House. Moreover, we do not know the source of that document, and I dare say it is not even signed, because I have not seen it. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to smuggle in a document and start discussing it, and yet it is not part of the report that we officially received in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is no law which says that you must confine yourself to only the report. The reason we present these reports early is to give you time to read and do research so that you come back to us. Let him lay his document on Table if you need it. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I promised you that I would lay reports that I have, including the one of the CID, which I have laid; the one of the PPDA which I am going to lay; I have my own report from your committee. I will lay it on Table. I will also lay a letter from the permanent secretary dated February 1 2010, which has a section talking about pressure from politicians. It is here. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister wrote on April 12 2010 and demanded for Shs 18 billion. The person who raised the supplementary is the PS of the Ministry to the Treasury. Since the minister took the role of getting the money then it meant that he should be responsible for getting the bicycles. He even costed the bicycles at more than twice the price on the open market. If you are a really good minister, why didn’t you say, “70,000 X 100,000” and ask for Shs 7.0 billion? But you asked for Shs 18 billion! This is one of the things we should investigate.

On May 11 2010, the Minister in Charge of the Presidency also wrote to the Minister of Local Government –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I agree with you that we should not be confined to the report of the committee alone, but if a Member introduces a document, which has the effect of making a serious allegation against another Member, it is only fair that that document must have a clear source. Also, that Member against whom the allegation is being made is served in advance to be able to make a comprehensive response. To allege that I asked for a supplementary of Shs 18 billion when it has just come here for the first time – and a report of PPDA is being quoted; I do not know who signed it. I think I am entitled to know the source because an allegation is being made against me. It is very difficult for anybody to have asked for a supplementary in April 2010 for a payment which was made – first of all, the contract was not even signed in May 2010; it was signed in November. I am entitled to defend myself.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I told you that we shall bring evidence here and you will see how people will run. Even if you checked the committee report, it has a letter from hon. Wabudeya attached to it. You mentioned here that we want to thank the minister; he even asked PPDA to go and do an investigation. I am giving you your report for PPDA. Here it is and I will hand you a copy if you do not have one. 

I agree that the civil servants have made errors, but also the political leadership knows what took place. I want to quote this letter dated – 

THE SPEAKER: But the Leader of the Opposition, this thing you have given me has no origin and it is not signed - this one from CID.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the PPDA report is here. If you wanted –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been informed from the committee that the PPDA report is yet to be approved by the PPDA board. Secondly, the directive of the President was on May 2010; it is not practicable that the minister would ask for a budget release in April before the President’s directive. Thirdly, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying that the permanent secretary’s letter, quoting political pressure, was written in February 2010 – I think we are in for some bit of confusion! Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that you guide us on this one. As a committee, we have submitted a report with clear recommendations. If any Member wants to amend a recommendation they should quote the specific recommendation, propose the amendment and we pass or not pass the report.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just as my colleague has said, there couldn’t have been any letter earlier than May because the letter from the Minister for the Presidency to the Minister of Local Government was written 
on 11th May, and the advert is saying that this is in the budget. So, there was no need for a supplementary. It is in the budget. It was in the budget on some - you know these eyes have got to be added on; the advert says, “The Ministry of Local Government has secured funds from the Local Government Sector Implementation Programme”. So, it was already in the budget; there could not have been any supplementary budget.

When a committee is given an investigation like this and any Member has got information that is relevant and that could be of use to the committee, it would be very good in terms of parliamentary procedure for this Member to come to the committee and give this information so that it helps to make some good judgment. When you wait for the report to be presented and then you come and say, “This is what we have, this one they did not do” and yet all the time was there, it doesn’t help much. 

We spent a whole recess, we did not go to see our constituents and we were there and everybody could have come with all this information. So, they should be fair to us and I think we did the job that we thought was the best. After all, just as a colleague said, put in something on the recommendations, propose amendments to the recommendations or additional recommendations and then we move forward because all of us are interested in good governance and the fight against corruption in this country.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a loose minute which was brought to the committee dated 1 February 2011 and I just want to highlight -

THE SPEAKER: 1 February 2011?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. It is written to Henry Batumara by John Kashaka Muwanguzi, PS, Ministry of Local Government, and it was tendered in the committee: “My understanding is that if you had guided the process meticulously, especially knowing that the supply of bicycles for which the LCs were being applied was politically sensitive and His Excellency the President had committed himself to timeliness of delivery, the delay of a whole month would have been avoided”.

Then there is this one, which I am only going to highlight, but I will lay it here: “There is no doubt in my mind at all that your conduct was suspect during the process. You no doubt knew the pressure we were subjected to by the political leadership to deliver the bicycles and the disappointment that was caused...” -(Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, I highly respect the Leader of the Opposition because he was my mentor in the Public Accounts Committee, and he told us that any letter or any document, whose source is not well known, should never be accepted. Further, he used to tell us that if you have any document you want to produce, you should bring it during the investigations when the committee is sitting.

But now, I am shocked that the most respected Leader of the Opposition is reading a letter which is not even headed, but signed by the permanent secretary. May I know, my boss, if you have changed your standing? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I think it is not fair even for the Speaker that new evidence is being presented now. First of all, our committees are bi-partisan and both the ruling party and the Opposition are represented. Hon. Mugume is here, hon. Bako Christine is here, Hon. Santa Alum is here, hon. Bakireke Nambooze - really, you had an opportunity to present these things in the committee, because now, what do you want me to do?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am just giving information. I have been seated near the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Nambooze and what I read between the lines - which is very serious for the integrity of this institution - they claim that certain documents that were tendered before the committee have been deliberately left out. That is what the Leader of the Opposition -(Interruption)

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to bring up a document which was given to the committee, and yet we discussed thoroughly the details of that committee? We investigated and queried the officers that had written that document and made clarifications. Political pressure in this case, which is attributed to His Excellency the President - we found out from the person who wrote it that every ministry has a day when they have a meeting that technocrats and line ministers attend, and in these meetings, ministers -[Dr Lulume: “What is the point of order?”]- The point of order -

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Allow her to develop her point.

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, the point of order is that they are misleading this honourable House. The point of order is that they are bringing documents that are not annexes and were found irrelevant to this investigation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want us to amend the Rules of Procedure on the Floor of this House. When we were inducting you, we told you and I said this many times, that if you disagree with the contents of the main report, you file a minority report and come here together with the other one. The chair reads hers, you read yours and then we debate together. But now you are purporting to introduce a minority report at this stage. No! (Applause)

DR LULUME: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I have been keeping quiet for a long time and I have been struggling to say a word. I think the essence of debate of reports is to discover the adequacy or inadequacy of the reports and to enrich them where necessary. We are seeing a process of enriching the report and we are benefiting from information being got from other sources and this is not the first time. (Interjections) It is a shame that I am attracting very many hecklers!

Madam Speaker, my suggestion is, and I beg your indulgence that now that we are having information enriching this report, which can help us to arrive at better decisions in this Parliament, let us allow it now that it is even being laid on Table. It is only fair that Members accept the Leader of the Opposition to lay these documents on Table because their sources are definite.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, today I was very excited to see both sides of the House demanding that those who stole public funds be arrested. That spirit must not disappear now that we are about to conclude. The only issue which I was instigating the Leader of Opposition by way of information is that we need to set the right precedent. The committee of Parliament is delegated by Parliament to do jobs on behalf of Parliament, and it reports back to Parliament. Their reports may be binding or not. 

So, to find a situation where a committee on its own volition omits certain documents and then the first preliminary objection is that the document of Nandala is fake. The second one is that we investigated and called all the stakeholders and found that the political pressure was high. That means that the chairperson knew about this document and they were deliberately keeping it away from the House which delegated them to do that job. 

I am a committee chairperson myself and I have been here for 11 years. The rules are that the moment you are delegated, at least on issues involving documents, documents must be tendered before this House. 

Now, where is the controversy? The documents being tendered - the PPDA report which is being disowned now – that means there are other documents which are relevant to this committee report that this House needs to look at. A whole Leader of Opposition cannot stand on the Floor of this House to quote a PPDA report and we just shun it as a lie. That report must be investigated. If hon. Nandala-Mafabi is lying that there is a PPDA report, he must appear before the disciplinary committee. That is the only way the House can resolve that issue.

So, we cannot just say that the report is fake. If hon. Nandala is tendering fake reports, the rules and disciplinary committee is there. So, I suggest that if it would not cost much, we should have a committee constituted by the Speaker, of at least six people, to look at these documents being tendered in. It may save a lot. It is useless to pass a resolution which will curse the flies and leave the birds.   

MS NANTUME: Thank you, Madam, Speaker. The chairperson of the committee has just told us that the document was discussed fully in the committee. What the Leader of the Opposition has just said is that they discussed it and they saw what was relevant and what was not relevant, and what is relevant was included in the report. So, are we procedurally right to discuss issues that were discussed in the committee and included in the report? 

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member holding the Floor is that the addendum to the report of the committee states well that the Minister of Local Government, as the overall supervisor, is commended for raising the matter in the policy statement. However, the committee observed that there was inadequate supervision of the contract. Now, I suspect that the committee looked at all these documents and it could not quote each and every document. But out of this document, they recommended that the laws should be reviewed to give the political heads of Government, ministers and departments, a greater oversight role in the procurement process. 

So, the Leader of the Opposition is bringing very good information, and the committee admits that they saw the information, and consequently made this recommendation. I agree with the committee that they saw this as important and they recommended thus as noted in the addendum of the report. I do not see any problem with this. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying that they saw that communication, examined it and discarded it. And based on what they saw there, they made that recommendation. Okay, let us hear from the chair. 

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleagues have clearly said that they looked at this document and they disregarded it because of lack of relevance. Two, we have been sitting here and debating; but my good friend, the Leader of the Opposition should have raised an objection at the beginning. But now we are almost concluding. Why did you have to keep quiet and then ambush us? You are my good friend, but you had this information; people have been debating basing on what we have. Why did you have to bring it in late like this?

THE SPEAKER: Actually, you are also being unfair to the Speaker. You know, I listened to the report; now you are bringing in new issues. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you know we are taught to have good manners. That is why I remained seated and waited. I knew that once I am given the opportunity, then I would mention this. I had wanted to talk immediately after the two ministers and the Prime Minister had talked, so that I put my case. 

Madam Speaker, I will give you one example. You are aware that the committee discovered that the company was registered after the advert, but there is no recommendation that has come up on that. Didn’t they see it or isn’t it relevant? These are some of the issues. I do not want to waste a lot of time. But this document is vital; if the committee does not want it, let it be a record of Parliament. Tomorrow, I will submit more documents on the minister. Give me an opportunity; that is what I will start with. 

In the meantime, because he is still denying it, let me lay the PPDA report – and I am not a member of the PPDA. Listen to the recommendation of PPDA, it says –(Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have been in this House for over 16 years and I intend to be around for more years. You always guide us that if we are laying documents on the Table, we should clearly indicate the source, the heading and the author. The purported document, which hon. Nandala wants to lay on the Table, is not signed. I am very reluctant to talk about the content because I am not sure about the authenticity of this document. 

So, is it procedurally right to admit this document, which is not signed, to the House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to appeal to all of you not to change the Rules of Procedure. First of all, the committee stayed here throughout the recess. It was common knowledge that this Committee of Public Service did not go on recess. They were here taking evidence, every day and night. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you were here with me; you should have gone there and said, “Friends, here is some information I want you to have.” And if you felt very strongly about those papers, you could have caused a minority report, which would have also come here with those annexure. But I do not want to create new precedents here. I do not think it is fair to the House. (Applause)   

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, before I get more information, we have recommendations here from PPDA. It has listed everybody who is supposed to be dealt with. The accounting officer must be disciplined, the contracts committee – nobody is mentioning the contracts committee - the head of the PDU, the evaluation committee, the principal accountant and the principal internal auditor, Hellen Owechi. 

It is goes further to say you suspend this firm: “The authority imposes –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to misguide this House? When you read our recommendation 7.2, all the people you are mentioning were mentioned. The committee spent all that time investigating and meeting different categories of people. In our recommendations, we did not leave out the contracts committee. The contracts committee is here, unless you have not gone through the report we gave you. The only problem is that hon. Nandala-Mafabi must have read this report with a bias or he never read it all.

THE SPEAKER: The offices were mentioned in the report; what is missing are the names. Let us put the names. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, when you refer to page No.10, 7.2: “The committee recommends that the relevant agencies of government, that is, CID, IGG, DPP and PPDA investigate this matter thoroughly to establish the officers and persons involved in causing this loss to Government with a view of prosecution or other appropriate action. 

The following offices and officers should specifically be investigated: The permanent secretary and accounting officer; principal accountant; principal internal auditor; the contracts committee members; the  evaluation committee members; Accountant General’s Office; Bank of Uganda; Solicitor General’s Office and Stanbic Bank-Uganda Limited.”

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I want clarification on the same issue, because when I look at the good work done by this committee and the methodology they used, they invited all these people. They were carrying out investigations. The recommendation is again saying that these officers should be investigated thoroughly. I am looking at the committee’s good work which was done, as being watered down because they did a lot of investigation. I, therefore, propose that the interdiction of these officers, which had already been moved by hon. Sanjay Tanna, be adopted. I support the motion of hon. Tanna because I am looking at almost all the investigations having been done by the committee. 

Madam Speaker, on capacity of the Local Government officials, those people who were involved in this saga, I am saying that we have people who are supposed to be competent when they are carrying out their work. But when you look at 7.6, the committee made an observation that these people lacked capacity. I think that was being a bit lax on this recommendation. These people had the competencies. They knew what they were doing and whatever they did, they did it with the intention of stealing money. Therefore, I am not comfortable with this recommendation that these people lacked capacity. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, the last recommendation in the PPDA report is very concrete. It is saying suspension. The authority should impose a permanent suspension on the following individuals, because the moment we target an authority - we can summon PPDA before a committee of Parliament on the following people then it mentions the names. I think other than leaving everything to prosecution, to DPP, we could also adopt this. The individuals have been mentioned. I only have a problem with pronouncing some of the names, but the information I wanted to give is that this report, which is seemingly being thrown out, recommends a ban on those individuals from participating in any procurement in Uganda because they are fraudsters. If they appear again, they will cause a problem. I pray that is adopted.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make a clarification and request Members that we move together. First of all, the committee has done a very good job. We have listened to debates since we started and all sides seem to agree. The clarification I want to make is that, there are things we cannot avoid. The Member is trying to say that the committee has investigated. Parliament cannot prosecute. We have made our report. We have made resolutions and the minister and the Leader of Government Business have accepted. We need Police, we need IGG, to take these people to court. We cannot go away from them. Surely, I think we must not lose sight of this, otherwise, we shall be rupturing a very good report that we have adopted. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to use the words which were introduced by Gen. Ali that, “the House has merged on issues of corruption”. So, let us continue moving together. On that one, I just want us to say that everybody is in agreement with the report and we are saying that let us just amend as hon. Tanna proposed. 

So, I want to put the question 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we want to put more amendments to this. First, I recall my sister, who was my vice and ran away, saying, when documents are brought, you must keep them. That is why we brought them. It is unfortunate that she left before she could understand how documents are tendered. But having said that, I want to put an amendment to the proposal.

First, I concur with the committee on the issue that all these people must go to Luzira, but Police and IGG or whoever, should help us. However, on the issue of saying that these are inexperienced officers - you cannot be a permanent secretary when you are not experienced! You cannot be a principal accountant when you are inexperienced! These are things we do not want to see here. We want to remove the issue of investigating and say, now, CID, IGG, DPP, take over the matter. But we do not want to hide under inexperience. 

Finally, the issue –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard as if you were about to put a question to this matter. This is the report of the committee. It has been presented and debated thoroughly. So, I thought that you were putting the question for us to adopt it before we go to the recommendations, one after the other. I thought that would be the best way for us to move on.  It would save us from continuing to debate and making amendments to resolutions one by one.

Madam Speaker, if that procedure is accepted, allow me move a motion that a question be put for us to vote.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the question now be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Members, I now put the question that the report of the committee together with all amendments, as proposed, be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much. As you are aware, we have a team from the Committee of Government Assurances extracting these issues. In that regard, may I ask the responsible minister to tell us the timeframe within which he will report to us on the actions taken? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the peasants want their bicycles. When do we get an answer for the people because they want to know? Also, when is prosecution taking off?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, while the minister is still planning, I would like to point out that we don’t need to procure bicycles from India because they can be purchased locally. For example, we could procure them from Roadmaster Industries Ltd.

The other thing is about the balance. The minister has told us that there is only $2.5 million. That is not true. It should be $2.937 million. I am saying this because 60 percent of $4.86 is not $2.5 million. In the circumstances, we should resolve that the bicycles be brought within two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the minister and we close this matter? Yes, clarification from hon. Sanjay Tanna.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you and the whole House for adopting my amendments on the report. However, there are two issues that I would like the Frontbench, most especially the Leader of Government Business, to take note of. One of the issues is about how soon prosecution will be done. I am saying this because my amendment was about an immediate interdiction. May I hear that commitment come from the Leader of Government Business?

Secondly, the responsible minister said that he will provide accountability for the funds that remained, either tomorrow or on Thursday. I would like to have a commitment on that as well so that we can get to know how much money was left out of the feast, for the peasants.

Thirdly, I would like to request that when the minister is presenting the statement of accounts, he replies to the issue that you raised; about how we shall receive the bicycles. This is pertinent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me say something about the issue that hon. Sanjay Tanna is talking about. The Prime Minister said that he came here after issuing instructions. We are going to hold you people on that commitment. So, at the end of this week, you must tell us who has gone to court. He said it here and it is in the Hansard. So, we shall hold you to that promise.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has given a commitment on behalf of Government. But I just want to reiterate that position that as far as the people who are culpable are concerned, we should be in a position to report on the actions taken on Thursday.

As regards the balance, I would like to inform the House that we will also be able to report on it, authoritatively, on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: We also want to hear from you on the insurance money.

MR MIGEREKO: The minister will be in a position to report on that on Thursday as well. As far as the procurement of the bicycles is concerned, as you have realised, the matter is fairly involved. We do not want to create room for making mistakes again. My consultations with the line minister over this matter reveal that he is of the view that we shall need a month, to come up with an authoritative position on the procurement of bicycles for our people. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I would like to ask the Committee on Government Assurances to take note of all these promises. Let me also thank all of you for participating in this debate so enthusiastically. House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

