Wednesday 1st November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYER S

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. NJUBA SAM (Kyadondo East, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question was prepared quite a while ago, in fact before the Olympics, but I still think some points are relevant. Permit me to also congratulate our national team, the Cranes, for having performed so well in Nairobi recently. 

(I) The recent revelation by hon. Minister, Omony Ogaba, to the Committee on Social Services that there is no vote for his department shocked the sports fraternity. This revelation, no doubt, highlights why Uganda’s performance in sports events throughout the world has been so dismal.  

Could the hon. Minister inform the House the plans he intends to put in place to reverse this sad state of affairs in his department?  

(II) The Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA) has perennially complained that it lacks funds to sustain its activities. There is, however, reliable information contrary to the assertion made by FUFA. Indeed, the six qualification matches for the national team for those under 23 years, which were planned for Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, were fully funded by the Federation of International Football Association (FIFA). In addition, the Uganda Government did contribute Shs.50 million for this activity. The national team for those under the age of 17 years is fully funded by FIFA. It is reported further that FIFA pays salaries for some FUFA employees who are actually non-existent (ghosts). In the budget of FUFA for the year ended June 2000, Shs.25 million was provided by FIFA for the creation of regional offices, but to date, there is nothing on the ground.  

Could the Minister inform the House:
Whether he is satisfied with the soccer management in the country? If not, what does he intend to do?
  
What plans has he in place to ensure that FUFA is accountable and is better managed?  

How is he going to ensure that the current FUFA leadership holds an annual general meeting as enshrined in its constitution?  

Why FUFA, for reasons best known to itself, refuses to take decisions on certain matches thereby fuelling tension and rivalry between football teams within the country? 

The last question refers particularly to a match between Express and Villa, which was supposed to be in Arua. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (MR. OMONY OGABA): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Njuba for the questions he has raised and for the fact that he stated that the questions were raised before we went for the Olympics. That explains why I could not give an answer then as per the requirement of the Rules of Procedure. I got them when I came back. 

In line with the hon. Member recognising the performance of the Cranes in their last match, allow me to also thank hon. Members of Parliament who were physically there to see the Cranes defeat Kenya. With your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, allow me to read their names: Hon. Winnie Babihuga, hon. Namumbya Sarah, hon. Lukumu Fred, hon. Akwero Odwong Jane, hon. Ikote, hon. Kandole Clement, hon. Mayanja, hon. Olum Zachary, Dr. Kasirivu Atwoki, hon. Sulaiman Sembajja, hon. Ilukori and hon. Obedmoth Richard.  These hon. Members of Parliament did not stop at cheering the Cranes, but they went ahead and contributed a sum of 7,000 Kenya shillings. I wish to thank them very much.

I would now like to give the following answers in response to the questions raised. The first question raised the concern of the absence of a vote for sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports. The hon. Member would like to know what plans I intend to put in place to reverse this state of affairs.  

Government does provide funding for sports through the National Council of Sports. The National Council of Sports is a structure established by an Act of Parliament of 1964, to develop, promote and control all amateur sports. 

Government funding through National Council of Sports, since the financial year 1995/96 to date, has been approved and released as follows:  
In the 1995/96 financial year, the National Council of Sports had budgeted Shs. 832 million, however, 805,584,334/= was released.  

In 1996/97, Shs. 3,409,941,810 was budgeted, 842 million shillings was approved, and 735,280/= was released. 

In 1997/98, again the National Council of Sports budgeted for 3,316,280,000/=, but Shs. 532 million was approved and 519,800/= was released.  

I would like to assure Members that I will avail these figures afterwards so that later on they can become part of the records.  

In 1998/99, again 3,778,758,120/= was budgeted for, however, 532,000,000/= was approved and only 484,275,000/= was released. 

In 1999/2000, 2,963,316,000/= was budgeted for. Again 532,000,000/= was approved and 414,000,000/= was released. 

This financial year, 4,058,302,000/= was budgeted for, and 542,000.000/= was approved.  We do not know how much is going to be released.  

The above budgetary provision includes the salary and wage bills for the staff of the National Council of Sports. You may recall that during the presentation of the Ministerial policy and budget statement, we did inform Parliament that the National Council of Sports requires over three billion Uganda shillings to be able to support the sports programmes, and yet it receives only 18 percent of its request. With the approved budget, you will realise that a lot of the sports development programmes cannot be implemented. We have therefore, got to prioritise even from priorities. This definitely has adverse effects on sports performance, which I would like us to acknowledge as a national issue.  

While the National Council of Sports receives about 500,000,000/= on average a year, since the 1997/98 financial year the football programme alone needs 1,072,680,000/=. So, you can see that the 500,000,000/= is not even enough to fund the football programme. I have a detailed breakdown for the football programme. I request Members to look at them when they get them –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to lay that document on the Table?

MR. OMONY OGABA: Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will lay it on the Table. 

There is limited infrastructure at the Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters. The office of the Minister of State for Education and Sports received facilitation from the headquarters. 30 percent of the UPE capital grant is provided for co-curricular activities.  Guidelines from the Ministry of Education and Sports specify that a portion of this money should be spent on sports.  

The Ministry also makes special interventions to fund specific sports activities and events. For example, five million shillings and three million shillings were given in 1998 and 1999 respectively as contribution to the post primary football competitions. Davis Kamoga was given support for the pre-Olympic training in Italy, and over 30 million shillings was spent between November 1999 and July 2000 on the process of developing the national sports policy. 

Apart from the direct funding from Government, sports associations get some funding from international federations, gate collections and limited private sponsorship.  The current trend of thinking, however, the world-over, is to encourage private sponsorship of sports events. Uganda, like many other countries, is yet to achieve this dream. This is true in light of the fact that our private sector is at the development stage and whatever contribution is coming therefrom is still minimal. In the meantime, our funding is basically from Government.  

Allow me now to report on the plans that the Ministry of Education and Sports has made so far for the development of sports.  

Sports policy:  
A draft policy document is now in place. A national sports conference, to which various stakeholders were invited, took place at the end of May 2000 to discuss the draft policy. We are currently fine-tuning the policy in preparation for presentation to Parliament. Let me emphasise here that the sports policy has addressed the concerns of Parliament in many respects, for instance, raising the level of funding. We are thinking of introducing a special tax, but of course this is going to be approved by both Cabinet and Parliament. 

Other areas are ensuring accountability and transparency in the management of Government-sponsored and donor funds, instituting cost recovery principles in using sports facilities and equipment. There is also encouraging commercialisation and professionalism of sports, encouraging sports associations to invest in income generating activities, encouraging the private sector and donors to invest in sports, and developing methods for marketing sports.  

The institutional arrangement for the implementation of sports has also been identified. That includes identifying the role of players, specifying the different roles right from the Ministry level to the grassroots level. 

We have also noted the absence of a sports department in the Ministry of Education and Sports. So the initial work on the creation of a sports department has started.  The personnel in the Ministry of Education and Sports are studying a draft proposal and job description. This, however, has to fit in the framework of the sports policy.  

Members will recall that I made reference to the National Council of Sports Act of 1964. The 1964 Act of Parliament that established the National Council of Sports needs to be reviewed. First, after 35 years there are definitely a lot of changes and developments which necessitate the review of the Act. Secondly, the establishment of a sports department in the Ministry of Education and Sports implies defining the roles of both the National Council of Sports and the sports department.  

In conclusion, I would like to say that the Ministry of Education and Sports has moved a step forward by putting in place a sports policy, although it is still in a draft form. The sports policy will now guide the review of the National Council of Sports and create a sports department in the Ministry. In the interest of Members who have taken interest in sports, I thought I should give an elaborate answer to that question.  

The second question I am going to answer was raised by the same Member. He asked whether as a Minister I am satisfied with the soccer management in the country, and if I am not, what I intend to do. 

The administration and management of sports in general in the country –(Interruption) 

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, our rules provide for supplementary questions. Would it not be procedurally correct for us to ask supplementary questions before the Minister moves to the second question?

THE SPEAKER: You are quite right. Let us deal with the first question.  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before asking for clarification, I would like to express my disappointment with the revelation by the Minister that up to now there has been no department of sports in the Ministry. If there has been no department of sports in the Ministry of Education up to now, and you are just working on it, what kind of staff has the Minister of State been using in the Ministry? What infrastructure has been there to help sports administration in that Ministry? The responsibility of sports was transferred to this Ministry as far back as almost eight years ago, what has been happening in that Ministry as concerns sports?  Actually, no wonder we are doing so badly! 

The Minister has given us a series of budget proposals, and each year they are cut down. Apart from being cut down so much, even less than what is approved has actually been released! And yet every time the Minister of State for Education talks to the public and stresses the fact that Government is very concerned about sports and supports sports vigorously! Is it not fair, therefore, to say that the Ministry and the Government have really been giving lip service to sports?  

I would also like to thank those who attended the match between the Cranes and the Harambee Stars in Nairobi. I had hoped that the Minister would actually mention that those hon. Members were already in Nairobi for a meeting, so that the impression is not given that they actually travelled from here to attend the matches.  Thank you. 

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are aware that when the department of sports was transferred from the then Ministry of Gender and Youth to the Ministry of Education, the intention was to enable the department to tap the talents from schools all over the country. The Minister has not given us any plans, at all, by the department to tap talents from these schools. Is there any plan? Can he clarify to us whether he has any plans, at all, to ensure that he taps sports talents from schools all over the country? I thank you. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister responsible for sports two supplementary questions, but before that, I would like to thank him for his answers. 

The first supplementary question is with regard to the functions of the National Council of Sports. The National Council of Sports was established some 34 years ago by an Act of Parliament. But the operation of the National Council of Sports has been irregular for many years. 

I did serve as a member on the National Council of Sports, and I saw how irregular its operations were and have continued to be. Even though the Act has not been reviewed, what action is the Minister putting in place to ensure that some of the basic functions of the National Council of Sports are sustained with proper financial support from the Ministry responsible for this body? The National Council of Sports is very important for the development and promotion of sports in the country.  

My second supplementary question is with regard to the plan the Ministry has to assist schools develop basic infrastructure for sports. Indeed, when I was on the council, we recommended that the department of sports, which was then in the Ministry of Culture and Community Development, be transferred to the Ministry of Education. The basis of that action then, and even now, was to use the Ministry to tap the talents in schools. But you cannot tap those talents if you do not have the infrastructure like physical facilities and trained sports masters. What plan has the Minister got in place to address this concern, even though the master plan for sports may not be on the drawing board yet? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We used to have an Aloi-Lira marathon in the 1960s. It used to be organised sometime around September. I just want clarification from the Minister as to whether he intends to revive this marathon, which I think, is one way of identifying sportsmen who can represent us at international levels. Thank you. 

DR. KAKUNGULU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask this question following the disastrous performance by our various teams at the Olympics. Countries that are serious about sports have either fired the officials of the entire Olympic committees or the coaches and managers. It is unfortunate that our delegations have more officials than actual sportsmen, which is an absolute shame, because it is a drain on the national resources. Mr. Minister, have you considered firing all these officials so that we have new faces with a new outlook towards running sports in this country?  I thank you.  

MR. KANYIKE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that 30 percent of the UPE funds are committed to sports, and the Minister has revealed the same fact here. Could the Minister assure the House whether there is a system in place to look at how these funds should be utilised?  This is important to some of us, because as we visit schools and go for sports activities, the first issue that comes up is that most of these schools do not have sports equipment. They do not have footballs, gloves, nets and equipment like that. Is there a system in place to assist the schools on how to utilise these funds? Thank you.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the Minister to clarify as to whether, for the last eight years, he has been working without any policy regarding sports. 

Secondly, what was our performance in the Olympics in Australia? Surely, we deserve to be told why we performed badly or whether we achieved anything. And what is our target in the current budget or for the current Olympics?  What are we targeting as far as sports is concerned?

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to add my voice to those who have contributed to this issue. I would like to start by thanking the Ministry of Education, particularly the section that handles sports, for the way they recently handled the Ugandan child who put Uganda on the map in San Diego, Chile during the junior Olympics. That is Dorcas Inzikuru. I am sure every one has been seeing pictures of this lady. She was well received by the Ministry of Education, particularly by the Minister responsible for sports. I am delighted because of this, and I wish this would be the case every time. 

As I said in a statement I issued in Entebbe, our nation should learn to be proud of her children, regardless of what age. If there were Olympics for old people, I would like to try. And if I was to try and I won, Uganda should be proud of a person of my age. Some people will say that I am blowing my own trumpet, but if I have bought the trumpet with my own money, I do not want anybody to blow it for me.  This girl was actually dismissed from Mvara Secondary School because of lack of fees. It just happens that I was there at that material time. It could have been anyone of you. I said I would do everything possible to check on my colleagues and friends so that we keep this girl in school. 

If this girl was dismissed just because of lack of school fees, we would never have had this Uganda flag flying high. Why can’t we move with a definite principle in place, to look out for our children who can make it, and then attract them and facilitate them? There are so many Inzikurus in Kapchorwa, in Kisoro, in Bundibugyo, in Buganda, in Acholi land, in Bunyoro and all over Uganda, but we will not be able to see them unless we go and look for them. Schools cannot enjoy Namboole -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ajeani, this is not a debate. What you should be doing is either to ask a supplementary question or some clarification from the Minister. From the way you are proceeding, however, it is as if you are debating the issue.

DR. AJEANI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You are guiding me very well. I had just came in and I thought we were still debating. Now that you have reminded me that we are not debating, may I ask the Minister responsible for sports what exactly he has put in place in as far as looking for Ugandans with potential is concerned. What do you have in place to aid fertile areas like Mvara Secondary School, which has already produced a gold medal for this country on its own, without your assistance? What reward is there for such schools, like equipment for improvement of sports?  Thank you very much.

MR. NJUBA: I would like the Minister to inform the House about the allegation that one Atuhairwe, the swimmer who did some mischief in Sydney and was subsequently acquitted, did not in the first place qualify to go to the Olympics. Somebody else had qualified. Is the Minister aware, and if so what disciplinary action has he taken against those who practise such corruption?  

MR. OMONY OGABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Ongom asked if there has been no department of sports and what kind of staff the Minister is using. 

When I was appointed a Minister and I moved in to take my duty, I was assigned a senior assistant secretary to work with me and handle the sports desk in the Ministry of Education and Sports. There is, however, the inspectorate of schools, which also handles sports in schools. But as far as the staffing of the sports sector is concerned, indeed it is the senior assistant secretary, the staff of the inspectorate department and I who run the sports desk. We are limited, and that is why we are calling for a fully established department of sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

That also answers the question on what structure is there. Currently, I would say that there is no structure.  That is why earlier on I referred to a sports policy and a recommendation of a fully established department of sports to be created in the Ministry, thereby giving sports a structure. 

The other question was whether the Government is concern when the budget is being reduced. ‘Is the Government not only giving lip service?’ Members must appreciate the fact that there is a Minister in charge of sports. That is a clear indication that the Government is concerned about sports. The challenge, actually, is now for the Minister to make sure that sports is developed and it is focused on as an area of priority by Government. The absence of a sports policy and a department of sports also made it really difficult to have a clear budget presented in line with the action plan of the Ministry.  But the presence of a Minister is a clear sign that the Government is concerned with developing sports.

The Member went on to say that the hon. Members whose names I read were already in Kenya. That is true, but you can be in a place and if you are not interested, you will not take time off to go and attend something. These Members took time off to go and support the Cranes, which was playing. The team had suffered because they were being called ‘Ebola’, so I thought the moral support that they gave the Cranes was worth noting. 

Hon. Toskin asked about taping talents from schools and whether the Minister has got any plan. Indeed, if you go back to your copy of the Ministry of Education and Sports’ policy statement, on page 2 you will read that a lot of sports activities took place in various schools, post primary institutions, technical colleges, colleges of commerce and teachers’ colleges. So, it is not true that the Ministry does not have a plan for development of sports or for identifying talents in schools. I would like to inform you that Inzikuru Dorcas was identified through sports competitions in schools, and Webombesa, who comes from Kapchorwa, was also identified through sports’ competitions.

Hon. Okumu Ringa asked about the functions of the National Council of Sports. He said that their operations are haphazard. And he also asked how the functions of the National Council of Sports are being sustained. Well, the fact that National Council of Sports has a budget and the Government gives them money, is an indication that the Government is trying to make sure that the programmes of the National council of sports are sustained. So, the approval of the budget, however small it may be, is an indication that the National Council of Sports’ programmes must be sustained.  

On assistance to schools to develop sports infrastructure, I would like to say that sports infrastructure is very expensive. That is why we are trying to develop, in the sports policy, ways of raising funds to supplement Government funds and to help us develop infrastructure in schools. We are thinking of a sports lottery, specifically for raising funds for sports.  

Hon. Abura Kene asked what has happened to the Aloi–Lira marathon that used to take place. I would like to assure hon. Abura Kene that plans have already been made for the revival of the Aloi–Lira marathon. It is going to take place next year in July, because we would like it to climax the sports activities in the district. I would also like to inform you that last weekend I was in Lira and the managing director of United Assurance assured me that he would sponsor the Aloi–Lira marathon. We are also trying to revive the Bobi-Gulu marathon, which also used to be there. So, we are trying to revive activities and programmes that used to be and are no more. 

An hon. Member asked why Government could not fire the officials of the sports associations. It is true that Government has power to hire and fire, but it is also critical for factors that lead to poor performance to be critically analysed before we dismiss people. You must also bear in mind that the International Olympic Committee entertains as little Government interference as possible in sports associations. 

You will recall one of the local papers reporting on the Tanzania Football Federation, which dismissed their committee, and FIFA, which governors football, decided to suspend Tanzania from FIFA organised football matches because it believed that was Government interference. So, dismissing officials aimlessly might create more problems, but we are looking at all the problems that face sports so that we address them in a wholesome way.  

There was a question as to why there has been no sports policy up to now. That is a difficult question to answer, but you will agree with me that Uganda as a nation has been through political upheaval, which has also made it difficult for people to focus and come up with a sports policy. In light of the peace that we have now, and the fact that there is now a sector Minister in charge of sports, this has now helped us focus on areas that are weak in sports. Without policy you will not know where you want to go and what you want to achieve. 

‘What was our performance and what is the target for our next performance in respect to the Olympics?’ It is true that Uganda did not do as well as expected. We took 13 athletes including Davis Kamoga, Pascal Awori, Grace Birungi, Julius Acon, and Alex Malinga. For boxing, we had Jackson Asiku, Adam Kasim, Abdul Tibazalwa, Sunday M Kizito, and we actually had one Margaret Tumusime. For swimming we had Joe Atuhairwe and Supra. For table tennis we had Mary Musoke. So we had a total of 13 athletes. 

There were two officials who went for the athletics side, Benjamin Logiro, who is the coach, and Moses Twesigomwe, the manager, who is also vice-chairman of Uganda Amateur Athletics Association. In boxing we had two officials, Dick Katende, the Coach, and Vincent Byarugaba, the Manager. In archery we had George Tibamanya, the coach, and in swimming we had Fred Sendaula, the coach. In table tennis we had Tom Kiggundu, the coach. So, it was association officials who went with the athletes. 

We also have the administrative order of the general officials, which consisted of Mrs. Margaret Ojara from Ministry of Education and Sports, who was the chief de mission, that is the team leader. And then we had John Odyek, the acting secretary general of National Council of Sports, who was the general team manager. We had Dr. Sengendo Ntege, the team doctor. We also had Gideon Karyoko from Uganda Olympic Committee as assistant general manager, and Salim Senkungu Musoke, who is the treasurer of Uganda Olympic Committee. 

We also had Government officials who included myself, hon. Omony Ogaba, Minister of State for Sports as you all know. From the Uganda Olympic Committee we had Maj. Gen. Nyangweso, who is also a member of the International Olympic Committee, and G.W.J. Oloka, a general secretary at the Uganda Olympic Committee. 

We also had international judges. We were lucky that we had two Ugandans who served as judges. There was David Agong for boxing and General Omara for archery. 
So, in brief, those were the athletes and the officials –(Interruption)

MR. KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Minister for giving way. Judging from what we have heard, we have now confirmed that the officials were obviously more than the athletes. However, I would like to get clarification as to who paid for all these officials. Is it the Uganda Government that paid for them or were some catered for by other bodies?

MR. OMONY OGABA: The International Olympic Committee met costs. So, it was not entirely the Uganda Government that met the costs. Members of the Olympic Committee like the assistant general manager, Karyoko, and Musoke, the secretary, normally have meetings when the Olympics are taking place. So, by virtue of their positions, it was inevitable for them to go.

I would like to thank hon. Ajeani very much, for recognising the role of the Ministry of Education and Sports, when he said that as a nation we should be proud of achievements regardless of age. Indeed, as a nation we are proud of the achievements regardless of age. I want to assure you that we are proud. You will agree with me that as Minister of State for Education and Sports, I requested you to read an official message during the arrival of Inzikuru in Arua. That is an indication that the Government recognises achievements, regardless of age.  

On talent identification, I have already enumerated the various sports programmes that schools have. That helps identify talents in schools. The Ministry's biggest challenge now is to identify talents in the community.  This is the area we are going to move in. You will agree with me that with decentralisation, the local governments should be required to help in organising sports activities in communities. The schools are already catered for, but the communities are not. I have already written letters to chairpersons of LC.V of the 45 districts that we have. I have asked them to move and organise sports activities in their districts.  

Hon. Ajeani also asked what rewards the Ministry or Government is going to give schools like Mvara SS. First of all, Mvara has already earned a name by virtue of Inzikuru’s achievement in winning gold. Secondly, we shall see how Mvara can help identify talents, not only in schools, but even in the community around the schools.  I cannot be specific here, because this is still on the drawing board.

Allow me to inform Members that through the efforts of the Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Council of Sports, Makerere University has now accepted to introduce sports science as a degree programme. This indeed is an achievement. I think we shall now have elite athletes in this country, something that we have not been having.  

Those were the supplementary issues that were raised, and if - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is one more. I think the hon. Njuba asked something specific about an incident involving one of the Ugandan athletes.

MR. OMONY OGABA: Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Joe Atuhairwe was one of the Uganda athletes who participated in the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games. In the past, the National Council of Sports was involved in selecting athletes but this time I said ‘no, as a National Council of Sports you do not know who the best are, let the associations select the best performers’. So, Uganda Swimming Association selected Joe Atuhairwe and forwarded his name to the Uganda Olympic Committee. The Uganda Olympic Committee, after going through the records, accepted that Atuhairwe represents Uganda. So, he was among the athletes that left for Adelaide for a month's training on 31st August 2000.  

I would also like to report on the allegations of sexual assault. As a background, the athletes were in Adelaide for one month from 31st August. According to the official team manager, Fred Sendaula, the one-month's training in Adelaide was successful with no cases of indiscipline. The team arrived in Sydney on 1st September ready for the Olympic Games. The actual competition started on 16th, so the athletes were in Sydney for a complete two weeks and some two days. So, up to the opening ceremony, there were no cases of indiscipline. 

Joe Atuhairwe was eliminated from competition at his first meet, which was on 16th. In the afternoon of 20th September 2000, the chief-de-mission received a call from the Press requesting for a comment about the sexual assault by one of the Ugandan officials. This came as a shock. An urgent meeting was called to find out if there was any truth in that inquiry. From the meeting it was established that no official was involved in such an act.   

The search then turned on to the athletes. The boxers then informed the officials that it might be Joe Atuhairwe because he stayed out till late in the night.  The attaché to the Ugandan team, John Donahor, had advised us that if there was any truth to the matter, it would be better to send the concerned person back to Uganda urgently. However, when Joe Atuhairwe was confronted with this issue, he vehemently denied any involvement in any sexual assault. The officials, however, suspected that he was not telling the truth because he begun lying about where he was and what time he came back. So, after this he was confined within the village. His accreditation card was withdrawn, and he was told that he was only allowed to go for meals in the company of the officials. Ten minutes later, Joe left the House and never returned that night. Officials tried to get him through his mobile phone, but he was not receiving calls. 

The following morning the police came in to investigate. Knowing the gravity of the matter, and realising that Joe had run away, the officials contacted the Consul General for Uganda in Australia, Mr. Philip Onek, for his advice and assistance. He was able to talk to Joe and convince him to hand over himself to the Police instead of getting arrested while on the run. This he did in Adelaide. 

He first appeared in court in Adelaide because, as you may be aware, Australia runs a federal system of government, so Adelaide is in a different State from Sydney. He was produced in court in Adelaide, so that consent was got to have him transferred to Sydney. On that same night, after the transfer, he appeared in court in Sydney. The officials were able to get lawyers to represent him with the help of the Australian Olympic Committee. Dr. James Lukabyo, a Ugandan, who is now in Australia, stood surety of 20,000 Australian Dollars and he made arrangements with the Salvation Army to offer Joe accommodation until his case was heard. He appeared in court on 19th October 2000 and was acquitted of the charges. So, this is the report on Joe. He had a return air ticket, so he was not left without a return air ticket.  

Allow me also to inform Members that three of the boxers we went with remained in Australia and have become professionals -(Mr.Kanyike rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we still have a second question. So, you better take that into account. Didn’t he respond to your question, hon. Kanyike?

MR. KANYIKE: Mr. Speaker, the Minister did not respond to the question as to whether there are guidelines regarding the 30 per cent funds under UPE. This was in view of the fact that we do not see this money being utilised on the ground, and we keep on buying the balls ourselves.

MR.  OMONY OGABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Member for reminding me about that. There are guidelines on how to use the 30 percent to cater for sports, music and drama in schools. The school management and parents are also supposed to monitor how these funds are used. There can be problems when you find a head teacher of a school who is not interested in sports, but more interested in drama. In such a case, more money can be allocated for drama at the expense of sports. But I would like to appeal to Members to also take interest in monitoring the use of this 30 percent, and to take into account the quality of sports equipment that is bought using the 30 percent.   

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification in relation to the Minister’s answer on the Atuhairwe issue. I am not interested in his sexual exploits, but the Minister did not seem to have answered the basic question put by hon. Njuba, and that is the fact that it was rumoured or there was a complaint that, in fact, he was not the best swimmer taken. Although the Minister said his association selected him, did the Ministry try to investigate the allegation that he was wrongly chosen? I think that question was not answered.  

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG: Mr. Speaker, whereas the Minister has tried his level best to give an explanation on the Atuhairwe issue, I just want to know about the appeal he sent back to Uganda. The appeal was to donors to send about 20,000 dollars to bail out Atuhairwe, whereas in Australia there is a doctor who stood surety. Can he explain to us why he convened a donors’ conference and then again sent back the appeal to Uganda?

MR. OMONY OGABA: Mr. Speaker, the All Africa Games, which took place in South Africa, were also supposed to be treated as competitions for qualification for Olympics.  However, none of the swimmers who went to South Africa qualified. On the basis of wild card, this is a card given by the International Olympic Committee to the Uganda Olympic Committee, one male swimmer was to be selected. 

Indeed, I received a letter from Mrs. Luberenga, complaining about her son being left out and yet he was supposed to be the best. I tried to inquire about this from the Uganda Olympic Committee, and I was informed that the Uganda Olympic Committee assisted Mrs. Luberenga’s son to go to London to practice and also participate in swimming competitions to see whether he would qualify. The report they got from the British Olympic Committee was that the boy did not qualify. So, perhaps that was the basis on which Atuhiarwe, who later on performed better in various events, was favoured by the UOC.

I did not understand the second question about the donors’ conference, Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the question was, if there was someone who was ready to stand surety for him, which is actually what happened, according to you, why did this young man hold a donors’ conference to raise 20,000 dollars.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG: Mr. Speaker, it was reported in the papers. I forget the debate, but it was the Minister of State for Sports who sent word from Australia appealing for donors to give 20,000 dollars to bail out Atuhairwe.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Minister is the one who convened a donors’ conference.

MR. OMONY OGABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is not true that I held a donors’ conference. When the incident happened, I faxed a message to my senior Minister asking for guidance as to what steps we should take. He sought legal advice, and his advice was that the due process of the law in Australia should be allowed to take place.  

Raising 20,000 dollars was a problem because there was nobody who could volunteer to raise it. We approached the International Olympic Committee and they also declined.  But there was no donors’ conference. What happened was that Dr. James Lukabyo, who is a lecturer at one of the universities in Sydney, and now, in fact, a citizen of Australia, accepted to sign a bond of 20,000 dollars. So, there was no donors’ conference, he voluntarily came out to sign the bond.

THE SPEAKER: We will now go to the second question. Hon. Members, I am receiving quite a number of requests from Members to depart from the House for some other engagements. But I would like to say that we have two Bills, which we have got to take decisions on. And if you are not in the House, you cannot take the decisions that we are supposed to take. I thought I should remind you about that. If you are not in the House you know what it will mean. It will mean that we will not be able to take a decision.  Can we proceed with the second question?

MR. OMONY OGABA: Mr. Speaker, the second question asked by hon. Sam Njuba, was in relation to the federation of Uganda Football Association. He asked whether I am satisfied with the soccer management in the country, and if not, what I intend to do. 

The administration and management of sports in general in the country is problematic. This is one of the many problems of sports, which has been of major concern to me as Minister of State for Education and Sports. I have had to intervene and broker on many management problems from associations, federations and sporting bodies. 

I also realised that we were operating without regulations. Although we had the 1964 Act of Parliament that established the National Council of Sports, there were no operative laws, and implementing the National Council of Sports Act continued to be a problem. The absence of the policy was also a problem, because there was no way one would know how to guide sports. For this reason, I constituted a task force to write a sports policy. The draft sports policy has been written and the issue of poor management and administration of sports has been addressed. 

The strategies to be used to improve management and administration of sports in the country as identified in the policy document are:

    1. To review and adjust terms and conditions of service of sports managers and administrators.
    2. To improve the working environment of the managers and administrators.
    3. To invest in the trading of sports managers and administrators.
    4. To enhance managerial skills of sports managers and administrators. 
    5. To establish and strengthen institutions providing management and administration of sports.
    6. To build capacity to manage and administer sports at all levels.

I am definitely not satisfied with the management of soccer in this country, hon. Members. I do acknowledge that FUFA has questionable standards in those international contributions, and things like gate collections are not satisfactorily accounted for. The measures that the Ministry of Education and Sports has taken to address the issue of sports management and administration will be applicable to all sports, soccer inclusive.  

What plans have I put in place to ensure that FUFA is accountable and is better managed? The issue of accountability and transparency is very vital in the development of sports. Our ability to raise our level of funding from international bodies and the private sector is dependent on how wisely we spend such money.  Accountability and transparency is therefore a priority to the Ministry. 

With regards to FUFA following the recommendation from the Parliamentary Committee on Social Services to institute a probe into the resource management of this body, I have been pushing for this to happen. The delay in constituting the probe committee was due to the fact that the Ministry of Education and Sports had to seek guidance from the Solicitor General on the procedure for establishing the commission of inquiry. 

The rate to be paid to members from the Ministry and the person to undertake the task have all been finalised, and a Cabinet Memorandum has been prepared to be tabled before Cabinet for approval. Once the commission of inquiry is in place, it will establish whether the issues raised by hon. Sam Njuba and also by the public are true or not. The recommendations from the inquiry will also help the Ministry to take appropriate action.

I was also asked how I was going to ensure that the current FUFA leadership holds the annual general meeting as enshrined in its constitution. Hon. Members, the annual general meeting already took place on Saturday, 21st October 2000.

The third part of the question was on why FUFA, for reasons best known to itself, refuses to take decisions on certain matches, thereby fuelling tension and rivalry between football teams within the country. Hon. Members, decision making is a management skill that should be acquired by individual managers. I have already noted that management and administration of sports is a problem in this country. That is why we would like to address the question of capacity building for better managers and decision-makers. The sports policy has addressed this, and I believe that with time we should be able to change the attitude of our sports managers and even do away with politics of intrigue and uphold those values that will promote sports.

Finally, hon. Members, I would like to reiterate that much as the Ministry, through my office, has struggled hard to ensure the smooth running of sports in this country, this has been hampered by the fact that the 1964 Act of Parliament that established National Council of Sports is very old. That is an issue that I have referred to several times. The review of the Act should be able to address many issues that pertain to scientific management and development of sports. 

I wish to thank hon. Members of this august House for the interest and support they have given me in the development of sports in this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, by the time we adjourned last time, we were not able to raise a quorum to proceed to the next stage of The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 1997. We are still in the same difficulty. We do not have a quorum, and even if we had one, we would not take on this particular item. We would take on the next item, because I am informed that the hon. Minister is on his way from outside the country, where he went on official duty. So, we would proceed to consider the next Bill, whose Committee Stage is also pending, because we were also not able to raise quorum then. We have ascertained that there is still no quorum as yet –(Mr. Karuhanga rose_)- Well, hon. Karuhanga, before you come up with your point of clarification, I am now advised that we have managed to raise quorum. Proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I was surprised that there is no Minister to handle the pending business we have. According to our rules, it is clear to me that there should be no shortage –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I said the Minister concerned.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, but there should be somebody holding that portfolio. So, I would expect us to continue and dispose of the very short business on COMESA, and then move on to other businesses. The Prime Minister is here, and there is a Minister in front of me –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, if the Minister requested that he would like to deal with the matter, I think we should give him that opportunity. Is that all right?   

MR. KARUHANGA: The problem, Sir, is setting a precedent where we are constrained from carrying on business because the Minister requested. I really do not see why the Minister requested, because the Minister presented the Bill! The chairman was there, the Bill was debated, we literally concluded it and it is only a question of voting and going into the Third Reading.

THE SPEAKER: But weren’t we supposed to go to the Committee Stage?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, Sir. In any case, –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, are you really serious about this matter? A Minister has said that he is on his way and he will be here tomorrow, and we have some other business to occupy us. Is there really a serious problem?

MR. KARUHANGA: No, Sir. I have no objection if you have ruled. I was just worried about setting a precedent.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, we will examine each case according to its own merit. Now there is another complication. It seems we are going to do what hon. Karuhanga was talking about. The chairperson of the Committee is not around. Are the deputy chairperson or some other members of the Committee around? 

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the way items are listed on the Order Paper, what we should be going to now is the Third Reading of the Bill. Since the debate has already been concluded, and the chairman and the Minister have already concluded – (Interjections)- I thought that is what has already happened. 

THE SPEAKER: If we are going to deal with the next business, the Minister is around. We are going to the committee stage and then clause by clause. And the Committee has produced a lot of amendments. I think this goes up to clause 109 or something. Is there any member of the Committee who dealt with this Bill?  

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I am ready to proceed. The majority of the amendments here are actually Committee amendments. If there is somebody from the Committee to spearhead them, we are ready to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: Members of the Committee, is there anyone who can handle the amendments?

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I am a member of that Committee, and there are several members of the Committee here. But there may be a number of other issues, which we have not internalised ourselves, because we were not always present when changes were being made. So, I think it is unfortunate.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill we have before us, which is the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, is a very important Bill. In the absence of the chairperson and deputy chairperson, I would like to implore the House to differ this particular item and then we tackle it later tomorrow, because it is not fair to pass a bad law, which will tomorrow require amendments. That is my proposal, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is a pity that we have found ourselves in this position, because the amendments are the Committee’s amendments. If the Committee is not ready to defend them because of the absence of the chairperson and vice chairperson, there is no way we can proceed.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, since the chairman for the Committee is not around, there is notice of business to follow, that is the Condominium Property Bill, 2000. It has been long overdue, and the chairman and Minister are here. So, why don’t we continue with that and wait – (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am very apprehensive about dealing with important matters in Parliament piecemeal. We have two Bills, which have reached their committee stages, but because of these technicalities, we could not go further.  Now you want us to add more Bills on top of those! 

DR. PHILLIP BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, some members of the Committee are present. They may not have actually internalised all the amendments, which are about 90, but at least they have internalised a reasonable number of them. I humbly request we proceed and stay over some – (Applause).  

MR.OBIGA KANIA: Mr. Speaker, I think you have extensively consulted the Members on the procedure to follow in this House. The discretion of how this House should proceed is finally yours. I strongly suggest that you exercise it and make a ruling on how the House should proceed.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Sir. I really pray for your indulgence, as a member of the Business Committee, who attends meetings where we fix these programmes, and aware of the problems and the timing that confronts us. The business to follow is clearly spelt out on the Order Paper, and the Minister is in the House and is ready to – (Interjections)- I think it will be a disservice for us to adjourn.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want to encourage a situation where we start on a Bill and then we suspend it half way through, and then we go to another and stop half way and then start on a third one. No, I am not going to allow that!  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amendments in the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill are very many. Some of them are just routine amendments. It is normal practice to even stay some amendments if you think you have no competence to handle them. The vast majority of them are routine amendments. And, by the way, I talked to the chairman of the Committee and the Minister, and they totally agreed on the amendments –(Interjections)- this is what I was told –(Interjections)- I should be protected, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will protect you, but I really would like to tell you that there is no chairman to guide us through the very many amendments, which have been proposed by the Committee. We cannot bend the rules especially in a situation where we have many amendments made by the Committee. I do not think we can proceed. I am not happy about starting on some other business or another Bill when we have two Bills that we have not concluded. So, I will adjourn the House to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.18 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 2nd November 2000 at 2.00 p.m.) 

 
