Thursday 9th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is apparent that with our present numbers we will not be able to proceed to complete our deliberations on the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill, because we have to take decisions. We will stand consideration of the rest of the clauses until we are in a position to realise quorum.  This means that in order for us to save some time, and to profitably utilise time, we will be in a position to deal with the next business on the Order Paper. 

Before we go on, however, I would like us to stand for a moment of silence in memory of the late Kirenga, who, as you know, passed away. I think many of you were not around when we paid our last respects to him here, so this will be an opportunity for you to remember him.  

(The Members stood  and observed one minute’s silence in memory of the late Kirenga)

THE SPEAKER: You may resume your seats. 
Finally, I am sure some of you may have heard about the unfortunate accident involving one of our Colleague, the hon. Chebrot. I was informed that he sustained some injuries, but I do not know the degree or nature of the injuries. I am also informed that he has just been flown from Mbale by the Military and he is now in Mulago Hospital, Ward 6A. I shall take time off later, after we have finished with today’s proceedings, to go and see him

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Presidential Elections Bill, 2000” be read a Second time.  

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Proceed.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, Articles 98 to 110 of the Constitution provide for the Office of the President.  They also provide for his election to that office and the various procedures that should be followed. I am now referring particularly to Articles 102, 103, and 104.  These refer to qualifications of the President, election of the President and methods of challenging an election for a President. For that reason, we have this Bill, which is really procedural, to cater for the election of a President.  

This Bill is going to replace two Interim Acts, the Presidential Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute of 1996, number three, and the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute, 1996. These two are normally read together, for purposes of holding the elections of Presidents and Members of Parliament. 

The Bill seeks to provide substantive provisions for presidential elections similar to those contained in the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998, which was published in the Gazette of March 20, 1998 as Bill number five, 1998. It also seeks to provide other relevant provisions in electoral laws already enacted by this Parliament. 

As hon. Members no doubt have noted, the broad subjects are qualifications for elections as President, the mode of election and information to returning officers in society. These, again, are procedural. There is also nomination of candidates for election as President and many other subjects. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Presidential Elections Bill, 2000 was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on 21st September 2000 for scrutiny, in accordance with the Rules of the House. 

Background 
The National Resistance Council enacted the Presidential Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute, 1996. The authority to do so was derived from Article 264(b) of the 1995 Constitution, which reads as follows: 
“The appropriate organs of the NRM Government shall take such measures that are necessary or practical to give effect to the provisions of this Constitution and in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall – 
(b) make interim laws for elections and other matters connected with elections to any office under this Constitution”  

That law was therefore intended to provide for the 1996 presidential elections only. This Parliament is required, by Article 103(9), to make a law prescribing the procedure for the election and assumption of office by a President, hence the Presidential Elections Bill, 2000.

Methodology 
The Committee held discussions with the following:

1. The Minister of Justice and constitutional Affairs -(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to the presenter of the report, I arise on a point of procedure. Before I entered this House I had been told that copies of this very important report were available at the reception, but when I got there, I was told that the copies were not there. Is it proper for us to continue discussing a matter of public importance like this one when some Members do not have copies?

THE SPEAKER: How many Members do not have copies? Well, I think the majority have copies. But in any case, they can be provided anytime. If you check at a later date, you should be able to get one. I will instruct the Clerk’s office to avail you a copy.

MR. OGALO: And for the record, Mr. Speaker, these reports were actually made available yesterday. They were at the reception yesterday. They were not put there only this morning.

Methodology
The Committee held discussions with the following: 
    1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
    2. Mr. Mohammed Mayanja – President of Justice Forum
    3. Mr. Ocheger Nelson – President of the Action Party 
    4. The National Organising Committee for Civic Education and Monitoring(NOCEM)
    5. Uganda Joint Christian Council
    6. Action for Development
    7. Uganda Project Implementation and Management Centre
    8. State University of New York/Uganda Parliamentary Technical Assistance Programme(SUNY/UPTAP)
    9. Uganda Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA)
    10. The Uganda Journalists Safety Committee
    11. The Director of Public Prosecution

The Committee also received a written memorandum from Uganda people’s Congress.

Observations
There is now a practice by which intending candidates have to pay a fee as a qualification to stand for elective office. This was introduced as a method by which candidates would contribute to the cost of the electoral process. The money is treated as revenue and paid directly into the consolidated fund. It is not recoverable, whether the candidate is elected or not.  It is paid by each candidate, irrespective of income levels.  It acts as a measure by which a candidate shows his or her seriousness to contest for elective office. The suggested fee of 8m/= is high and prohibitive.

Campaign Period
The law fixes the campaign period within which the candidates must traverse the country canvassing for support.  The Bill proposes 60 days.  Uganda is presently divided into 45 districts, and all indications are that by the time of presidential elections there may be 51 districts. This means a day for each district and nine extra days. This time is clearly not enough for serious campaigns. All stakeholders, who presented their views to the Committee, proposed 90 days for this exercise.

Penalties
The Bill creates many offences attracting harsh sentences.  Some of these offences, for example making statements containing sectarian words or allusions, punish utterances by candidates or their agents. Canvassing support is primarily speaking, and there is need to balance the freedom to express oneself and maintaining law and order. The purpose of campaigning can be defeated if candidates fear to express themselves lest they are arrested, charged, convicted and sentenced to jail.

Financing
The Bill places a duty on the Electoral Commission to declare governments, institutions, bodies or persons from which or from whom a candidate may not raise funds for electoral campaigns. The Committee is of the view that the Electoral Commission is incompetent to do this.

Equal treatment of candidates
It is a constitutional obligation on the Electoral Commission to ensure free and fair elections. In order to achieve this, the process leading to elections must be seen to be fair to all candidates. The law must therefore level the ground and give equal treatment to all candidates. In this respect, the provisions of Article 67(4) of the Constitution should be reflected in the law. And that provision reads as follows: 

“Parliament shall make laws regulating the use of public resources and institutions during election campaigns.” 

However, it should be noted that an incumbent cannot cease carrying out the functions of the office of the President just because he or she is a candidate.

Second Election
Article 103 of the Constitution provides that a candidate shall not be declared elected as a President unless the number of votes cast in favour of that candidate at the presidential election are more than 50 percent of valid votes cast at the election. Where no candidate obtains this percentage, a second election shall be held within 30 days after the declaration of the results. At this second election, the two candidates who obtained the highest number of votes shall be the only candidates.

The Committee observed that the Bill is silent on this important aspect of the presidential elections. Where there are many candidates, it is highly likely that a second election may have to be held.

Recommendations
1. The Committee is of the view that it is improper to tax candidates who seek to offer their services. The fee should be treated as a refundable deposit, unless a candidate fails to obtain a prescribed percentage of the total votes cast. The sum of 8,000,000/= proposed in the Bill is prohibitive and can deter would-be candidates from contesting. Capability to manage public affairs should not be pegged on wealth.

The Committee recommends that the fee be reduced to 2,000,000/=, and that a candidate who fails to obtain 20 percent of the votes cast forfeits the deposit.

2. In view of the fact that it too late to afford more time to candidates in the 2001 elections, the Committee recommends that at least 90 days be provided for subsequent presidential campaigns. The Committee also recommends that a presidential aspirant should be allowed to go out to consult and prepare for nomination 12 months before the nomination day or days. This would also give the opportunity to the presidential aspirant to estimate the support he or she has in the country.

3. Many of the offences created are of a civil nature already provided for in the Law of Torts, and for which remedies are available. It is not necessary to criminalize civil wrongs and punish a candidate twice.  Furthermore, the prescribed sentences are too harsh. Though the discretion lies with the courts on whether or not to award the maximum sentence, courts take into account the maximum sentence that can be awarded in deciding the punishment.

4. The Electoral Commission does not have the capacity to determine which foreign governments, institutions, bodies or persons have demonstrated an intention to overthrow the Government of Uganda. Determination of hostility between Uganda and any other country is a function of the Executive and Parliament.   

5. The Committee recommends that the Minister of Public Service lays before Parliament a statutory instrument specifying what Government facilities are ordinarily attached to and utilised by a President.

6. The law should provide a procedure for a second election, in case no candidate obtains more than fifty percent of the total votes cast in the first election.

The Committee notes that it is a constitutional obligation for this Parliament to enact this Bill into law and supports the policy behind the Bill. Subject to amendments to be moved by the Committee and any other hon. Members, the Committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law.
I beg to report, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Motion. I would like to thank the Committee and the chairman of the Committee for the good work done.

On the on-set, I would like to thank the people of Uganda, who came out and exercised their fundamental human rights and constitutional rights, and turned up to vote in order to determine the destiny of this country.  I would like to thank the people for turning up in big numbers to determine whether this nation should go movement or multiparty. I think this was a very good exercise, in spite of the negative publicity that had been generated everywhere, urging people not to go for voting. It is amazing to note that even those who had asked people not to vote have now realised that the peoples’ power is paramount, and they have accepted the verdict of the people, and they are now registering to stand for presidency. So, I salute the people of Uganda for having taken up this challenge. 

I would like to comment on the issue of reducing the fees payable by an individual candidate to 2 million shillings from 8 million shillings. While I do appreciate that every office is competitive and that people can come up and stand for any office, I think that 2 million shillings is too little. It is very, very little. We should set a standard. This is the highest office in the nation, and anybody who wants to be the President of this country, I think, must be presentable, and we must gauge him by what he has. One of the problems that we have is people coming with nothing and they want to acquire wealth within five years –(Interruption)  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Sembajja for giving way. Hon. Sembajja is tackling a very important point brought out in this Bill, namely the capacity of a candidate to stand. Noting that he has mentioned that for someone to stand he should be well capacitated, does that mean that yardstick for being able to stand as a presidential candidate is affluence?  

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way. Some prospective candidates have already informed us that they have already mobilised something like 3 US dollars or 10 US dollars for the presidential campaign. Is the Member suggesting that we should wait and search for people like this as the possible candidates for the Presidents of this country?

MR. BWERERE KASOLE: Mr. Speaker, at any given level, people are measured according to what they have. Even recently, when hon. Lukyamuzi organised a wedding, it was not a wedding of a common man. It was a wedding befitting a Member of Parliament. So, why should we minimise? A person intending to be a President must measure up to the office just as hon. Lukyamuzi measured up to a wedding that befitted him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member. Hon. Sembajja has alluded to the fact that if somebody is poor and pays 2 million shillings, he will amass wealth. I just want clarification as to whether when he paid 200,000/= to stand for MP, he came here to amass wealth, because that worries me. Could he clarify on that?

MR. SEMBAJJA: I wish to thank all those who have given me information and those who would like clarification from me. Surely, if you cannot raise 8 million shillings how do you expect to lead a nation with a population of 20 billion people? You cannot raise 8 million shillings and you expect us to take you very seriously! Definitely we cannot take you very seriously. I think we should keep to the 8 million shillings so that we set standards.  

As far as what hon. Kaggwa said, we did not come here to amass wealth, but we came here to serve the people of Uganda. In the process, however, some people think that once they are elected President or MP they are going to amass wealth, otherwise, we were elected to serve the people of Uganda. So, I am appealing to hon. Members to reject this recommendation of reducing 8 million shillings to 2 million shillings. Let us stick to the original text.  

My second point is on civic education. The Committee consulted very many people on this matter. We have had many elections here in this country, but NOCEM, Uganda Joint Christian Council and all the other organisations that have assisted the Electoral Commission conduct civic education, have not done it to my satisfaction.  I think there is alot more to be done, and yet these people are funded with alot of money. Of course, they normally use the electronic media, but they do not go down to the grassroots to educate the people on how to vote and what is involved in the voting. They only wait until the polling day, that is when you see them appearing, and you wonder where these people have been. So, I think that the Electoral Commission should also play an active part in educating the people on how to vote, otherwise, we are going to have a problem. The fact that we are now going to have more than two candidates as opposed to what we had last year, and even many more candidates are coming, means we need to sensitise the public on how to vote and all the necessary indicators.   

On the campaigning period, I agree with the Committee that the 60 days is okay. Traversing the whole countryside requires a lot of time, and the aspiring candidates should get enough time to reach the people and to reach every corner of this country. Some places are inaccessible, so I agree with the Committee that 60 days is appropriate.   

I would also like clarification on what safeguards are going to be put in place in areas where there is insurgency and war. Very often these areas suffer because not many logistics go there in time. I think it is the duty of this Parliament to guide the Electoral Commission on how to proceed in those areas where there is insurgency, so that the logistics are in place. Logistics should be in place so that those people who stay in camps, for example, know where to vote and when to vote, so that we avoid what happened in the last elections.

Finally, on the registers, the chairman of the Electoral Commission has assured us that he is going to revise the register. Those of you who took part in the CA elections must have realised that very many people were ferried from Kampala to go and vote upcountry. The tendency these days is not to ferry people but to let people vote where they are staying. This means that the names of those people who were ferried from Kampala to go and vote upcountry during the CA elections still appear in those areas. Nobody has taken trouble to clean up the register, and that is why even during the referendum exercise, many people’s names appeared in those registers when actually, what was on the ground was not what was reflected in the register.  

The Electoral Commission has informed us that they are going to issue new cards. I think time is running out. If the Electoral Commission has to issue new cards to the voters, then Government or Ministry of Finance should release this money. This money should be released so that the Electoral Commission does the work as early as possible. People should not go to polling centres and they do not either find their names or there are no cards as has been the case before. 

With those few comments, I support the Motion. Thank you.

MR. KAZIBWE MUSISI (Ntenjeru South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to start by congratulating the Committee for the satisfactory work they have done, however, I would like to raise a few queries. 

First of all, the report says that the Committee held discussions with the president of Justice Forum and the president of the Action Party, among others. Who registered those parties? Does this mean that any body is free to register a party if the Committee was able to recognise that the Action Party and the Justice Party do exist? They say that during the time the Movement is in place, parties are not supposed to operate. So, how did Nelson Ocheger’s party come into existence? – (Interruption)  

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that as of now, there is no law requiring registration of political parties in this country.  

MR. KAZIBWE MUSISI: Does that mean that anybody is free to form a political party and declare himself a president of a party? This means that a party must have members who must have held a delegates’ conference to elect a president, thus negating the present situation. 

The Committee also received a memorandum from Uganda Peoples Congress. I do not know why DP, UPM and CP did not send their memoranda. We have a whole chairman of the Conservative Party – (Interruption)  

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Speaker, I just want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Democratic Party and the Conservative Party were all invited to come, but they did not turn up and we could not force them. It is only Uganda Peoples Congress that sent a memorandum.

MR. KAZIBWE MUSISI: If the chairman had put all that in his report, I would have known that he had extended the invitation –(Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I see here, on page one of this report, under methodology, that the Committee held discussions with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Now, I heard the hon. Member say that CP was never represented or consulted or did not have any input in this report. I would like to inform the hon. Member that, to the best of my knowledge, the current Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs also doubles up as the president of the Conservative Party.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kutesa, the reference to a discussion with Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had nothing to do with the Conservative Party. That is my understanding. The discussion was with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and not with the president of the Conservative Party.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make it clear, so that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi or Nsambu do not bring up other matters regarding the Conservative Party.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Kazibwe for giving way. Since I am the Secretary General of the party referred to, I thought I should give some information. The Conservative Party officially received the invitation but deliberately declined to attend the meeting. We were just not keen to present a memorandum.

MR. KAZIBWE MUSISI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank hon. Sam Kutesa for the information he gave, that hon. Mayanja Nkangi attended on behalf of CP. I had, however, always believed that hon. Mayanja Nkangi was overthrown from the Conservative Party and it is headed by hon. Nsubuga Nsambu. 

I do not support a nomination fee at all. The Committee has stated that this was introduced as a method by which candidates would contribute to the cost of the electoral process. Does this mean that the Government does not have enough money, so that it requires candidates to contribute to the electoral process? A country should hold an election and stand on its own feet without relying on the candidates. What is the budget? How many candidates are they expecting so that they can realise their estimated revenue?  

The Constitution says that there should be no hindrance for any Ugandan who wants to attain any political office.  This is a roadblock! The 8,000,000/- or the 2,000,000/- is a roadblock! You do not govern this country by using money, you use brains. So, I feel that this should be eliminated. We should instead look at the number of seconders one gets. They should say that if you get 200 from each constituency, you are legible to stand. We should not use money. Otherwise, we would hinder those intellectual Ugandans who can run this country just because they do not have the money.  

I support the recommendation of the Committee that in future presidential aspirants should be allowed to go out to consult and prepare for nomination 12 months before the nomination day. Otherwise, we would have a scenario like the Ssebagala scenario in Mbarara, whereby nobody is allowed to canvas for any votes until he is nominated.

I also support the Committee’s third recommendation, which says that many of the offences quoted are of a civil nature and already provided for in the Law of Torts, and remedies are already available. If we pass the Presidential Bill, which is very harsh, it will intimidate the would-be presidential aspirants. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to make a few comments on this Bill and on the recommendations. Before I start on the Bill, allow me to comment on what hon. Sulaiman Sembajja said about the turn up for the referendum. He said that there was massive turn up. I do not know whether he was living in this country. If anything below 50 percent is massive, definitely his ideas are completely different from the understanding of most people. Secondly, he said –(Interruption)

MR. SEMBAJJA: I wish to inform the speaker holding the Floor that because there were no other people who turned up to vote, those who turned up were massive - (Laughter).

MR. ONGOM: It is a rather queer way of reasoning. I thought we were comparing the voters’ list with those who actually voted? In any case, those who campaigned against voting during the referendum, including myself, did say very clearly that they would support the presidential and parliamentary elections. Therefore, it is not strange that we are now supporting them, like had been alluded to.  

I would like to agree with the Committee on their recommendation number two, that the time allowed for the presidential campaign is too short. I also agree with their recommendation that 90 days should be allowed for future elections. My concern is about the forthcoming election. First of all, we should have already passed this law long time ago to allow time for aspirants to canvass for support. But now that time is running out, although the recommendation is that we allow candidates to canvass or to consult 12 months before nomination day, we should also consider the remaining time for this forthcoming election, before the commissioner announces an official campaign date. 

I am only saying that as soon as we pass this law here, any aspiring candidate must be allowed to now go out and consult and canvass for support. Otherwise, the time that will be given to them will only be the 60 days, which we have admitted is not enough. I think we should be fair, even for this coming election.

I would also like to agree with the Committee that the fee of 8 million shillings is too high. Surely, we should not measure ability to run the country on whether somebody is already wealthy or not. He has to get this money from somewhere, and now that other candidates, apart from the incumbent, are not even allowed to go out and look for support, it is going to be very difficult for those who are aspiring to find money to deposit. And in any case, I do not agree with the argument that those who do not have money to deposit for election are likely to come to office merely because they want to make money.  If anything, the wealthy ones are the best looters in this country. We have examples –(Interjections) - No, I am not referring to anybody, but we know that even those who have been running the country, who claim that they were already rich, are still amassing wealth. I think, I will stop at that with this issue. I agree with the Committee that 8 million shillings is really too much.  In fact, even the 2 million shillings, which has been recommended, is still too high. Consideration should be given to having candidates pay a token fee of half a million shillings.

Another concern I have is with recommendation five. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service lays before Parliament a statutory instrument specifying what Government facilities are ordinarily attached to and utilised by the President. This concept of ‘ordinarily attached to the position of a Minister or an incumbent’ is a very difficult thing to manage, even if you know them. 

I think that some definite restriction should be put on the incumbents, because they already have too many advantages over those who are new. Right now, for example, if the incumbent wanted he would already be going round even before the Electoral Commission announces the date for campaigns. He would already be going around in the name of some project promotion and the like, when in fact he is already campaigning. 

We noticed this during several elections. Memoranda were already passed and all of a sudden there were some higher officials concocting projects to go and promote projects, which, anyway, they should have already been promoting long time ago. They draw a program to cover the whole country and at the end of it, you do not even see the results. During that promotion campaign you only hear things to do with the referendum election. They tell you to choose wisely, and yet they already have too many advantages.  

So, I think more restrictions, in as far as the use of public facilities is concerned, should be put on the incumbent. I have not yet worked out exactly what the restrictions should be, but perhaps we could talk about that when the Minister of Public Service brings the so-called list of facilities ordinarily attached to the incumbency. Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RONALD REAGAN (Aswa County, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, I also have a few concerns to raise, though I support the report of the Committee. In their methodology, the Committee came out with some list of names of organisations. I kept wondering at number three, which mentions the president of the Action Party. I do not know whether we legally have the Action Party existing in this country. 

On the period of campaign, I think we must be realistic. We know how difficult campaigns are. Even within a county, you cannot cover a campaign in one day. So, it would be extremely difficult for the presidential candidate to cover a district in one day. I do not buy the proposal of 60 days in the Bill. I would go with the Committee’s recommendation, of something like 90 days, but having given the candidates ample time to move and introduce themselves to all corners of the country.

On equal treatment of candidates, I think this must be clearly spelt out. I sometimes find a lot of problems in drawing a distinction between the continuity of the work of the incumbent and the presidential duties. As we approach the campaign periods, it becomes extremely difficult to differentiate between the two. I think this is partly the problem, because there is a lot of use of public funds in the name of presidential duties, and yet in the long run all these things are meant for the selfish interests of a presidential candidate. I think candidates should get equal treatment from all organs of the state.

The Committee’s first recommendation is on the sum of money that has been proposed by the Bill, and the Committee thinks that it should be reduced to 2 million shillings. I do not know whether this is constitutionally right, because I can stand up and challenge this. I am not supposed to contribute for contesting for an office. And I also think we should really be considerate. We are not going into a money venture. We should not put yardsticks of money as the only way of measuring seriousness. We have many people who can successfully carry out the ordinary duties of society without necessarily being rich people. So, I think this element of depositing some huge sum of money – eight million shillings - is really morally unacceptable, and I think it is also constitutionally unacceptable.  

In view of the next presidential election, I think we should speed up the process and allow the intending candidates ample time to visit all parts of the country, without any intimidation. There is already intimidation going on, because some people think they own Uganda so they should limit other people from expressing their interests in taking the office of the President. I think this is very unfortunate. Nobody owns Uganda. Everything belongs to all Ugandans. Everything in this country belongs to all of us, and we all have the right to move around the country and introduce ourselves as people who are interested in taking up the office of the President, and our views should be listened to. 

I would like to conclude by urging, especially the Executive, to watch out, because it would be very dangerous for the stability of this country if this element of blocking candidates and intimidating supporters of certain intending candidates continues in this country. I thank you.

MR. BAGALANA TOM (Bunya South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee very much for the noble work done in scrutinising this important law, which is going to determine the future of this country. I also want to give a few recommendations and make a few observations.  

First of all, concerning the nomination fees, I would like to say that, if is possible, let this Parliament recommend that the nomination fees be two million shillings. I say this because, as some members have mentioned, and as the Scriptures say, leadership comes from the Lord.  It does not come from money – (laughter)- If we say that those who can raise eight million are the only ones who are eligible to register as candidates, we are defeating the real purpose of leadership. If you read the history of Africa - I will not mention other continents - those prominent and successful leaders have come from grass-thatched houses, not to mention myself – (laughter)- They have come from homes where the realisable capital in cash and assets is not even one million.  

When I was coming to Parliament, I did not have one million shillings in all my assets and cash, but my people elected me because of the talent they saw in me – (laughter). That is why I say, as Ugandans, and as a Parliament, we should encourage the talent in a person, because if we look at money, we may defeat the purpose of which we were looking for in these leaders. We want celebrated brains, but it is not often that those who have celebrated brains have the money.  

I will leave that point and go to the point on facilitation. I beg this Parliament to agree with me that we support the candidates, who are going to stand, with 50 million shillings each. Every person should go with fifty million shillings or even more, as for he goes for his campaigns. I say this because when I looked at the Bill, it was recommending something like three hundred million for all the candidates –(Interruption)

MR. KYEMBA HENRY: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I am trying to appreciate the point the hon. Member is making to facilitate the candidates, but this country has already witnessed some candidates or groups of people coming up to claim the facilitation that Government provides. Given the fact that you are suggesting 50 million for any candidate who is standing, don’t you think, hon. Member, that this would provide an opening for a floodgate of all sorts of candidates who might hope to benefit from that exercise?  

MR. BAGALANA: Mr. Speaker, in reiteration to what the hon. Member is saying, I see 50 million as too little compared to what insecurity and political instability may cost a nation. If we say that 50 million shillings is too much and it will open the door to too many people, then we are leaving the national seed to only the incumbent. What can 50 million do in sixty days? That would mean one million per day, or less than one million per day. And the incumbent can raise more than one million shillings a day. So, we are trying to help those who are coming up with talent, to use meagre resources (50 million), so that they can also be able to compete favourably for the national seed. 

I would also like to advise this Parliament to recommend that this money comes directly from the consolidated fund. I do not believe in saying that we are going to pass 300 million for candidates, and then we put leave it to the Electoral Commission, and we say that is it all.  Let this money to facilitate candidates come from the consolidated fund. If possible, let this not be left to the Electoral Commission. 

Regarding the security and transport of candidates, we should not leave it to the Electoral Commission to decide how these people are going to be protected. I recommend that every candidate be availed eight security guards.  That means two for home, four for moving and two for office – (laughter) - I also recommend a strong four wheel drive vehicle for each candidate and a four-wheel drive pick-up. A land cruiser is so small for a candidate, but we could have a good four-wheel-drive vehicle, as this Parliament may determine. We want these people to move and be facilitated ably.

It is unfortunate that we are passing this law too late, otherwise, I would even expect this Parliament to request the Executive to give up all instruments of power, including the office, before the elections, so that the Chief Justice shall take charge of the nation before the elections. It is unfortunate that an aspirant goes to Iganga –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you aware of the provisions in the Constitution regarding elections, transition and ending of power?

MR. BAGALANA: Mr. Speaker, those are the jargons, which I am saying are really unfortunate. I actually started with the statement ‘it is unfortunate’. You cannot imagine somebody going to Mbale in a helicopter, he is received in a helicopter, and then another comes in a small Matatu and says ‘I am Godfrey Besigye, an aspirant’. The people will decide even before you talk. They will say that you are not capable.  

Let me just say something small before I wind up, and this concerns the voters’ registers. I recommend that three months before we go to the elections, the voters’ registers should be cleaned up so that candidates can look at these voters’ registers and scrutinise them with their agents. They should be able to see whether they are the true voters’ registers.

The other point, which is difficult to decide on, and which this Parliament should look at, is the presidential tours before elections. This issue has defeated the real purpose of democracy in this country. People keep quite, and yet they see what takes place. The President pre-empts campaigns. He moves around and then when the campaigns come, he has finished his campaign. So, these presidential tours before –(Interjections)- I am not against the President, but I am trying to look at the possibility of a clean field for campaigns. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let me stop there. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that when we stood-over consideration of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions’ Bill, it was because we were not in a position to go to the Committee Stage. Now, we are in a position to go to the Committee Stage because we have realised quorum.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

Clause 86

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira): Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 86(1) by substituting the expression “Board of Governors” with the expression “Governing Council, in consultation with the Education Service Commission” 

In clause 86(3), between the words “shall” and “institute”, appearing in the first line, we insert the expression “in consultation with the Governing Council”. 

In clause 86(4), between the words “the” and “committee” appearing at the beginning of the second line, we insert the word “appointments”. 

We also beg to insert a new sub-clause (5) as follows, and renumber the existing (5) as (6):

“The Governing Council shall, report the suspension to the Education Service Commission within the period of thirty days”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 86, as amended, agreed to

Clause 87

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 87(1), we beg to rearrange paragraph (c) as (a) and renumber the rest accordingly. 

In clause 87(6), we beg to substitute the first line, including the word “December” in the second line, as follows:
“The Governing Council shall, within three months from the beginning of the financial year”

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to

Clause 88

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 88 by substituting “31st day of December” with “30th day of June”, because the financial year ends in June.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to find out from the chairman whether the financial year would be the same as the academic year.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, there was an omission. The financial year of the institution should run at par with the financial year of Government, not January to June.  So, we should amend it to say that the financial year of a public tertiary institution shall be 12 months from the 1st day of July and ending on the 30th day of June.

MR. MWANDA: Is the financial year going to be same as the academic year?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the financial year will not be the same as the academic year. But, since these public tertiary institutions are funded by Government, the Committee felt that we should be in line with the financial year regulations of Government.

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Chairman, if the financial year of the institution starts at a different time, definitely the requirements at the beginning are usually different, and therefore, need funding. If we follow the Government financial year, institutions are bound to have problems. Many of the requirements that would probably be needed in January would not be funded, because the funds would be required say in July. So, I see that as a problem. I oppose the amendment.

CAPT. BARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform Members that, since this is a public institution, the money that will fund its programmes has to be voted for by Parliament. So, you cannot separate the budget of this institution from the budget of other institutions of Government, because it is funded by Government and it has to be passed by Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to

Clause 89, agreed to

Clause 90, agreed to

Clause 91

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the section we have just finished was dealing with financial provisions for public tertiary institutions. I propose that immediately before clause 91, we insert a heading as follows: 
“Part XVI - Other matters relating to public tertiary institutions.” 

I beg to substitute clause 91 (2) as follows: 
“The students association may make its own constitution with the approval of the Board of Governors.”

MR. MWANDHA: I have as small problem. I understand that the Committee changed the name of the body governing this university to governing council. Now the chairman insists that this should be board of governors. I do not know whether he wants to maintain board of governors or change it to governing council? This goes for both sub clause (1) and (2). Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, that was a slip of the tongue. It is a consequential amendment. We amended board of governors for public tertiary institutions to governing council. I am sorry for misleading the House. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to

Clause 92

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 92 (1) by substituting the words “Tertiary institutions” at the end of the clause, with the words “Academic staff”. 

I beg to substitute sub-clause (2) as follows: 
“The Academic Staff Association may make its constitution with the approval of the governing council.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 92, as amended, agreed to

Clause 93

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 93, we propose an amendment to insert a new sub-clause (1) and subsequently re-number the existing sub-clauses. The new 93(1) should reads as follows: 
“Tertiary institutions shall have a common seal, which shall be such a device as the governing council may determine.”  

Also, substitute the words “Board of Governors” or “Boards”, wherever they appear in sub-clauses (2) and (3), with the words “Tertiary Institution”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 93, as amended, agreed to

Clause 94, agreed to

Clause 95

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 95(1) by substituting the words “or company” with the words “firm, or organisation”, and substitute the word “post-secondary” with the word “tertiary”. 
The justification is that ‘person’ includes company but does not include a firm of partners or an organisation that may wish to start a university.  

The second amendment is to sub-clause (2) (a). We propose to insert the word “physical” between the words “name” and “location”.  

In the third amendment, which is to sub-clause (2), insert a new paragraph (c) as follows, and re-number the existing paragraphs:  
“the detailed financial base of the proposed University” 

In the fourth amendment to sub-clause 2(e), delete the word “finances” and substitute the word “resources” with the word “facilities”. 

In sub-clause (2) again, insert the following new paragraphs after paragraph (e), and re-number the existing paragraphs:
“(f) existing or proposed human resources including academic and senior administrative staff 
(g) existing or proposed physical infrastructure.”  

We further propose a new sub-clause (4) to clause 95 (2), to be inserted after sub-clause (3) as follows:  
“(4) A detailed report of the findings of the National Council under subsection (3) shall be submitted to the Minister.” 
We thought about this so that the Minister is kept abreast with all the developments.   

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us go amendment by amendment, because they are fairly many. There is a substitution of words in the first amendment. After that we shall go to item two sub-clause (2). I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The second amendment, which is to sub-clause (2)(a), is to insert the word “physical” between the words “name” and “location”. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: There is yet another amendment on sub-clause (2), to insert a new paragraph (c) as follows: “the detailed financial base of the proposed University”  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The fourth amendment is to delete the word “finances” and substitute the word “resources” with the word “facilities”. That is an amendment to sub-clause (2) (e)

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The fifth amendment is to insert new paragraphs after sub-clause (2)(b) and renumber the existing paragraphs. Hon. Minister, do you have any objections?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I agree to the insertion of the new paragraphs and to the re-numbering of the existing paragraphs.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: A new sub-clause (4) after the existing sub-clause (3).

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 95, as amended, agreed to

Clause 96, agreed to

Clause 97

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 97(b) by inserting the expression “and public print media notify the University of the intention to” between the words “Gazette” and “suspend”.  

The second amendment to clause 97 is to insert a new sub-clause (4) after sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “The suspension or revocation of a license under this section shall not affect the validity or other status of any certificate, diploma, degree or other academic award granted by the University in question when still under provisional license.”  

THE CHAIRMAN: We start with the first amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, any objection to the second amendment?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 97, as amended, agreed to

Clause 98, agreed to

Clause 99.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 99(2) by adding a new paragraph, (h), to read as follows:  “the names of the proprietors of the University”. 
We think that the proprietors must be known.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 99, as amended, agreed to

Clause 100

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 100 by inserting new sub-clauses (4) and (5). The first amendment on page 27 of the report is just a re-arrangement by the draftsmen.  

The new sub-clauses, (4) and (5) should read as follows: “(4) The Minister shall take appropriate action after the recommendation of the National Council under subsection (3) within three months from the date of the recommendation.”

“(5) If after consideration of the report of the Inspection Committee and any other relevant matter, the National Council is not satisfied with the findings, the National Council shall inform the University and the Minister about the shortfalls in its expectations and give reasons for not recommending the granting of a charter.”

 (Question put and agreed to)

Clause 100, as amended, agreed to

Clause 101

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, there is a consequential amendment to clause 101 (3) to add, at the end of the clause, the expression “and public print media”. We have handled this before.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 101, as amended, agreed to

Clause 102, agreed to

Clause 103, agreed to

Clause 104, agreed to

Clause 105, agreed to

Clause 106, agreed to

Clause 107, agreed to

Clause 108, agreed to

Clause 109

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 109, there was only a drafting error, which can be corrected. But I wish to add a new sub-clause to 109.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where is it?

DR. MUTESASIRA: It is on page 29 of the report and it should read as follows: 
“A private university may, with the approval of the National Council 
    (a) establish any college or institution as a constituent college of the university; 
    (b) with the approval of the institution, declare a private tertiary institution as a constituent college of the university. 

The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Section 28 shall apply to a constituent college under this Section with such modifications as may be necessary in relation to a private university.  

The provisions of Section 70 shall apply to tertiary institutions wishing to affiliate with a private university under this Act.”

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the marginal note for the new clause that you are reading? What does the marginal note say?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I forgot to read the marginal notes. The marginal note would read as follows: “Constituent colleges and affiliation to a Private University.” 
This is because in the Bill as presented, affiliation and constituent colleges are only referred to in the context of a public university. We now feel that private universities should also have affiliation and constituent colleges.

THE CHAIRMAN: What number is the clause? After clause 109, you now have 110.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Yes, Mr. Chairman. We shall re-number accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, this is a new clause. What do you think about it?

DR. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I support this arrangement for private universities.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 109, as amended, agreed to

Clause 110

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the first and second amendments as proposed by the Committee in clause 110 and in sub-clause (1) and (2), are consequential amendments, because we have talked about the physical location and the firm or organisation to replace ‘person’.  

The third amendment on clause 110 is to re-arrange the paragraphs so that (e) becomes (d), and to insert a new (e) and re-number (d) and (f) as (f) and (g) respectively. We also wish to add a new (h) and (i). 

The new (e), (h) and (i) should read as follows: 
“(e) the academic staff and senior administrative staff”   

“(h) an outline of the academic programmes to be offered”  

“(i) the accessible physical facilities available including library services and equipment” 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 110, as amended, agreed to

Clause 111

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 111(1) by inserting the words “and verify the resources” after the word “application” appearing in the middle of the third line.  

The second amendment is to insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows:  
“A provisional license shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of publication of the institution in the Gazette and public print media.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 111, as amended, agreed to

Clause 112

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the first amendment to clause 112(2) is to insert the expression “physical location” at the end of paragraph (a). It is a consequential amendment.

The second amendment is to re-arrange the expression “land including” to read “including land” in paragraph (h).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is not really an amendment; it is re-arranging. The draftsmen can take care of that. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 112, as amended, agreed to

Clause 113, agreed to

Clause 114, agreed to

Clause 115

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 115 by adding a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “The National Council shall give at least six month’s notice to the Institution of the intention to revoke a provisional license or certificate, giving reasons for the same”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 115, as amended, agreed to

Clause 116

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 116 by increasing the fine from ten to fifty currency points.  The second amendment is just a drafting issue.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 116, as amended, agreed to

Clause 117, agreed to

Clause 118, agreed to

Clause 119

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to substitute clause 119 as follows: 
“Subject to Clause (1), Article 32 of the Constitution, and section 28 of this Act, universities or tertiary institutions shall admit, train and assess students on merit.” 

The marginal note should read as follows: “Admission and assessment to be on merit” 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have a problem with this amendment. You need to put the right emphasis on the special nature of the Islamic University in Uganda. And if you look at section 65, whose import we are writing about in the original clause 119, you will see that it is very important to maintain the original stand. 

The idea is to prevent exclusion of discrimination, but the Islamic University in Uganda has special provisions for catering for a historically disadvantaged section of the community. We think that if you phrase it the way you have done in the proposed amendment, you would not emphasise the protection of that historically disadvantaged community. So, I am very sorry, Mr. Chairman, I oppose the amendment proposed by the chairman of the Committee.

MR. KIKULUKUNYU: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to seek some clarification on section 65 of the Islamic University Statute. Is he saying that the Islamic University shall not put into consideration the aspect of standard at the time of recruitment? If so, why then should the Islamic University be given leeway not to follow the other credentials set by the National Council as per the issue of academic qualifications to the University? So, I propose that we take the chairman’s amendment in this respect.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you say you oppose it or you support it?

MR. KIKULUKUNYU: I support the chairman. Mr. Chairman, I am only emphasising that, like any other University, I do not think it is in order for the Islamic University to say that they can recruit any person, irrespective of what points one could have got, because here we want to emphasise standards in all respects. So, I do not think the Islamic University should fall short of other universities in the respect of the standard to be emphasised within the country. I thank you.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I wish to give some small background as to how we came to that amendment. We had shared this information with the Minister and it was only yesterday when he informed us that he is does not agree with this amendment. 

The Islamic University in Uganda was set up with specific objectives, which we have saved in this Bill. We consulted widely with all stakeholders, including the university administrators. In fact, we had a special session with the Islamic University in Uganda at their request, and they told us that their graduates are finding a problem because the public thinks that they admit people who have failed to be admitted elsewhere.  

People have not appreciated that at the Islamic University there is what we call remedial teaching. They admit students and they do remedial teaching before they actually admit them for the actual courses of the university. The public does not understand this. They think that the university is taking in sub-standard students. 

It is the Islamic University in Uganda which requested not to be exempted. It should appear in the Bill that they allow students on merit and not with exception. In my opinion, the Committee’s position should be allowed to prevail because this is in the interest of education in Uganda. 

I know there is a question of quotas from other countries. Even those students, who come from outside the country, if they feel they do not meet the standards, they do some remedial teaching. I therefore, appeal to the Minister. It is in the actual interest of the university itself and other stakeholders, including their chairman, who is a Member of Parliament, and other members of their council, who are Members of Parliament, not to let their university be exempted from admitting students on merit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not have the privilege of having the Islamic University Statute in my possession, but I think hon. Members will now be aware of Article 32 of the Constitution, which is being referred to in the Committee’s amendment. Article 32(1) reads as follows: “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.”  

The Committee’s amendment is subject to this Article that I have just read and to section 28 of this Act, which deals with constituent colleges. The original text of the Bill subjects the admissions on merit without discrimination, subjected to section 65 of the Islamic University Statute, 1990.  That is where we are.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have a copy of the Islamic University Statute No. 8 of 1990 and the section 65 that we refer to in clause 119 reads as follows: 
“(1) The Council shall prescribe acceptable qualifications for the admission of students to the University.

(2) The admission of students to the University shall be subject to the following proportions – 
(a) 50 percent to be students from the Republic of Uganda
(b) 30 percent to be students from the other East African States, however, the percentage of candidates from any one of those states should not exceed 15 percent of the total number of admissions.
(c) 10 percent to be students from other African countries and;
(d) 10 percent to be students from countries other than African countries.

(3) In selecting students for admission to the University priority shall as far as possible be given to Muslims.”  

The original clause 119 reads as follows: “Universities or Tertiary Institutions shall admit students on merit and train and assess the students on merit and without any form of discrimination subject to section 65 of the Islamic University in Uganda Statute, 1990.”  

This Bill now proposes to preserve the Islamic University in Uganda Statute, 1990. My fear, Sir, is that the amendment as proposed by the chairman waters down the special status of the Islamic University in Uganda. I must repeat that I oppose the amendment proposed by the chairman of the Social Services Committee.

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The establishment of the Islamic University in Uganda, I am sure, had a purpose. And I believe that one major purpose was to encourage the Islamic community in Uganda to get education.  History has it that the Islamic community for a long time did not encourage education. Therefore, the establishment of this university in Uganda was purposely to do that, and it has actually done it. So, if we pass a law here, which again prohibits the law that was established by that Statute, then definitely we shall be negating the major objective for establishing that university. So, I would like to appeal to Members to support the Minister’s view. I thank you.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the chairman’s amendment, because by not doing so, we shall be introducing two sets of standards. We shall establish a standard for the other universities and a standard for Mbale University. And by the way, we shall not be helping the products of Mbale University when it comes to the job market, and we know that people are competing for the available scarce employment. Therefore, Sir, I find it very difficult to really appreciate the arguments put forward by the Minister. I support the chairman. Thank you.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Unfortunately, I have not been following very clearly, but I just want to make a contribution. The university that we are talking about is not fully Ugandan. It is a university meant for other countries also. Uganda was just lucky to have it here, and I think Uganda does benefit. My worry is that when we pass the amendment proposed, I do not know what repercussions it would have in as far as our international relationship with the OIC is concern. I am really worried about that. I do not think other countries do not want this university. We may pass a law, which may even lead to the removal of this university from here, because it is not fully funded by the Ugandan Government.  So, I think we should bear this in mind when we are looking at the amendment proposed by the chairman. I thank you.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Chairman, when Uganda joined the Islamic Conference in Pakistan in the mid 1970s, among the decisions taken by that Islamic Conference was the establishment of two Islamic Universities in Africa. One university was for the benefit of Franco-phone countries and the other one was for Anglophone countries. The Franco-phone Islamic University is based in Niger, in West Africa. And on our invitation, through Field Marshal Idi Amin, V.C, DSO, MC, the Islamic University for Anglophone was located in Uganda. 

Initially, it would have been some 10 miles south of Arua, but for other political reasons, it was re-located to Mbale. It is here on the basis of what is called the Headquarters Agreement between Uganda and the Islamic Conference. It should therefore be regarded as an inter-governmental institute. It should therefore not be subjected to the same restrictions applicable to our own universities here, except in as far as we feel that it has to with the basic law. I thought this information should serve the purpose. In other words, I tend to share the views expressed by the Minister. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have not read that Statue, but there is talk about some proportion and specific percentage. I do not know the significance of that is. Is that what the hon. Member was saying, about bringing up the Islamic community?

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Chairman, I was simply emphasising that the Islamic University in Uganda was set up for the purposes of encouraging education within the Islamic community, not only in Uganda but within the East African region and also some parts of the world. What we are saying here is, a Statute was brought to this Parliament and this Parliament ratified that Statute. It would not be fair for us again to pass another law to contradict what we passed. That is what I am saying.  

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee had not felt very strongly on this clause as it originally was, but then we were requested by the university itself and we had agreed with the Minister, at least up to yesterday. I got his letter yesterday, and it is dated 8th November. We deliberated on this matter, at the request of the Islamic University in Uganda. Section 65 does not mention standards. It mentions the quotas and affirmative action for the Moslems. 

The Bill, as amended, has not looked at these items, and the University is saying that their students are finding problems when they go out after graduation. They say that Mbale University has got substandard products because they admit students without using the known benchmarks.  The public is not aware that Mbale University actually admits students who would not have qualified elsewhere, but they spend one year or sometimes two years in that University being given remedial teaching. When these students go to University for remedial teaching, the public assumes that actually they are already in the University. So, after this remedial teaching, when they join the formal courses of the University, the public still assumes that the University admitted substandard students.  

The university called out to us, and we met with all the vice chancellors and the rector, who is a professor from Nigeria. The rector actually requested for a special meeting with the Committee, and we accorded him the meeting. Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was there, hon. Moses Ali was supposed to come as chairman, but he did not come.  They requested us not to exempt them from the standards because it does not affect section 65. I am not a lawyer, but what I heard seemed to be referring to affirmative action for Moslems and the quotas. We have not touched the quotas. Therefore, if it is in the interest of this House is that we leave clause 119 as it is, I would just like to say that the Committee did not feel very strongly on this one. We would have left it as it was, but we were requested to do otherwise by the key stakeholders. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 119, as amended, agreed to

Clause 120

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I raise a point of clarification, and if it is not clear I will raise an amendment. Clause 120 (2) reads as follows: “(2) If after the period of thirty days referred to in subsection (1) no objection is received by the National Council -

    (a) the application shall be granted by the Minister, in the case of a Tertiary Institution, and
    (b) the application shall be forwarded to the President through the Minister, who shall grant the application.” 

Under (b), Mr. Chairman, there is something missing. I am of the view that under (b) we are referring to the case of a university. So, I would like the chairman or the Minister to clarify. If there is something missing, then I will move an amendment to read as follows:
“In the case of a University, the application shall be forwarded to the President through the Minister, who shall grant the application.”  
I believe that is what is missing. I seek clarification.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, the amendment proposed by hon. Okumu Ringa clarifies the situation, and I would support it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, he has not moved an amendment, but I know what he is getting at.   

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the Minister for conceding, and I would like to move a formal amendment to clause 120 (2) (b) to read as follows:
“In the case of a University, the application shall be forwarded to the President through the Minister, who shall grant the application.” I beg to move - (Dr. Mwebesa rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mwebesa, hon. Okumu Ringa is making a distinction between the two situations. One is a tertiary institution and the other one is a university. I now put the question to his amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 120, as amended, agreed to

Clause 121, agreed to

Clause 122

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification on clause 122(1), which reads as follows: “The National Council shall adopt a system of classification of Tertiary Institutions according to the type of Tertiary Education being provided or the institution. Programmes being offered by the institution and all tertiary institutions whether Private of Public shall be registered according to their classification.”  

The word “institutions” is used so many times. I seek clarification as to whether or not the first one used without a comma is not redundant. That is the clarification I seek from the Minister or the chairperson.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are quite right. There is something confusing there. Could they have wanted it to be as follows: “The National Council shall adopt a system of classification of Tertiary Institutions, according to the type of Tertiary Education being provided or programmes being offered by the institution and all Tertiary Institutions, whether private or public, shall be registered according to their classification.” 

The expression “or the institution” after the word “provided”, I think is the one bringing that problem.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, may I move that the expression “or the institution” plus the full stop after it, which appear after the word “provided” be deleted from this sub-clause.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether hon. Okumu is happy or not, because his amendment was hijacked from him. Any way, let us proceed.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The amendment of the hon. Minister includes deleting the word “or”. I thought “or” referred to programmes, so what should be deleted is “the institution.”

THE CHAIRMAN: It is now grammatical. You are right, “or” is conjunctive to programmes.

Clause 122, as amended, agreed to

Clause 123, agreed to

Clause 124

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 124 by inserting the expression “and the Minister” after the words “National Council”. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 125, agreed to

Clause 126

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, this amendment is just to re-arrange or re-name clause 126 as 125 and 125 as 126.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is for the draftsman.

Clause 126, agreed to

Clause 127

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 127 by making the existing provision sub-clause (1) and adding a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: 
“Notwithstanding sub-section (1) any regulations, statutes, actions, appointments or programmes made under any Act or other law repealed under subsection (1) shall continue in force as if it were made under this Act until revoked, replaced or expires under this Act.”  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 127, as amended, agreed to

Clause 128

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 128 by substituting sub-clause (1) with the following, and renumbering the subsequent sub-clauses: 

“(1) A University or Tertiary Institution operating before the commencement of this Act shall –
    (a) Where it was established by law, apply for a charter or certificate of classification within twelve months from the date of commencement;

    (b) here it was operating under a valid provisional licence, continue to operate under that licence and shall apply for a charter or certificate of classification at the appropriate time as is provided under this Act;

    (c) where it was operating without a valid provisional licence, apply for a provisional licence within twelve months from the date of commencement”

“(2) Where, at the commencement of this Act, a University or Tertiary Institution had a valid provisional licence, but had not started operating, the licence shall expire and the University or Tertiary Institution shall be required to apply for a provisional licence under this Act.” 

The second amendment, Mr. Chairman, is to substitute sub-clause (4) as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, the Islamic University in Uganda shall be recognised and registered by the National Council and its award subject to the equating and relevant regulations by the National Council but shall operate in accordance with the provisions of the Islamic University in Uganda Statute, 1990.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you stopped there for the time being? What does this 74 mean? 

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we had numbered the amendments, but we had agreed that we delete the numbering of the amendments and leave only clauses. I think this typist forgot to erase the rest of the numbering.  So, I have stopped at the second amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read out all your amendments and then we shall pronounce ourselves on them.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend clause 128 further by adding the following new sub-clauses after sub-clause (4):“(5) The provisions of subsections (2) and (3) relating to the registration, recognition and operation of a University or Tertiary Institution under this Act shall not affect the validity or other status of any certificate, diploma, degree or other academic award granted by the University or Tertiary Institution in question before the commencement of this Act”  

“(6) So far as they conduct courses leading to awards of certificates, diplomas or degrees of Makerere University, the following institutions shall, until they attain a University status, be deemed to be affiliated to Makerere University for purposes of those awards, that is to say –
    (a) the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo; 
    (b) the Uganda National Institute of Special Education; and 
    (c) the Uganda Management Institute.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, those are all amendments to clause 128 by the Committee. I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I request the hon. Toskin, who is the neighbour to hon. Okumu, to refrain from disturbing him.

Clause 128, as amended, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: I am advised that before we proceed with the new clauses, which you want to introduce, we should deal with the matter that we stood over. 

Clause 72

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 72(1) by inserting the expression “Uganda Management Statute, 1992” after “1989”. So, the whole clause should now read: “The Makerere University Act, 1970, the Mbarara University of Science and Technology Statute 1989, the Uganda Management Institute, 1992 and the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo Statute 1993 are repealed.”

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your justification?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, all these will fall under a new law, but because of the unique and special nature of the Uganda National Institute of Special Education (UNISE), after consultation we thought that this Statute establishing UNISE should be saved.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: The second amendment on clause 72 is to substitute sub-clause (2) to read as follows: ”Notwithstanding sub-section (1), any acts, appointments or programmes made or started under the Act or Statute repealed shall continue in existence as if they were made under this law or until they expire.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 72, as amended, agreed to

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to add a new clause after clause 128, to be referred to as clause 129, to read as follows: 
“Makerere University Business School” - that is the marginal note. 

“129 (1) At the commencement of this Act, Makerere University Business School shall be deemed to have been affiliated to Makerere University and shall assume the status of an affiliated Public Tertiary Institute under this Act 

(2) At the commencement of this Act, all assets and property acquired by Makerere University under Makerere University (Establishment of Constituent College) Order, 1997 shall vest in the Business School without further assurance, subject to all interests, liabilities, charges, obligations and trusts affecting that property.

(3) All contracts, debt engagements and liabilities of Makerere University attributable to Makerere University Business School immediately before the commencement of this Act shall vest in the Business School.  

(4) The school shall conduct courses leading to the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates by Makerere University under standards provided by the Act and Statutes and regulations made under the Act or as may be agreed upon by the School and Makerere University and shall, in connection with the awards, jointly conduct examinations leading to the awards, with Makerere University

(5) In addition to the functions of a Public Tertiary Institution under section 75, Makerere Business School may – 
(a) provide instructions to those admitted to the School and make provision for advancement, transmission and preservation of knowledge relating to commercial or business - 
    (i) Undergraduate, postgraduate, higher diploma and ordinary diploma courses;  
    (ii) professional courses, including but not limited to chartered accountants, chartered secretaries, bankers, insurance personnel, managers and other professions; 
    (iii) short term professional courses;  

(b) create and offer opportunities to persons interested in correspondent courses from relevant commercial or business training institutions outside Uganda;

(c) conduct examinations for the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other awards of the University;

(d) conduct other examinations and award certificates and diplomas and where necessary to revoke awards;

(e) coordinate and supervise all Uganda Government funded Colleges of Commerce with an objective of developing curricula and achieving high standards of business education;

(f) act as examining body for such Colleges and privately run Colleges which may seek affiliation to the School for such diplomas and certificates;

(g) conduct or facilitate the conducting of research on any issue relating to the commercial or business sector;

(h) facilitate staff development through the provision of up-grading courses and short term continuing education;

(i) establish linkages and joint programmes with other institutions offering similar courses within and outside Uganda; and 

(j) carry on any other thing relating to the enhancement of standards in the commercial and business sector as the Minister may direct.

(6) The National Council shall ensure that the Business School is established fully as a Tertiary Institution under this Act.”

Justification for this, Mr. Chairman, is to clear the conflicting situation that has been existing between Makerere University and Makerere University Business School.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the amendment, but I am seeking clarification about the numerous proposals. 

My first point is with regard to 5(a), if I may read it:  “provide instructions to those admitted to the School and make provision for advancement, transmission and preservation of knowledge relating to commercial or business...” 

My problem is with the word “commercial”. I thought an appropriate word like “commerce” would be more relevant. 

My second point is with regard to (5)(e), which reads: “Coordinate and supervise all Uganda Government funded Colleges of Commerce with an objective of developing curricula and achieving high standards of business education.” 

I seek clarification here, particularly with regard to just supervising without supporting the development of these colleges of commerce scattered all over the country.

My last observation is with regard to (5)(i), which reads: “establish linkages and joint programs with other institutions offering similar within and outside Uganda” 

I think there is something wrong with the phraseology.  Similar what? I seek clarification on this. Those are my observations. Otherwise, I support the amendment.

DR. RWENDEIRE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also support this addition. I am not coming here to state otherwise, but I was interested in adding a more modern way of providing correspondent courses. 

(5) (b) reads as follows: “create and offer opportunities to persons interested in correspondent courses from relevant commercial or business training institutions outside Uganda”  

Instead of correspondent courses, once could say “create and offer opportunities to persons interested in courses offered through distance education methodologies from relevant commercial or business training institutions outside Uganda”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Are proposing an amendment to the chairperson’s amendment?

DR. RWENDEIRE: Yes that is right.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you move it?

MR. RWENDEIRE: Well, if the chairman of the Committee agrees, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 129(5)(b) to substitute “correspondent courses” with “courses through distance education methodologies”. The whole paragraph should read as follows:
“create and offer opportunities to persons interested in courses through distance education methodologies from relevant commercial or business training institutions outside Uganda.” I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I would like the chairman or the Minister to clarify to me what has necessitated this amendment. Is it as a result of personal conflicts between personalities in the institutions mentioned or is it the lack of the law to cater for the running of this Business School?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, what is hon. Gagawala Wambuzi’s appreciation of the problem before us? Wherever it comes from, we have the responsibility to deal with it and we are dealing with it. We can assure you that these provisions are both a legal and social necessity. I thank you.

Clause 129

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall take it as having been read the second time.  

PROF. KHIDDU-MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move that the word “commercial”, in sub-clause (5)(a), be replaced with the word “commerce”.   

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us first deal with the other amendment by hon. Rwendeire.  

PROF. KHIDDU-MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, in connection with 5(b), I support the amendment proposed by hon. Rwendeire.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. NKUUHE: I seek clarification from the Minister in a matter related to what hon. Gagawala was asking. My understanding is that, as a result of a few misunderstandings between Makerere and Nakawa, we have now brought this amendment. Anyway, that is my own interpretation. I need clearance from the Minister as to whether Nakawa is now more autonomous and yet they are supposed to have affiliation to Makerere. Now, suppose an institution wants to affiliate with another higher institution, who does the facilitation? Is it the law that does it or are there negotiations so that they reach some sort of common understanding on how to interact later?  

Secondly, from the way things are going, administrative costs are going to be reduced and staffing is going to be reduced. Therefore, there is need to pool resources together, and most of the resources that are pooled are administrative resources. Therefore, it will be very important for these people to reach an understanding, so that they do not duplicate a lot of the resources. So, I wonder what exactly is going to happen. Is this law going to help in any way or is it going to make matters worse?  I would like some clarification.

PROF.KHIDDU-MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, the Makerere University Act, 1970 provided that the Minister of Education, having gone through certain consultative mechanisms, had power to establish constituent colleges under Makerere University. This has been the law since 1970.  

In 1997, one of my predecessors enacted the Makerere University (Establishment of Constituent Colleges) Order, 1997 by which he converted the then Faculty of Commerce and UCC Nakawa into a constituent college of Makerere University. 

Two years later, His Excellency the President, who is the ultimate appointing authority under that Statute, appointed a principal for the constituent college. There were many operational matters, which were unfortunately not provided for in the establishment order. And these are some of the issues being corrected here.  

The constituent college at Nakawa, Makerere University Business School, was established after very serious considerations by Government. It has a role to play in the teaching and research of commercial and business education, and in the co-ordination and development of the sub-sector. These are the matters being clarified here. The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill has provided a comprehensive framework for establishing constituent colleges or affiliated colleges in the public realm and also in the private sector. A difficulty of this nature is unlikely to arise when this Bill becomes law.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think hon. Okumu-Ringa has a valid point. On page 36, (5) (i), he said you establish linkages and joint programmes with other institutions offering similar what? That was his question.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, when I was reading, I said offering similar courses because that was the word that was missing. I read it, but may be I was going too first.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to clause 129 as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to)

The Schedule

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In all the laws that we have passed so far, we have created a currency point of shs.20,000. Are we now varying it to shs.100,000 in this particular case?

THE CHAIRMAN: Where is that?

MR. ONGOM: In the Schedule.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I do not remember which clause it was, but we dealt with this here and it is on record. We said that one currency point is equivalent to shs.20,000, to make it line with other laws. We dealt with it in one of the clauses, and this one comes just as a consequential amendment. I think it was clause 116.

MS. TIPERU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to be guided.  When are we reaching the re-commital stage? I have an amendment to recommit.

THE CHAIRMAN: You remember that I advised you that at a later date you will move a Motion to recommit a certain section which you are not happy with and you wanted to amend.

MS. TIPERU: Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Schedule be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999” and passed clauses 86 to 129 with some amendments.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are yet to go to the final stage of consideration of this Bill. I propose that we pause here for a moment and we proceed to the conclusion on Tuesday. I, therefore, adjourn the House until Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)

