Thursday, 4 November 2010

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in then Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I am impressed that despite the rain, you have been able to come. 

3.00
MR NATHAN NABETA (NRM, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I am rising on an issue that came up while I was having lunch in the canteen. I received a message, apparently from a one Nabeta, mentioning certain things that I want to disassociate myself from. My colleagues have told me that they have also received messages to that effect. 

I would like to inform the House –(Interjection)– the message reads, “Our party does not condone corruption; as such, there can never be a policy in the party to defend the corrupt. It is time for everybody to carry their crosses.”  And the message is sent by Nabeta.  

They should have gone to the Internet and used a platform on the Net to send these messages. So, it is not me and I would like to thank the House for passing, The Computer Misuse Act and The Electronic Signatures and Electronic Transactions Act, which laws can now empower us to trace and convict these kinds of people. I have asked the IGP to follow up issue. So, we are going to be able to find out where this came from. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE TWO MISSING CITIZENS FROM MUKONO

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija):  Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Members, on the 28 October 2010, hon. Betty Nambooze, MP Mukono North, brought to the attention of this Parliament two cases of missing persons.  One, was of the disappearance of Boowe Isaac of Mukono; and another of Ms Wasagali Pamela who since then was reported to have been arrested in Bulambuli District on the 6 October 2010 and was detained by the Police. 

Mr Speaker, in the case of Boowe Isaac, I have to say the following. On the 22 November 2008, a report was made by one Lwabulanga Enock at Mukono Police Station that his brother, Boowe Isaac, a male adult, had been missing since 19 November 2008.  Mr Lwabulunga –(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, we can see the minister reading from a statement of which we do not have a copy; it is a serious matter. So, how do we take on the matter seriously without copies circulated to Members, Mr Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER: No, he does not have to wait. He has to explain.

MR KASAIJA: The copies should be outside there; I do not know why they are not coming in.

THE SPEAKER:  So, if they are not there, then we shall deal with this statement next week.  Can we take on another item?  But it is important that you know what has happened to these people; because if you insist on a statement other than the content - I think the content is more important than getting a copy of the statement. The families of these people are anxious and, therefore, they should know what has happened to them from the minister. But since we insist on the copy, we shall deal with it next week. 

3.05
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to request that the minister be allowed to read the statement as we take notes because this is an issue touching people’s liberty and the parents are out there waiting for this report.  So, it is important that this report is read today. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the minister make his statement as we wait for the reports to come.  

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I presume that before I finish, the copies will have come.  The copies should be coming in; I don’t know what has happened.

In the case of Boowe Isaac, as I said, on 22 November 2008, a report was made by one Lwabulanga Enock at Mukono Police Station that his brother, Boowe Isaac, a male adult, had been missing for three days, and Mr Lwabulunga and his father gave the Police some clues on the disappearance of Boowe Isaac. 

Investigations were immediately instituted by the Police Crime Intelligence officers in Mukono. All the clues mentioned by Lwabulunga and his father were followed up and many people have been interviewed by the Police personnel to obtain relevant facts and information. For example, the telephone number of the missing person was tracked and later three suspects who were found to have used it after the disappearance were arrested for interrogation. On interrogation, the suspects revealed that the phone had been picked from an accident scene in Mukono Town Council. 

Further investigations carried out as a follow up of the accident claim made by the above mentioned suspects, we confirmed that some unknown person fell off from a boda boda motorcycle along the Kampala-Jinja Highway in Mukono Town Council during the evening of 19 November 2008 after the motorcycle was knocked by the driver of a motor vehicle registration No.UAG 349Z and the person was taken to Mulago Hospital in critical condition.

Follow-up action at Mulago Hospital revealed that during the night of 19 November 2008, some unknown male accident victim was taken to Mulago Causality Police Post by Mukono traffic personnel. However, records of the movements of that patient from Mulago Causality Police Post to the admissions Ward and to discharge are scanty. 

To complicate the matters further, the said accident victim was unconscious by the time he was left at Mulago, and his particulars were not known as he carried no identification on him.

It is highly suspected that the 19 November 2008 Mukono accident victim was the person who was reported missing. Mulago Hospital has been requested to provide Police with records of all people who could have been admitted on that date and could have died later on and were buried in the public cemetery as unclaimed bodies. We want to analyse their DNA and accordingly inform the public of what exactly took place. In other words, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, investigations are still going on regarding this case.

In the case of Ms Wasagali Pamela, it is true that the above named person was arrested on 6 October 2010 in Bulambuli District and transferred from Mbale to the Police Rapid Response Unit Headquarters in Kireka, Kampala, in connection with the terrorist attacks that rocked Kampala on the 11 July 2010 as we know.

Ms Wasagali Pamela was later released to her relatives from Kireka RRU, the headquarters, on Police bond on Thursday, 20 October 2010. She is safe and secure in the hands of her relatives. This can be confirmed from one of her relatives on telephone No. 0782 814838. I have talked to her and she is very safe and ready to get back - she is a student of Mukono University and she is preparing herself to return to the university. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister about two issues. I came to this House on 28 October 2010 and raised two issues. Indeed on the same day, at night, the parents of Wasagali Pamela were called by RRU to go and fetch her. 

She was released on Police bond as the minister has clearly stated, but it is not true that I made this report eight days after Pamela had been released. Pamela was released on the night of the 28 October 2010 after I had been here and raised this matter. 

So, I want to know if it is a typing error or the minister is trying to say that I raised this matter days after Pamela had been released.

Secondly, about Isaac Boowe, these people who were arrested with his telephone set were not even charged with theft. Where are they? Where are these suspects who were arrested with the telephone set of this missing young man?

Also, where is this vehicle registration No. UAG 349Z which knocked the person who is suspected to be Boowe Isaac?

Allow me to add that in Mukono, people are pointing fingers. Some people’s names have been mentioned in connection with this young man missing. I want to say that this report as given by the minister leaves a lot to be desired and it is my request that further investigations are made on this matter, particularly where people are ready to give evidence in connection to this case. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope you are continuing with investigations.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, where is the vehicle that caused the accident? Where is the phone? I didn’t regard this as important because the most important thing was to establish where the person that was queried is, and I have clearly stated that we have not yet ascertained this because we do not know precisely. 

We have got very interesting clues that this person is very likely to have been the victim of an accident that took place in Mukono. The patient was taken to Mulago but Mulago is unable to tell us whether this is the person because that person did not have any identification on him. So, we have asked Mulago to give us a report of the people who were received that night and who passed away and the bodies that were not claimed by the relatives. 

As I speak, Police is ready to exhume those bodies, carry out the DNA and maybe link it up with the father. The good thing is that the father of the victim is known to us. So, that is the story as far as I am concerned.

Hon. Nambooze, I will be the happiest to receive all the evidence and information relating to this case so that we can bring it to a final conclusion and inform the parents of where this boy eventually ended up. Thank you.

3.16
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister, first, for the statement he has made and the clarification he has also provided. I am really surprised about the information that is contained in 2.7, on page 2, about the hospital as an institution, which is supposed to clerk and take records of every incoming patient and how this patient moved from one ward to the other. But for this particular case, it has not happened.

I would like to inform the honourable minister that there is a case involving one of your officers who fell sick from Katwe Police Station and this was way back in 2007. He was taken by your officers and admitted at Mulago National Referral Hospital and this person went missing from the hospital; because this Police officer was from my constituency. 

When the relatives approached me, I tried to work with your senior officers and even linked up with Mulago hospital administration. Mulago could not even provide any plausible explanation as to how a Police officer, who was delivered by his colleagues, sick with cerebral malaria and was admitted, disappeared from there. 


The request I am making to Government and more particularly with - the Minister of Health was here - it is really absurd that a person goes to hospital and is admitted either in casualty or somewhere else and he goes through the wards and at the end of the day you do not have any record of this person. 

I think these are issues that you, as a government, should exercise diligence on so that once a person goes to a hospital or to a Police station - there should be a way of tracking the movement of files from one department to the other. 

If that had been done, surely, Mr Minister, we wouldn’t be with a problem because the hospital authorities would have told us that, “Yes, we received such an unknown patient; we treated him and he moved from this -” and we would have gone with that name of being unknown up to the last moment. But here is a situation where they admit that the person was received but they cannot give any explanation beyond that. 

My appeal to those of you in Government is that please, let institutions function so that we can be able to rely on them. Otherwise, if they do not - and my fellow senior bureaucrat there knows how important it is to trace the movement of files in an institution; but if that cannot be done, then we have a lot to do. I think it is very unfortunate for a human being to go missing in the hands of Government agencies. I thank you. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

3.20
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have circulated responses to allegations raised about me in respect of my participation in the CHOGM preparations. 

My response is in two parts: The first part is up to paragraph 5.0 of page 6; and the second part was attached for purposes of information, and it is in respect of accountability. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that under Article 164 of the Constitution, the minister is not the accounting officer; the accounting officer is the permanent secretary, but because those issues had been raised in the report, the officers gave them to me to attach. So, I will only limit my responses – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, permit me to introduce an honourable distinguished visitor in the public gallery, hon. Miria Matembe. You are welcome -(Applause) 

MRS MWESIGYE: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I will limit my responses to the allegations that were raised about my person. It is not too long ago for anybody to forget that Kampala was spotlessly clean and shining when CHOGM took place and Ugandans and foreign delegates were immensely impressed by the standard of cleanliness, beauty, and order in Kampala City, Entebbe Municipal Council and the surrounding areas. 

Up till now, there is plenty of evidence regarding what the Ministry of Local Government did in beautifying the city, namely: the Pan African Park, the Constitutional Square next to the High Court, the Mayor’s Gardens and Children’s Park in Entebbe as you approach Entebbe Municipality; the roundabout at Kibuye, Fairway Hotel, Garden City, Mukwano Road, Grand Imperial, Kubbiri near Bwaise, Bukoto, Equatorial Hotel Gardens and the island on Speak Road, Yusuf Lule Road, Kira Road, Jinja Road and Kampala Road, to mention but a few. 

Our contribution in making the Independence Monument rightly and visible, including, the Parliamentary Gardens and State House. These are some of the results of the efforts we put in. It is worth noting that Kampala was free of garbage at the same time and that buildings were also painted. 

Mr Speaker, there are three allegations that were raised against me. The first one is the Shimoni Exhibition Ground; the second is the decorations of the venues; and the third was that I directed the officers to pay money and hence caused financial loss to Government. 

I wish to draw the attention of Members to Rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure. Rule 148(2) provides that the Public Accounts Committee shall be assigned the examination of the audited accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. 

On page 141 of the PAC report, they raised a concern that I collected fees from the exhibitors at the Shimoni Exhibition Ground and that I did not declare the fees to the Auditor-General. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the Ministry of Local Government and Government was never involved in the exhibitions at the Shimoni grounds. The exhibition at the Shimoni grounds was purely a private matter. 

The then Minister of State for Local Government, who happens to be me now, only presented the idea of the exhibition at the Shimoni grounds on behalf of the exhibitors to the Cabinet sub-committees for clearance because all the side events during CHOGM had to be cleared by the sub-committee of Cabinet. 

Mr Speaker, in annex 23(a) of the PAC report, the committee attaches the minutes of the Cabinet sub-committee which read as follows: “The Minister of State for Local Government informed the meeting that an exhibition would be held from the 14 November 2007 to 1 December 2007 at the Shimoni Demonstration School ground. 

The meeting discussed the issue at length on whether the exhibition should be cancelled and it was agreed that a committee comprising of the Inspector General of Police, the Minister of Health, hon. Rukutana and hon. Nasasira be set to discuss the issue conclusively taking into consideration the security and hygiene concerns that had been raised.

The meeting agreed that only those events that were cleared by the Cabinet sub-committee on CHOGM would take place as side events for CHOGM.”

So, Mr Speaker, that presentation to the sub-committee of Cabinet, because the exhibitors could not go to a sub-committee of Cabinet, was the only role that I performed.

So, Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, my contention that since this was a private matter, PAC merely jumped onto it hence breaking the Rules of Procedure, which limit its role to only examining public accounts where Parliament has appropriated Government funds. 

The committee alleged that I collected fees, but surely, even if it had been my business, I do not think I would have collected the fees myself.

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, would like to pray that since the issue of Shimoni was never at all raised by the Auditor- General in his report because it was a private matter, PAC had no business with examining private accounts.

Mr Speaker, the next allegation was in respect of decoration of venues against which PAC raised three issues, which included: That Hope Mwesigye must explain over Shs 617 million allocated for decorations; that Hope Mwesigye hijacked the powers of the venues committee and formed a consortium of decorators; and that Hope Mwesigye negotiated, procured and awarded the contracts to the decorators consortium.

The Auditor-General in his report, on pages 25 to 26, made no mention whatsoever of the Ministry of Local Government’s role in the matter of decorations. He in fact confirmed that the mandate for decorations was for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that that ministry engaged a number of firms to have the work done. 

That notwithstanding, PAC again got out of its way in its report on page 3, when it stated that the committee had required me to explain questions of expenditure of Shs 617 million allocated for decorations. And surprisingly when the committee failed to meet me, it went on to make wild findings contained in pages 84 to 86 of its report, which led it into making absurd recommendations.

Among its findings, the committee alleges that Hope Mwesigye hijacked the powers of the venues committee and decided to negotiate and award the contract to the decorators, which was contrary to the law. 

But at the same time, PAC gives contradicting findings that the committee nonetheless learnt that the consortium of decorators undertook the work without any contract or agreement, which issue again, was observed by the Auditor General. So, if on the one hand, I awarded the contract and on the other hand, there was no contract, what is PAC talking about?

The committee claims that it got evidence of a meeting chaired by Hon. Hope Mwesigye on the 26 of October 2007, in which she presented to that meeting a consortium of decorators, negotiated with them and later awarded them the contract.

They note that that was not the responsibility of the minister; that she imposed herself onto the procurement functions and that the minister be held responsible for flouting PPDA Regulations and the Constitution of Uganda. 

The committee also adds that Hope Mwesigye should be held liable for abuse of office and causing financial loss to Government of Shs 617,652,120 and that the appointing authority should take appropriate action.

Mr Speaker, PAC in its report on page 84 confirms that a one Rhoda Kaisho was the chair of the venues committee. Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho appeared before the committee and testified to the fact in respect of the decorations, which testimony surprisingly again, the committee chose to ignore when writing its report.

I must say that I was not responsible for forming a consortium of decorators nor did I hijack the powers of the venues committee. I did not negotiate any contract with the decorators to procure nor did I award any contract at all.

I would like to submit that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs formed the consortium of decorators and this is confirmed by the minutes of the meeting chaired by a one Sarah Nakamya at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters on the 19 October 2007. I have attached to my response, Annex A of those minutes. 

The meeting was chaired by Ms Sarah Nakamya and the people who attended were Ms Byarugaba Adriko, who is the Director of Hones and Grades; Ms Jaki Byaruhanga, Director of Exciting Options; Ms Nakimera Lubega from the same group; Mbabaali Victoria, the Director of Faith’s Petals and Stems; Mbabaali Juliet from the same company; Marion Etiang Businge, the Director of Fantasia, and absent with apology was –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and seek your guidance. Hon. Hope Mwesigye is presenting her defence before this Parliament and it is a 15-page defence – she is just at page 4 of the 15 pages. But whether the document is one or 20 pages, some us have already made up our minds. (Laughter) 

The guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is whether she can summarise the major highlights. Since we have a written copy of her report, we could just focus on substantial matters. Otherwise, I do not think we will spend five hours listening to the accused person yet she can summarise it in 30 to 40 minutes. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think she is making a statement, which she was unable to make before the committee and we allowed her to do it before this House. So, it is up to her to decide whether to summarise or not, but she may think that it is her time to give you the details. So, I cannot direct her on that. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I think you appreciate the circumstances I was going through. In the minutes – and I will highlight the most important provisions – 

“The chairperson informed the members that the urgent meeting had been convened to deal with the procurement of the consortium of the CHOGM venues. However, she emphasised the fact that she had been tasked with the responsibility of establishing the concerns of the consortium to have them forwarded to higher authorities for decision-making. She went ahead to say the chairperson highlighted that it was not only the group present that would single-handedly handle decorations, but other artists like Gen. Elly Tumwine, the production company of Mr Kaggwa, the decoration consultant, Symbion among others. The meeting agreed that this group of decorators agree on a joint partnership that would be used for signing the contract and into whose account the funds would be transferred once procured.

The meeting also resolved that at the next sitting, a joint proposal of the entire consortium would be presented. It was agreed that the proposal would cover issues like the scope, materials to be used, timeframe for delivery of the decorated venue, removal of materials and so on and so forth.”

I have read these minutes because they preceded the meeting of the 26th which I chaired. So, the consortium had been formed already by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I was not, therefore, responsible for that.

There is also evidence in Annex B showing clearly how the venues’ coordinator was writing to the chairman of the contracts committee of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to proceed with the process of procuring the consortium. I had no hand whatsoever in that.

The meeting which I called and the minutes are also attached of the 26th. I chaired that meeting because I was the chief beautifier of the city and Entebbe and the other areas. I was concerned that the venues’ committee had not started the process of preparing the decorations.

At the same time, I had got experts from Malaysia on my own accord who had been helping us to draw concepts for beautifying the city and Entebbe, and who were again going to help the decorators to develop a concept for decorations. And since I was there, Ambassador Kaisho by protocol could not chair that meeting. But the substance of that meeting had nothing to do with procurement. It was actually to look at what concepts they had developed and to work with the Malaysians who were now working with me and my ministry to help them make designs and their attachment is also there in my response.

In fact, on the afternoon of the 26th, the consortium together with the Malaysian experts, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials and I, were summoned by the First Lady; we went to State House to meet with her; she was equally concerned. So, we met with her, they made their presentations, we discussed and agreed on the concept that could be used.

Mr Speaker, therefore, it is my submission that the meeting I chaired did not at all tantamount to procurement of decorators, to negotiation or to award any contract. I know very well that the functions of procurement are outside the mandate of the minister. 

Consequently, the issues of flouting PPDA rules, the issues of abuse of office and the issues of causing financial loss to Government did not arise at all. I submit, therefore - (Dr Epetait rose)- I have not allowed you. I submit, therefore, that PAC findings as well as their recommendations are a nullity and should be expunged from the record.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I am particularly interested in Appendix I of the minutes of the second meeting of the venues’ sub-committee which was chaired by the hon. Minister of State for Local Government, Hope Mwesigye and in attendance was Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho-Sinani who attended in her capacity as chairperson venues’ sub-committee. The minister has just re-emphasised that Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho was the chairperson of the venues’ sub-committee. How then did you happen to be the chairperson of a second meeting of the venues’ sub-committee when the substantive chairperson of the venues sub-committee was there? That is what I want to find out.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much for that clarification. I explained. I said they had formed a consortium of decorators. Here I was; I was the chief beautifier and, therefore, even I had to oversee whether decorations would be beautiful. I had the experts and they came to my office. By protocol, Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho is a director in the ministry and I was then a Minister of State, so, there is no way she could chair a meeting when I am present.

Furthermore, I would like to submit that PAC —

MR WACHA: Just a small clarification. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam minister, if you see in the minutes of the meeting that you chaired, page 4, minute 16, on the way forward - if I could read it, if you have found it. 

“The meeting agreed that for purposes of procurement, given the time constraint, one of all their companies be procured and contracted to decorate the CHOGM 2007 venues. This company agreeable to all of them would sign MoUs with the rest. The decorators also agreed that they would collectively be responsible for the decoration of all the venues. The decorators unanimously agreed on Faith’s Petals and Stems to be procured”. 

I was wondering, madam, whether this does not amount to procurement.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, hon. Wacha. I do not think that tantamounts to procurement. In any case, when you read very well, you actually realise that it is their own decision. There are many, they cannot all be paid separately. So, it was their decision. They agreed like that. It does not amount to procurement as you know very well.

Mr Speaker, I would like to submit, therefore, because now my Floor is interjected, but PAC found me liable to abuse of office, and causing financial loss to Government, which is actually not their mandate. PAC cannot find me liable at all for these crimes. That is clearly outside their mandate, and the crimes which as I have explained, did not arise whatsoever. 

The last allegation is that Hope Mwesigye advised an officer to make payment contrary to Mr Ssekkono’s advice. I have already stated that Article 164 of the Constitution, mandates the Permanent Secretary, who is the accounting officer and is the one accountable to Parliament. I know and I am also aware that under Article 164(2); “Any person holding political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions, shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold office.” 

Again, this allegation is not in the Auditor-General’s report. In fact, you will realise that the heading of the report itself talks of the, “Report of the Public Accounts Committee based on the Special Audit Report of the Auditor-General.” But it keeps getting out of its mandate to other areas.

Having said that, the committee observed on page 141 that the committee was told that the payment was made on the advice of Minister Hope Mwesigye. They do not even name who told them. We are not here in Parliament to entertain hearsay. They further say that, “Hope Mwesigye failed in her duties to deliver on the job and hold the contractor responsible.” That is not my duty. Contractors are supervised by consultants and by the technical people; in my case, the engineers in the Ministry of Local Government.  

At no point in time did I direct or concur with any officer to make payment. So, the committee relied on whoever advised them that they do not want to name, with no evidence whatsoever, and made a finding that I caused financial loss to Government.

I would like to put on record that the committee said that Mr Ssekkono, the then PS, whom they actually even failed to invite and hear from, that in his handover report he said that payment should never be made – these are the payments that they allege that I advised or forced the officers to make. 

I have attached another exhibit marked (6). This is a letter dated 23 July, 2008 and it is signed by V.B. Ssekkono, the permanent secretary; and it is to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Transport – 
“Handing over of the beautification activity along the road corridors undertaken under CHOGM.” The relevant bit is that the beautification activities were intended to improve the appearance of the city and Entebbe Municipality and the corridors leading to CHOGM venues. 

“The road corridors covered under this project are: Kampala-Entebbe Road, and Clock Tower-Nsambya-Ggaba/Munyonyo Road. The contractors who were engaged to execute the beautification works have now completed the works according to the contractual terms and conditions. The maintenance period has also come to an end and the impact of the work along the corridors is evident.”

So, Mr Ssekkono himself had handed over – had asked the contractors to hand over those roads to the Ministry of Works, and the road they are saying that I ordered for payments - the Clock Tower-Nsambya-Munyoyo Road. So, this hand-over report meant that those roads were completed. 

They also allege and use an exhibit, which I have named number (7) in my report that, immediately Mr Ssekkono had left, I ordered that, “You pay, because Mr Ssekkono has left” which is not true. 

This small letter dated 1 October, 2008 was a demand note and not payment as the report claims. It was a demand note that was not honoured, and I have, in fact, attached a letter dated 6 January, 2008, which is marked (5). It is actually the real certificate of payment. So, even that payment was made about four months after Mr Ssekkono had left.

So, I am labouring to show that the committee really tried to drag in my name, that I hurriedly told somebody to pay quickly against Mr Ssekkono’s advice, which is not true. 

Therefore, I submit that even in respect of that payment for that road, the work was completed, certificates by consultants were issued and, therefore, there was no money lost whatsoever.

Mr Speaker, I have explained all the three issues about me, and clearly, you can see that there is no evidence whatsoever; that Shimoni being a private issue, the decorations - I did not participate in those procurements and the paying of the money. I did not direct anyone to pay the money.  So, they have failed to adduce evidence and, therefore, must expunge all this reference to me from their report. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that the beautification project has indeed had positive impact on Kampala City, its environs and the road corridors. The face of Kampala and Entebbe has improved tremendously. The open parks are green and beautified roundabouts are very evident and some now have fountains. Most road corridors are good. 

This is further confirmed by the value-for-money audit report by COWI Uganda which was instituted by the Auditor-General, which, in fact, forms part of the Auditor-General’s report that we are debating and I quote, “The beautification projects have greatly improved the look of Kampala City, Entebbe Municipality and the long road corridor where the projects were implemented, and that the quality of work done under the project and the facilities put in place, were providing the intended services.

I call upon all Ugandans to step-up personal efforts to stop littering and piling up garbage irresponsibly, and for local governments to beautify their towns and cities and sustain cleanliness.
Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am happy and proud to have served my country during the CHOGM preparations. I am reliably informed that when Her Majesty the Queen landed at Stansted, she said that CHOGM in Uganda was the most successful, the best organised and the most beautiful.

On this, I pray that all allegations against me be expunged from the report. I thank you very much, indeed.

3.45 
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I want to ask, hon. Hope Mwesigye, the minister, to read Rule 133 for this House because she has talked about the rules, and really, to me it is a matter of principle so that all of you can get to know. Rule 133 –(Interjections)- thank you, Mr Speaker; Rule 133 – “General Functions of Parliamentary Committees: The functions of Parliamentary Committees in addition to their specific functions under these Rules shall include the following:
a)	To assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies;
b)	To carry out relevant research in their respective fields and report to Parliament on their function.” 
This is in addition, so that in case you are investigating a matter of a road and there are incidental issues, you do not leave them hanging.

MRS MWESIGYE: I am aware of that rule; in fact, I am also aware of Rule 181 on the special powers of the committees. But Rule 133 and 181 must be read within the ambits of the other relevant rules, in this case Rule 148; otherwise, you would have the Local Government Committee doing the work of PAC or that of Social Services. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.05 
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the minister, on decoration for the venue. We spent Shs 617 million which you refer to on page 4 of your report. Now, the matter of contention by the Auditor-General in his report on page 25 is that the procurement did not follow PPDA regulations. The consortium of the decorators undertook to carry out the work without making any contract or agreement with the ministry. 

When you look backwards, the findings were that someone brought in these people; this consortium we are referring to. I want to seek your clarification; on page 4, you said that, “The meeting I chaired on 26th October, 2007, which PAC refers to on page 85 of its report, was purely to introduce the experts of beautification I had got from Malaysia to help improve the decoration concept and as a responsible chairperson of the beautification committee, I had to ensure that the last touches had to be perfect in bringing out the Ugandan image”. 

There is a problem of how this consortium came in; the contracts committee rejected the procurement. Subsequently, the PPDA was requested to ratify and legitimise the procurement. They said, “We cannot; you have already made an illegal process and we cannot give retrospective approval”.

Now, you said that your role was purely to introduce the experts in beautification; but you should keep in mind that you were the chairperson of the beautification committee. And in discussing beautification, you were to say, “Here is somebody I have got from Malaysia -” it was like chairing an interview panel and then you tell your colleagues “here is a young man I have come with, and he has a Bachelor of Commerce.” (Laughter)

The decoration went wrong; the gist of the query of the Auditor-General is that the decoration was not well done. There is evidence from the sub-committee that decoration did not go well. For example, on page 41 of the report of the Spouses Sub-committee, they say in the minutes, “The decoration of the Spouses’ luncheon in Golf Course Apartments fell short of what was agreed and presented at the planning stage”. That is on page 41 of the committee report. 

There are other evidences in the report pointing towards unsatisfactory decoration. So, when you deal with inquiry; the process was problematic, leading to poor decoration and, therefore, loss of value for money. That is why we go back to see how these people came in. If contracts committee and PPDA rejected them, we have to ask, “Who brought in these people?” And you have said, “I got these people from Malaysia”. 

So, my question is; how did you get these people? Did you go to Malaysia to shop for them? How did they come in? How did you know that decoration experts are in Malaysia so that you could go and bring them? (Laughter) 

It is in your statement that your role was to bring in these people and introduce them to the committee. Now, here is a report from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs – it is all here; it reads: “Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to the Solicitor General”, the letter is dated February 19th, 2008. “Given the opinions of the stakeholders, including the contracts committee, venue managers and the venue sub-committee, I am inclined to believe that this matter was discussed by the Executive Director PPDA, who advised me to request for advice from the Auditor-General, before I proceed with the payment. The Auditor-General, however, was reluctant to give me any specific guidelines except that I should comply with the relevant laws and regulations”; this is Ambassador Mugume. 

The gist of the issue that will exonerate you from the issue of decoration is to clear the way the consortium came on board. First of all, the Auditor-General says there was no contract; they just carried on the work. But the fact that they were given the job, that is what we call a contract you awarded; money was given as an award – you led to the giving of this job to this consortium of decorators. 

So, hon. Minister, help us to understand how you found these people and what role of policy you were playing; how did you get into the procurement of the decorators? That is the one clarification I want to seek from you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, the committee has been grossly abused and they have stated that we did nothing. I hope for procurement, the minister has understood. 

I will start from page 1 of the minister’s report. Shs 500 billion is about 10 percent of Uganda’s budget, and if Kampala was supposed to be shining, it would be shining up to now, and not for a few days. That is the reason the President directed an audit by the Auditor General, and that is the reason we are holding some of you responsible, and especially you, hon. Hope Mwesigye. 

Mr Speaker, the minister says we have no mandate. I want to help her understand that the Auditor-General is like a watching dog, if you are not in auditing. It can see what is passing in front, but it may not see what is passing at the back. The moment you realise that somebody passed at the back and caused a mistake, it must be brought to the surface. This is what you did and we want to demonstrate what was brought to the surface as far as the Auditor-General’s report was concerned.

You went and procured exhibitors because you said you took the exhibitors to Cabinet. We know exhibitors are under the Ministry of Trade, not Local Government. To begin with, how did you know the exhibitors? How did you carry them to Cabinet? If you read the minute very well, it says, “The exhibitors would start exhibiting from 14th November to 1st December.” You quoted exactly the proof when they had known.  

The work of exhibition belongs to the Ministry of Trade. The property they were using is Shimoni, which belongs to Uganda. This place was graded at almost Shs 1 billion using taxpayers’ money. That means if we are the ones who graded it, then we should have taken interest in it.

It is wrong for the minister to say that as Public Accounts Committee, we should not take interest in the exhibition yet they were using public property where people paid money. The minister who took them to Cabinet must know the person who collected the money. We have not gone to Trade; we have said it is you who went to Cabinet who knew them; who knows where the money went.

The minister talks about decoration. My colleague has laboured to ask her how she got the thing, procurement. In Uganda, we know under our Constitution, Article 119 - that is the Attorney-General. There is no contract in Uganda unless it has been cleared by the Attorney-General. We want to thank the Attorney-General; when he came he said, “Unless I have cleared, there is no contract.” I am happy he is seated here. Maybe you might – but we have a recording.

This consortium was never cleared. It went and executed work on behalf of Uganda. We want to find out how it did it. If you read the attachments, they are very clear. Hon. Hope Mwesigye chaired a meeting which she clearly states, on 26th October, 2007. We still had time. If we had wanted procurement to be done, we would have done it. 

But of interest are the opening remarks. She never asked anybody about what they had done as far as the consortium is concerned. She started – she called the meeting to order at 11.55 a.m. and started informing them of what she wants; but she never asked Sarah Nakamya about where the consortium was or where the reports were. There was no report. 

When you go to the next one, she asked them to introduce themselves. She never said, where is the consortium to introduce itself? That is Minute 10. 

Then we have the agenda. There is a report of the visits and the reactions to the report; there is no consortium being talked about. But when you go through up to the end, what hon. Wacha brought –the meeting agreed and who signed the minutes? Hope Mwesigye. Even when you go back to the attendance, the minute recorder was Sarah Nakamya. If you look at the person who confirmed the minutes - who is the secretary - is Rhoda Kaisho-Sinani. Who should have signed? The minute recorder or one of the Members? You look at the signing. Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho-Sinani is now signing and Hope Mwesigye is signing. That was on 26th October. But of interest is; the decorators put somebody called Faith Petals, who seemed to be procured. It was later established in the meeting that Faith Petals and Stems lacked proper company documents and subsequently, Finishing Touches was selected by the consortium to be procured. Are you seeing that? The same way forward where Hope Mwesigye, a whole minister signed. That means the consortium was procured when the minister was there. 

Now, having said that, there are things about the procedure which took place. First and foremost, we suppose we wanted decoration. I do not know where the budget was. But they went on to ask for decoration – we have attached Annex 21 if you want to go through it. The minister talks about it in the minutes of 26th. Then she brought in the decorators herself; then there is an attachment of the memorandum of understanding if you go through the attachments. This memorandum is not dated. That one is attached. I hope the minister is aware. 

When you go to decorators; the decorators supplied – the next attachment is a loose minute – before the contract. If you go to the next attachment, there was a decision of the chairman from the PDU, that is Procurement and Disposal Unit. But I want to quote the following that was written on January, 22, 2008; “Decoration of key CHOGM venues.” It says, “Reference is made to the letter dated PPD/17/ January, 2008 against which you endorsed on 18th January, 2007.” I have noted the following documents pertaining to this procurement. A contracts committee decision dated 24th November, which rejected retrospective approval while giving advice in form of an observation. The contracts committee rejected because the thing had been flouted from day one. 

Secondly, an internal memo dated 20th December forwarding an evaluation prepared by the chairperson of the venue for CHOGM with a cost break-down, which was delivered from the reports of venue managers and tentative budget figures. Now, the venue is sending proposals when the work has been done. There is no contract. An internal memo from the contract dated 4th that analysed the evaluation report and has made discovery, while making such recommendation, says the procurement was irregular.

This is from inside; that the procurement was irregular. We go ahead.  The PPDA says - that is now the next letter, but I want to quote the last one. “In light of the above, we are unable to accept the procurement.” This is also attached; PPDA rejecting the procurement of the decorators. They are attached. 

When you go to the next one, there is an attachment. They are all on procurement. The committee sat this morning - now this contracts committee - and observed there was no submission to the procurement unit regarding the subject matter apart from the internal memo from the coordinating chairperson. This is about flowers. This is dated 21st November, 2007. There was nothing to the Contracts Committee as far as decoration was concerned. 

We have a letter dated 22nd November 2007 from Amama Mbabazi, SC, MP, Minister in charge of Security, to Hilda Musubira. This is what it says - the above side - that is decoration –

“The following inspection team of the International Conference Centre, Serena, where the CHOGM opening ceremony is to take place; the CHOGM activities inspection team has observed that the place is not yet appropriately decorated. We have been informed that the problem is with the procurement process. Given the importance and urgency of the matter, we strongly recommend that you ensure that the decoration is done immediately and then explore the possibility of retrospective procurement is undertaken.” You can see these guys were determined to bend the rules. (Interjections) Yes, that is true. (Interjections)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I am not hon. Amama Mbabazi. We are debating my portion in the report. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to start to smuggle hon. Amama Mbabazi into my debate? Is he really in order with good faith? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, we are dealing with hon. Mwesigye and not hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the ruling. Basically, we are not blaming hon. Amama Mbabazi -

THE SPEAKER: Really, we are dealing with accountability -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, that is where we are coming -

THE SPEAKER: We are not dealing with so and so sat there. It is the misuse of funds that did not follow the procedure; that the accounting officer was suppressed. These are things that we expect you -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is what it is. I am not here blaming hon. Mbabazi. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is even saying they should have explored the business of procurement early enough. He said, “Ok since you have erred, you get retrospective.” Who delayed the process? And you can see the person who delayed the process. (Laughter) 

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I think you clearly see how I suffered in this process. I wish to have clarification from you. I made my statement here. I pointed out the allegations that were put on me which I should answer for. Should hon. Nandala-Mafabi now start raising issues which are for the accounting officer of Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who has actually even written an explanation, bound it, and it is here with us in Parliament? Should he continue taking that route when clearly, at the beginning I said, “I will take political responsibility, but I will not become the accounting officer of any ministry?”

THE SPEAKER: My advice is that when you are dealing with cases here, you should always address yourself to Article 164 and then you bring in political leadership if the accounting officer is overpowered. This is on accountability. Article 164 is very important and that is if, for instance, a politician forces the payment without following the strict procedure. These are issues, but let us avoid mixing private relationships in this case.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you for the guidance. One of the things which I wanted to clear is that the procurement never followed the prescribed methods and in the process, Government of Uganda incurred an expense of Shs 617 million which was not even budgeted for, and the Executive Director of PPDA rejected - the people who are supposed to reject procurement - and the Auditor-General also rejected the expenditure. If you read the letter which the honourable read, which was addressed to the Solicitor-General by the PS Mugume, that the Auditor-General cannot accept because you must follow the rules and regulations, and the person who flouted this is the minister; the evidence is very clear! She chaired a meeting. She came with people from wherever and guided people that, “We go ahead and form a consortium,” and as we talk now, there is no agreement which exists with the decorators and yet they have been paid, contrary to the rules, and the money was not budgeted for!

The final part which I wanted to look at is that - 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying the accounting officer was overpowered -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Was overpowered because he was forced to do something which he would not have done.

Mr Speaker, the last part -(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, is it in order -[Mr Odonga Otto: “Procedure”]- There is “order” on the Floor. Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: But this is a point of order. Let us listen to it. I will rule then later you can say what you want to say.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to keep asserting that I forced the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Foreign Affairs to pay or procure, without tendering evidence? I think he should bring evidence, otherwise I do not think it is in order for him to continue.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you substantiate? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the attachments are here. One, decoration starts from Annex 19. No.1, the minister convened a meeting on 26 October 2006 where she chaired and in this meeting, she asked for a report from the decorators and from there she went and made a way forward and said the meeting agreed that for purposes of procurement, given the time constraints, one of all their companies be procured and contracted to decorate CHOGM venues. That was not her role; that is the role of the accounting officer. That is No.1, where the minister erred.

Two, in her response she said she brought Malaysians. She did bring Malaysians and we asked, “Under what law did you go to bring Malaysians?” Why did you bring Malaysians? What concept is it that you knew which others never knew? Why didn’t you then do the decoration and we pay you? And then, how did you know them? That one is a process of flouting the procedure.

Now, having brought the Malaysians and declared them to form a consortium, they went ahead and did work without a contract and even the Auditor-General never audited this expenditure.

Mr Speaker, this contract was forced on the accounting officer of Ministry of Foreign Affairs because if you read the minute which she has attached to her letter, the first minute which was chaired by Sarah Nakayima, CHOGM Secretariat Chairperson, and the people who attended were decorators. Now, Rhoda Kaiso was not available; who is the person in charge of the decoration? From there, the minister attends the meeting and chairs and directs. Mr Speaker, it is very clear that if you follow this, the minister, Hope Mwesigye, is liable for the Shs 617 million. 

I want to conclude on something she talked about; the PS of Local Government. She says PAC has no mandate to look into what she did which is not right. We can explain that further and we believe that if you say the Auditor-General is gospel truth, we should have laid the report here and said, “Pass or leave it.” But now the issue of Mr Ssekkono - Mr Speaker, I have the minutes of the handover which are attached inside, but I have the detailed one on page 31; it is also an annex inside here. But the annex says, “Beautification of Kampala City, Entebbe Municipality,” Oh, of course, “Entebbe Corridor and Clock Tower.” Ssekkono signing, handing over. 

But the interesting one which is towards the end says, “We have so far spent Ugshs 5.0 billion leaving a balance of 1.5, however, Omega Construction Company, which was contracted to beautify Clock Tower, Ggaba, Munyonyo and Makindye Kibuye corridors grossly underperformed and we have refused to pay this contractor any more money beyond the down payment of Ugshs 85.6 million, which he received at the beginning. I recommend that no more money should be paid to this particular contractor until he has made substantial progress on the corridor.” Signed, Ssekkono. The minister in charge of beautification said that for her she saw the beautification.

If you look at page 9 of hon. Hope Mwesigye’s response, the second last paragraph says, “The accounting officer did not sign the addendum until there was evidence of improvement of works in form of grass and trees” that is from February 2008 when it was cleared by the Solicitor-General up to April 2008. We are saying that there was no grass; the accounting officer never signed the addendum. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, at the beginning of my response, I clearly stated that I will deal with issues that concern me and issues of accountability are not my mandate as you have very wisely ruled.
 
In accordance with Article 164, it is the permanent secretary to deal with issues of accountability. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi refused to invite Mr Ssekkono to the committee and he was a key witness in this matter. Is he, therefore, in order to keep debating the area which I clearly said is not my mandate?

THE SPEAKER: I do not see us reaching an end in this matter. He thinks that he has evidence against you. We should listen and then you come later to refute the allegations.

MRS OGWAL: I have listened to hon. Hope Mwesigye on the matter concerning her mandate vis-à-vis the mandate of the permanent secretary. I want to understand the functional relationship and responsibility of the minister as far the work of the accounting officer is concerned. While we are looking at this report, we should also look at where we place ministers in terms of political responsibility. If something happens within your ministry, what role do you play as a political leader? I think this is one aspect that we cannot let escape from our sight. We need to know the role of the ministers, their political role in supervising and ensuring that they prevent anything that may go wrong within their realm of influence.

THE SPEAKER: I think according to Article 164, the accounting officer can reject a directive from the minister if it has not followed the proper procedure. The accounting officer will not say the minister said; he/she has a right not to agree with the political head. If the minister uses his political muscle and forces the officer to sign the cheque, that will be evidence against a political leader.

MS AOL: I have been thinking about how politicians can interfere with accountability and how they can be brought to book.
 
THE SPEAKER: Article 164 provides as follows: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from use and shall be required to make good of the loss even if he/she has ceased to hold the office.” This means that if the accounting officer was forced, evidence must be brought that he resisted, but because of political muscle this was done.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I still want to know what happened in the past when ministers were censured. How come it is now difficult to implement. If a minister plays around with public funds then he/she has to stand accountable for his/her action.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I want to be guided, because in my thinking, we are debating CHOGM in relation to the question of broad corruption. Accountability can be a critical issue, but there is also political corruption. The issue of public procurement is one of the areas affected by corruption. Annex 21 includes the minutes, and venue of a sub-committee meeting with some decorators for CHOGM 2007. 

This meeting actually procured. Minute 15/2007, the chairperson highlighted that there is need to work with Malaysians to enhance the decorators’ ideas. The consortium had already talked about their ideas. When the chairperson was concluding, she stated that there was need to work with the Malaysians.

Minute 16/2007, the meeting agreed that for purposes of procurement, given the time constraint, one of all these companies be procured and contracted to decorate the CHOGM 2007 venues. Is this not procurement? And if we are dealing with corruption in procurement, this is one of them. So, I do not see why we should limit debate on the matter and restrict it to accountability when procurement and corruption in procurement is one of the core forms of corruption that the African Peer Review Mechanism Report of 2007 pointed out that Shs 258.6 million is lost annually through corruption via procurement.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are considering the word, “accountability” narrowly. “Accountability” is wider and covers even the situation you are talking about.

MS AMONGI: Yeah, then it reinforces my argument that these people procured outside the regulation. Because in procurement and contracting, the procedure is very clear; you go to PPDA and so on.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, hon. Amongi and Mr Speaker. The information I want to give hon. Amongi and the House is that whereas in the strictest sense of Article 164 we look at a structured government that is looking at the permanent secretaries - accounting officers appointed every financial year by the PS Ministry of Finance - CHOGM was a special case in such a way that there was fusion of political roles and they were not clear. There were no clearly appointed accounting officers the way it should have been structured as required by the Constitution. Thank you.

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, I wouldn’t have liked to interfere in this debate as we consider allegations against one of my colleagues because I will also have my day here. (Laughter) But having said that, we should not allow wrong impressions to be created. There was separation between the political people and the accounting people. There was a cabinet committee on CHOGM whose role was policy. There was also a national taskforce composed of permanent secretaries of different and relevant ministries that generated work plans and expenditure and came for policy guidance from the cabinet committee. 

All resources from the Ministry of Finance were channelled through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs signed Memoranda of Understanding with all accounting officers so that when the money came from the Ministry of Finance and it was for transport, it would go directly to the Ministry of Transport. If it was for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it was retained at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. So, there was really no fusion as my good friend, hon. Okumu wants us to believe. 

In fact, there was separation; accounting officers were playing their role and political leaders were also playing theirs in giving policy. I thought I should make that clear so that we do not go away with that impression. That does not mean the taskforce did not report to the political leaders; it did and policy was given on that basis. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, we must appreciate that this is the first time this House is handling a matter of this complexity. I remember when we were dealing with matters almost similar to this in respect to censure; we were dealing with one individual at a time. Now we are dealing with a number of individuals and I think this is raising a procedural problem. Because I would have expected all the people who were involved in the matter should have been given a chance to present their cases and then the House would have debated them all at the same time as though they were debating the committee report.

But the way we are handling the matter now, it is as though we had already identified a culprit and I think it is wrong. I think we should give all the other ministers and people involved to present their cases and maybe there will be correlation and amplifications just like hon. Kutesa has just indicated which would have helped in discussions.

The second issue is that in future, I think committees should try to identify matters which are essentially criminal and give them to the CID and Police to handle, and leave us with matters which are essentially political and policy related. Because if we are going to handle criminal matters, where are we going to handle? We do not have the capacity to handle those criminal elements. We are essentially a policy-related organ. But as of now, I think we should allow all the other ministers who have been named in the report to present their case and then we discuss them. We should not identify one individual as though he or she were the only culprit.

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened very carefully to your guidance and I am certainly persuaded by hon. Ben Wacha in his submission that if all those mentioned could have the opportunity to present at a go, it would save some of us who are in problems for coming up to respond to certain issues, from being taken rather personally. We would have that opportunity to debate without necessarily appearing to be setting our eyes on some particular persons, who for their own weaknesses may always think that they are being targeted. (Laughter)

But having said that, I would think, as a rejoinder to what hon. Wacha has mentioned, the difficulty goes farther. I agree those criminal matters can be referred to the CID for investigations, but how do you investigate someone who is still in office? How can a superintendent of Police, for instance, go to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with a view to obtaining a statement? (Laughter) You see, it really does not add up at all. The normal procedure that would be plausible in such circumstances –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my brother, hon. Sekikubo that within East Africa, because of such lacuna and complexity, one of the eldest presidents of the region, Mzee Mwai Kibaki decided to request his ministers who had been implicated in a similar report, Mr Ruto and Mr Wetangula, to step aside. He told them: “I consider you innocent until investigation is complete because by you continuing to be in office, you jeopardise the process of investigation.” So, that can happen here if President Museveni thinks that this corruption will affect his election.  

THE SPEAKER: When do you consider somebody implicated? You consider him when we have considered the report and adopted it, don’t you?  And this is exactly what you are doing.  As far as what hon. Ben Wacha has said, even if the various people mentioned in the report are given opportunity to state their case, eventually we shall be considering each case separately. Because there will never be time to say that we adopt the report without considering the particular cases.  That is the position. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the problem is, how can the simple poor Police officers go to investigate authority?  Sometimes the ministers could be on presidential assignments or in a cabinet meeting; how can a policeman in such circumstances really go to carry out criminal investigations with the incumbent still holding authority? The best thing that should be done in circumstances like this is for them to first step aside and allow the due investigations to be carried out because you cannot investigate authority. 

THE SPEAKER: But has that stage come for the Police to come in? Do you really want to say that we stop the debate and allow the Police to take over?  The stage of the Police has not yet come. It will come in – we can decide not to debate the report of the committee and send the material to the Police.  It is really up to us!
 
MR SEKIKUBO: Even in that way, Mr Speaker, when you see the suspects laughing broadly as they are doing –(Laughter)– you know, they should not be in this audience. They are long past this audience. It is even failing on decorum. 

THE SPEAKER: You know, they become suspects when a CRB is opened by the Police. I think let the Prime Minister say something. 

MR OKUPA: Before the Prime Minister comes in, resulting from what hon. Ben Wacha raised, being the senior lawyer here, I think even in the committee recommendations there are those areas where the committee has recommended that the DPP and IGG take over. I think that we should adopt that when we reach there - because those are the cases we cannot deal with here. So, when it comes to that, we expect Members to say, “Let the IGG and DPP proceed from there,” because we are limited in capacity. But we should pronounce ourselves on the political ones and forward them to IGG and DPP to deal with suspects. 

MR KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the hon. Wacha rightly notes, this is the first time we are handling a debate like this. I remember the Local Government Accounts Committee came up with a report and one of our colleagues, the hon. Byandala, was mentioned in that report.  But we never went through this sort of thing we are going through now when we were looking at that report. 

Now that we have adopted this procedure, Mr Speaker, I strongly propose that after the report was presented, we should have had a general reaction from the Leader of Government Business in this House about, one, the two reports; the Auditor-General’s report and this particular report.  It would have guided us, for example, if there were issues which Government had already identified that they were mistakes done and the Leader of Government Business says, “It is true, as Government, we have identified 1, 2, and 3 as mistakes and we have even taken remedial action,” then it would sort of narrow this debate.  

What is the government’s position on this report? I thought that they should have come with their position and then we can debate this report keeping the government position in mind. And, Mr Speaker, I am raising this for one major reason; when you see the report, it is so detailed with so many recommendations; we need to find a way of narrowing it such that you can guide us. Otherwise, we do not have the time; between now and when we are going to be nominated is just a few weeks. If we are to get one of our colleagues to come up and we take a few days –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Katuntu could be right, but the problem we are having right now is that hon. Hope Mwesigye did not have a chance to present her case to the committee. But we are not very nervous about others who got the opportunity to meet the committee and also present their responses in writing. So, maybe for the future, we implore the government, particularly the President and Leader of Government Business, to try and persuade the ministers to also appreciate the problems that Parliament has. Because if a minister is given four chances to meet the committee and she doesn’t, and now you can see that we are all engaged and the focus is on hon. Hope Mwesigye and yet you find that the issues that hon. Hope Mwesigye dealt with are not as big as others. But all our attention is being diverted. 

So, I would only wish to implore Parliament –(Laughter)- that at this stage, we have heard from Hope Mwesigye. Can we also be given a chance to hear from others who have not been heard?  Because what we are doing this afternoon is what should have been done in the committee. That is my concern. So, we now move forward so that we can hear other voices before we can discuss the entire report? 

MR KATUNTU: Maybe I could wind up, Mr Speaker.  You see, like hon. Sam Kutesa notes, he says that he is going to have his day. (Laughter) He is going to present a statement that we might end up having this kind of ping pong; between that and this and then it will come to hon. Byabagambi and then another. Really, we are like in a committee of the whole House – something which should have happened in the committee, but we are now hearing evidence.  And yet we would be strictly looking at the report with evidence, therein, and then do a general report. Mr Speaker, we really need your guidance. 

But the important point of my standing is, can we have the government position? Did Government look into this matter and found that there was something wrong? Or we are actually wasting time; maybe there was nothing wrong during CHOGM, according to Government, and we are here just wasting time. If there was something wrong, let Government come up and say, “At least on this and this, we realise things did not go well. But as Government, we are taking this step,” and then we shall be moving in a tidier way, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all the committees we have are functionary committees to this House. Whatever they do, before they come to the final thing, they must report to us, including a report of PAC. It is not sealed until it is considered by this House. It is this House that pulls the seal on the report. That is why we have to receive it, consider it and adopt it or reject it. And that is what we are exactly doing. The committee cannot make their reports and send them to the Executive or to the CID. The committee must report to us, we consider the report and then make directives one way or the other, and this is what we are doing. 

In asking the government to put forward its side before we debate, people may think that they are prejudicing the outcome of the report. This is the fear. However, since you like it, I will ask the Leader of Government Business to make a statement.

4.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to answer three issues. The first one is the statement that His Excellency the Vice President and ministers who are adversely affected by the PAC report should stand aside and let investigations go on. This is wrong because His Excellency the Vice President and the ministers are assumed, according to our law, to be innocent until proved guilty by courts of law. That is a constitutional matter. So, hon. Ekanya, he has gone away, but he was my student and I want to teach you that it would have been improper for his Excellency to tell -(Ms Aol rose_)- But I am clarifying. That is the position of His Excellency the President and it is our position. I want to inform hon. Ekanya.

There was another issue, namely, that how can IGG and CID investigate these people. Let me inform you that when His Excellency received the report of the Auditor-General, he directed the IGG and CID to investigate the officials adversely mentioned in that report, and I want to inform you that they are doing so. They have not complained that any of the ministers or His Excellency the Vice President has refused to respond to any of the issues they have raised. We should not speculate. That is their work. We should not stand here and speculate on the Floor of this Parliament.

I have actually four positions or issues. The third issue, as the Speaker has guided, is that each person must express his or her views. Each person must defend himself or herself here on the Floor of Parliament. 

It was the government’s view when they did explain their story or facts that a number of issues which they submitted to PAC were ignored. It was the government view, and that is why they are here to articulate those issues and to give you their defence in writing. That is why I did write to all of them - to permanent secretaries and the Head of Public Service, to all those who were adversely affected by the PAC report and the Auditor-General’s of course, but more so PAC. I asked them to write to the Speaker of Parliament, copy to the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, copy to all Members of Parliament, so that when we are debating their matters, you should take into account what they have said.

That is extremely important and already they have written. Dr Mulwana, for example, has written to say that subsequently, when he met the PAC committee, the Auditor-General cleared him. He has a statement and evidence from the Auditor-General and it will be submitted by the Speaker because he wrote to the Speaker. We shall discuss it at the right time.

THE SPEAKER: He wrote to me with a copy to the chairman, PAC.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Yes, he did.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is true I got a copy of the letter from Prof. Mulwana. However, the issue which was there was the US$ 100,000 which he had stated had been refunded. What we are trying to look at is where it is. This was money advanced. Otherwise, I got a copy of the letter. We are looking for the refund of this money.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but what was in the certificate of the Auditor-General? What did it say?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General says he has seen the accountability and confirmed that he had seen the advance.

THE SPEAKER: He said there was nothing more.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are looking for the advance.

MR EKANYA: I want to ask for one clarification. Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Prime Minister - unfortunately I missed him being my lecturer at the university – and from the NRM government. Don’t you have internal mechanisms of investigating issues so that you give a report to this Parliament saying so and so was investigated, so and so is clean and this is wrong? You can then ask the NRM as a Cabinet to investigate each individual and clear others so that you save this country and the President. Don’t you have a system? (Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, is hon. Ekanya in order to state in this House, on this Floor, on this day of the year that the NRM Government does not have mechanisms to investigate? It is a sitting Government and the Executive arm of Government has the IGG and the Auditor-General, and these institutions were asked to audit and investigate these cases. Is hon. Ekanya in order? If he does not understand how Government functions, is he in order to say irrelevant things on this Floor?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. Hon. Ekanya, Government has independent institutions to investigate these matters including the IGG, the CID and of course the Auditor-General. We use those institutions and their roles, functions and powers are clearly stated in the Constitution. I think I have exhausted the issues. I have informed you of the Government position

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Let me ask a direct question. Was there anything wrong with CHOGM, according to Government?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I also want to find out from the Prime Minister whether the government side found anything wrong with the Auditor-General’s report. It seems the government side is looking at PAC as if the committee went out to look for these people. 

However, the President himself sanctioned the Auditor-General to carry out an audit and the Auditor-General came out with a report. Did the government find anything wrong with that report or not? If the government found nothing wrong with that report, then we are wasting time here. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, we have made it clear that his Excellency the Vice-President and all honourable ministers are here to state their cases and we do not want to prejudice you. We would like you to hear their defence and then we shall make our decisions together. I thank you. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister who time and again, in the course of making his statement, kept referring to Members as his former students. Yes, there are a number of people in this House who passed through your hands, but that does not mean that they are still your students. They are now your equals. They have found their way to this House through elections unlike some of you who are here with one vote. So, please, when they say this, they know how difficult it is to go out there to look for votes. (Laughter)

Having said that, this morning when I tuned into the BBC, one of the very first firm and stern decisions taken by an African President – Her Excellency Johnson Sirleaf, the President of Liberia - last night, was to send all her ministers on leave pending investigations, assessments and evaluation as to how they have performed their duties. The counterpart of hon. Dr Kiyonga – the Minister of Defence in that country – was also on BBC and there was a sound bite where he welcomed the idea. He said that it was the only way to show accountability to the President as the appointing authority and to the people of Liberia. He said that after an assessment, he was very optimistic that those who had performed well will be re-appointed. 

In a similar vein, his Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda appointed his Executive, having had confidence in them. However, this confidence has been eroded by the revelations of the Auditor-General’s report and we need to make a difference. On several occasions, I have seen people come out to impute that this report was cooked by the Public Accounts Committee. The Public Accounts Committee only investigated and came out with recommendations as to how the Auditor-General’s report should assist this country to improve on issues. This was not the Nandala-Mafabi work. The Nandala-Mafabi committee got a report, which was laid here on the Floor of the House of Parliament as prescribed in the Constitution. It is a committee of Parliament which studies the Auditor-General’s reports to Parliament and comes up with recommendations to assist Government. It is not an issue of witch-hunting. 

We are really here to assist one another and to make sure that issues of accountability are of interest to each and everyone of us. It is in our interest that we should have a clean Government. 

Having said that, I do appreciate the advice which was given by hon. Ben Wacha about the very intricate situation in which we have found ourselves. This is quite a new thing. In the past, where Article 118 was used to censure certain Members of this House, they were censured on issues where they were pinpointed as individuals. However, this is an omnibus report and I am sure during the time when preparations were being made for organising CHOGM, there was an inter-functional relationship between the various committees which were established by Government to organise this function, and also between the various ministries that had a role to play in executing and making sure that CHOGM succeeded. 

I will, therefore, say yes, we are in a new situation; we have never had any experience from which to borrow a leaf and say that the other time it was an omnibus situation and we used this approach to get ourselves through. There are many people who have been named in this report. There are those like the Members of Parliament and the ministers who have the opportunity to come and defend themselves and give explanations for their own exonerations, if any, in this House. However, there are others who were mentioned, who unfortunately do not have the mandate, the position and a chance to come and stand in front of the Speaker at this microphone and be able to make a defence. Of course, for those, there are other recommendations that have been made to deal with them in the most civilised manner, using the state machinery like the Police and the Office of the IGG. I think for those who are here, who have the opportunity to explain themselves - because not all of us had an opportunity to be there when they appeared before the committee and there are new things coming up. I remember on this Floor, there were two honourable ministers, hon. Isaac Musumba and hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, who came and pleaded that they had not been fairly treated in accordance with the laws of natural justice and they be heard. I stood on this Floor to plead for them and told my chairperson to accept so that we could clear ourselves of any doubts. I asked that they be given the benefit of doubt and have them scheduled to appear before the committee. This was intended to enable them present any grounds to save their political lives. That was done. 

There are other reports that were given after that with hon. John Byabagambi writing one too. That actually ties well with what the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister said here about a week and half back. He said that he had directed the ministers whose names had been implicated by this report to prepare their defences. I do not know how many of them have done that. I also do not know whether they are going to keep coming up one by one, the way hon. Hope Mwesigye has done. I have also seen another report from hon. Isaac Musumba and I am sure my friend, hon. Kutesa –(Laughter)– Ceausescu, as we nicknamed him the other time, might also come with his defence. However, do not get scared because we shall not slaughter you the way Ceausescu was slaughtered; we will treat you humanely.

Anyway, with all these and, Mr Speaker, knowing very well that today is the 4th day of November and we are having parliamentary nominations on the 25th and 26th  of this month, I can assure you that thereafter, nobody will sit in this Chamber to debate. We will all have gone to defend our efforts. So, in that case, I think what should be of concern to us from now to 20th November is how we can dispose of this report with due deliberations given. I think that should be the issue.

I know there have been other suggestions as to whether we should debate it omnibus by allowing some of the people who have been implicated to defend themselves. I know that will take time, but this is the heart and soul of good governance. We cannot run away from it. We have got to debate this report –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. I will be one of those MPs who will not be here to debate this report after nominations. However, the information I would like to give to my Leader of Opposition is that I am not very comfortable under my skin. I remember I was the first whistleblower that CHOGM money was being swindled by Members of this House. That caused me to be taken before the disciplinary committee of this Parliament, chaired by hon. Asuman Kiyingi, which made a recommendation that I be disciplined for spoiling the name of this House. 

That committee’s report was tabled before this House, putting me in the dock the way my honourable ministers are now. The House debated that report with the Deputy Speaker presiding. The trend of the debate was whether I should be disciplined or not. That debate went on up to 9 O’clock before the Speaker of the day ruled that I apologise, before the Members voted. I refused to apologise.

Now, if as a mere whistleblower I could be treated like that –(Laughter)– and I had never been treated like that in nine years – how about the people I was blowing the whistle against?

The information I would like to give is that depending on which side of the House you are, there is a way you are going to be treated. I do not think –(Interjections)– someone should apologise to me, Mr Speaker. Anyway, the information I would like to give is: Can these people be treated a little better than I was treated? Secondly, can somebody apologise to me so that, for the record, my children can get to know that I did not go to a disciplinary committee for indiscipline, but for exposing the very people seated opposite me. Thank you so much. (Applause)

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you have guided the House and I believe the information in this report is very good and enough to form a basis for debate. My sense is that we should not delay. Let us continue so that we can make recommendations to the relevant authority. Otherwise, if we say that we postpone the debate on this report, it may never come to the Floor of this House again.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Wadri. The information I would like to give to hon. Wadri and the House is that we are now in November 2010 and CHOGM was held in November 2007. The President, in his wisdom, asked the Auditor-General to investigate this issue because of public concerns, which hon. Odonga Otto should have been part of, and now some people have been named in this report. This is not a political report. The Auditor-General’s report is not a political report.

The question being asked is: “Honestly speaking, why can’t those named in this report step aside to allow further inquiries into the issues raised by the Auditor-General so that genuinely something can come out?” This is the question being asked, but the Leader of Government Business tried to meander by giving examples that were diversionary. For example, saying he was a lecturer to some of us and so on. You are a lecturer in a particular subject, but you can also receive lectures –(Interruption)

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and honourable Members of Parliament, when I was specifically asked whether His Excellency the Vice President and the honourable ministers mentioned in this report should step side, I specifically said that it is against the laws of natural justice. So, is hon. Reagan Okumu in order to say that I meandered. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appeal to you to be courteous to each other. That is when we shall move in the right way.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to conclude on the information – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, the person who was holding the Floor is hon. Wadri. You can only interrupt him if there is information you have to give, but not a contribution.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the three colleagues who have given me information. Hon. Samuel Odonga Otto, you were not a sacrificial lamb in vain. No! It has yielded fruits. You were crucified the way Jesus Christ was crucified and today those who are Christians believing in him are now able to say that they have seen the light. So, you were not sacrificed in vain. In only saying that, I also want to say —

THE SPEAKER: But Jesus Christ rose from the dead on the third day. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Yes, I agree with you, Mr Speaker. Jesus Christ rose after three days. Hon. Odonga Otto politically has risen because what he complained about again has blossomed after three years, so, what a coincidence. 

The urge and the cry of the public that there be a special audit for the CHOGM resources was not only conceived and decided by the President. I remember the issue of a special audit was a decision of this House. It is there in the Hansard. We all agreed that there were grounds strong enough to make us suspect or be suspicious of the clean usage of these resources and we did ask the Auditor-General to conduct a special audit and he expeditiously did it. That is the reason why we are having this debate.

Having said that, I now turn onto the first and second issues which were raised by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as to whether the persons implicated in this report should not be honourable enough to soul search themselves and come up to say, “Look, I am clean and my being clean can only be proved by myself”. First and foremost they should say, “If you think that I abused my office and I misused my position, let me step aside; let other institutions of investigation in Government take over this matter”. That will be the most honourable thing really expected. 

If I were the one, I would have said, let me step aside so that the public comes out and judges me clean, that, “This man is indeed innocent because he has stepped aside and he has allowed investigations to take place”. After all, when you step aside voluntarily in that nature, you will still go with your office as it were. You will still be a minister; you will still be having your very powerful land cruisers; you will still be having your escorts and you will still be having your fuel. So, what do you really have to lose? You have nothing to lose.

All we are saying is, for a month or so, let me take leave; let justice prevail; let me show my innocence by stepping aside. Really, if it was Kassiano Ezati Wadri, I would have stepped aside so that people are able to judge me right from the word go. (Applause) After all, this is for our own good as an institution and the own good of the individuals. 

I do not have to say that all this has come at a time when a lot of information is being looked for in order to go and talk out in the public. Yes, these are going to be election issues. I must shamelessly and without mincing my words say this. These are going to be election issues. If I were the one, to really exonerate myself so that I can go out and canvass for votes I would say, “You see, I am innocent; that is the reason why I stepped aside to allow investigations take place”. That will earn you -(Interjections)- yes in the NRC. 

I wish Maj. Gen Kahinda Otafiire was here. When he was implicated for wrongdoing, he resigned and stood aside. I remember that time it was for drawing a pistol at the late wife of hon. Sam Kutesa. He stood aside and he came back heroically. The public came up and said, “Yes, I think this is a gentleman; a gentleman who can be able to say if I am in the wrong, please, let me step aside”.

My appeal to my senior brothers and sisters in this House is that, surely, there is nothing wrong with them cleansing their image by stepping aside so that the machinery of Government is able to go ahead. Professor, I will take it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House and you have given a chance to the Members whose names have been mentioned in the report, that they come to this House and present their view point. Now, what I get from hon. Wadri is, you have not heard their positions and now you are calling on them to step aside. Is he superseding the other one or what? 

The guidance I am looking for is: Has this position changed? Now we are saying they should not be listened to because if they have stepped aside they will not be Members of this House. The moment they step out, they will not be Members of this House. So, how does -(Interjections)- well, I am seeking guidance not from a chorus of Members of the Opposition. So, I think my own view of things is, let us hear. Probably those who have already come to a conclusion of stepping aside and or may have second thoughts. I think justice must be seen in this House and not implied by a chorus of Members of Parliament. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what you are doing is not a question of investigation. We are just considering a report from our functionary committee which is reporting to us to consider whether there are merits in what they found out and recommended or not. In doing so, we give opportunity to people implicated to put forward their case so that we look at the two situations and then say, we accept this recommendation, we reject this recommendation or we adjust this recommendation. 

So, the question of resigning to facilitate investigations does not arise because that has been completed. It was completed by the Auditor-General and now the committee has looked at the report; it is giving us it findings for us to consider. So, I think let us go that way. 

Let us be courteous to each other. Let us continue to be courteous to each other. Even if we allow - which we are going to do - all the implicated Members to make their cases, eventually when you are finalising, we shall consider each case separately not omnibus. This is what we are going to do.

You have compared other situations; you mentioned Kenya. Kenya is operating under a different constitution and that is why what actually happened. This is a constitution which was inaugurated about a month ago. It is different from ours.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I wind up, I expressed fears about the time factor and, therefore, would like to buy the idea of hon. Ben Wacha that honourable colleagues who have had their names implicated in this matter be given an opportunity to make their defence. However, because of the inter-functional relationships of the various committees and ministries, we debate it omnibus. Of course, we are not going to give an omnibus judgement as it were; each case will be considered on its own merit as the people implicated give their explanations.

As I wind up, I would also like to assure Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere that these people were given a hearing and we are here, ready to continue to give them a hearing. We are not going to condemn anybody the way Ceausescu was slaughtered in Romania in 89 without a hearing the way hon. Sam Kutesa was implying the other time. We are going to give each person an opportunity to be heard. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: My assessment, having listened to you, is that you are tired. So, we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 November 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
