Wednesday, 4 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. In the public gallery we have our children. When I get their details I will formally introduce them to you. You are welcome.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT OF 2002/2003

2.39
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Johnson Malinga): Mr Speaker, I did present the report yesterday for the consideration of Parliament and my expectation is that Parliament will debate it now and we recommend its adoption. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the chairperson has mentioned, he tendered the report and we agreed that you would read it so that today we start debate on it, if any.

2.41
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Mr Speaker, it looks like when we had the first report, many of the queries, which were supposed to come out of the second report, were fairly debated in the first instance. So, I would propose that you put the question and we pass this report as well.

2.42
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): The truth of the matter is that these are very important matters but they are old and there is a feeling that they have been overtaken by events. Everybody tends to rely on the committee having examined these matters carefully and decided on them. You noticed yesterday, Mr Speaker, that hardly much debate was generated although a few issues were raised. 

My feeling is that the matters are so important and the recommendation of this House should be that the subsequent ones, which are much nearer, should be thoroughly studied and even professional advice sought on the matter before decisions or recommendations are made by the committee. 

Otherwise, the feeling of the House is that the committee has studied this matter; it has made its recommendations and we should abide by the recommendations made by the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok. So I will proceed with that. 

We have pupils and teachers of Kisowera Day and Boarding Primary School in Mukono District. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.44
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much. I do not disagree in any way with hon. Kawanga, but I would like to say that there was a very big backlog. I was a member of that committee and we even worked during recess to make sure that we cover the entire backlog. 

I do not believe that our recommendations will not be implemented because I would cite an example of advances; even if the CAO died, the new CAO, by posting instructions, is supposed to inherit assets and liabilities. So the new CAO will be in charge of collecting those funds. I am in total agreement that we could adopt the report but seriousness must be put in place because it would be very embarrassing for us to adopt a report to recover billions of money and no shilling is recovered. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report we have is the report of Local Government Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report for the year 2002/2003 and the motion is that we adopt the report. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION FROM THE TRADERS OF KAMPALA ON TRADE LICENCE FEES

2.46
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Bosco Lubyayi): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I must apologise because yesterday I was supposed to present this report on behalf of the committee but there was some misinformation from the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to our committee. 

We were supposed to visit area cooperative enterprises in Mukono and Kayunga and so members could not appear yesterday. I did the needful to represent the committee in Kayunga and Mukono district yesterday. My chairman has a sick mother so he could not be here too. But I have the pleasure to present a report from the committee on the petition from the traders of KACITA on trade licence fees.

On 7 May 2009, Hon. Lukwago Erias, MP Kampala Central, on behalf of Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA), presented a petition to Parliament seeking the intervention of Parliament to review the Trade (Licensing Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009 and probe into the propriety and/or legality of the trade licence fees levied by Kampala City Council prior to the enactment of the said instrument.

The petition was referred to the committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for its consideration and the committee was directed to report back to the House by 21 May 2009. The report was ready for presentation on that date but unfortunately the House was prorogued before then. It is in accordance with this directive that the committee now wishes to report its findings.

The committee held meetings with the following stakeholders:

•	Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA)
•	Kampala City Council; and
•	Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

The committee also received a written submission from the National Taxpayers and Tax Protection Organisation (NTAPO).

The following issues were raised from Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA):

KACITA informed the committee that they are not opposed to taxation and appreciate the fact that no country can survive without taxation. Indeed members of KACITA pay their taxes as required. They, however, noted that a good tax should be fair and equitable. The trade licence fee according to them does not conform to this principle. In January 2009, traders were confronted with unfair tax assessments with exorbitant new rates for the year 2009. They had not been consulted at all.

On 19 February 2009, KACITA petitioned the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry against the proposed new trade licence fees and the local service assessment forms given to the trading community in Kampala. They have received no response to date despite three reminders.

The Trade Licence Act of 1969 was revised in 2000 by the Uganda Law Reform Commission. The figures of licence fees payable were converted to the rates of 2000. A statutory instrument was issued at the time and was not reviewed until the Trade (Licensing Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009 that is now under contention.

However, since 2000, KCC has continued to increase the licence fees of the traders without a corresponding statutory instrument and therefore proceeding illegally. 

KACITA complained that the mode of assessment of trade licence fees by KCC is arbitrary. There is no standard formula but rather the rate a trader is charged depends on the bargaining power and in many instances their ability to bribe the tax assessor.  KACITA finds this unfair and calls for a standard formula for the assessment of taxes. 

The committee was informed that despite the high taxes that the traders pay to KCC, they do not receive most of the expected services like toilet facilities, garbage collection or parking space. They instead have to pay private service providers for the services that KCC should be obliged to provide. 

The traders also complained about their health and safety in some of the areas they work from. KCC does not assess the health situation in many areas. Traders operate in buildings without fire exits, toilet facilities or even dustbins yet it is the responsibility of KCC to see that certain standards of health and safety are complied with.

KACITA further informed the committee that the government in Uganda does not seem to care about the fate of its traders unlike other countries where governments are trying to protect their traders in the face of the current global recession. The dollar rates are high, traders are making losses and government is overtaxing them.

The relationship between KCC and KACITA is not good. KCC is not receptive of KACITA’s concerns. KACITA, therefore, rarely interacts with KCC and send their communications through the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

KACITA informed the committee that their members are often harassed by landlords. Many of the members rent places where there are no tenant agreements and payments for rent are not receipted. 

The National Taxpayers and Tax Protection Organisation (NTAPO) Uganda

The committee received a written submission from NTAPO Uganda to supplement the presentation from KACITA and the following issues were highlighted:

Contracting private companies to collect trade licences; KCC and other districts without any law to back-up the decision, took away the licensing authority from the town clerks of cities, municipalities or towns granted by Section 9(a) of the Trading Licence Act CAP 101, 2000 and privatised the job to private companies on a commission basis of 14 percent.

The private companies on top of the licensing fees charge additional fees like bank fees, fees for application forms, and fees for erection of signposts.

Payment of licence fees to companies that are required to pay licences elsewhere: NTAPO, in 2003, petitioned the IGG on matters pertaining to trade licences. The IGG’s report on the matter indicated that it is wrong for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to require pharmacies to pay for trade licence. The above categories should also refer to milk sellers that pay licences to Dairy Development Cooperation and foreign exchange bureaus that are licensed by Bank of Uganda. 

These following are the issues from KCC:

KCC informed the committee that it increased the licence fees because there was need to increase the cash inflows in the city given the increase in population and inflation. The new rates were passed by the council.

The committee was further informed that the existing law divided Kampala into two grades. On the committee’s probing, KCC acknowledged the fact that it had divided it further into other grades without the backing of any law. 

The committee brought to the attention of KCC the illegality in contracting out its obligation of revenue collection. KCC informed the committee that they did not have the capacity to collect revenue in the city because all they have is a skeleton staff. They acted in accordance with the second schedule of the Local Government Act, 1997 that permits them to contract out in the provision of services. 

The money collected is not received by KCC headquarters; the headquarters only runs the contracts committee that awards the tenders and then the divisions receive the money. 

Payment of licence fees to companies that are required to pay licence else where: the committee also brought to the attention of KCC the fact the charging licence fees to companies that are required to pay licences elsewhere contravenes the Trade Licence Act, as revised in 2000. KCC conceded and acknowledged the fact that companies within this category were paying a trading licence in error. 

Multiple Taxation

The committee sought an explanation from KCC as to why many businesses in Kampala were being taxed several items. Cases in point are the hotels, which pay the overall hotel tax, and then pay for each of the restaurants within the hotels and then each of the bars and for the liquor in the bars as well. 

Petrol stations also face the same problems having to pay a tax for operation of the petrol station, then for operating an underground storage tank, then a different tax for operating a service station and another for the supermarket within the petrol station. KCC undertook to study the issue further and find possible solutions to the problem. 

A Presentation from the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry 

The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry informed the committee that wide consultations had been done with a range of stakeholders before the statutory instrument in question was signed. He also informed the committee that the petition to the ministry by the traders was received and the ministry is undertaking some consultation before responding to the issues. The minister, however, noted that the policy at the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is to have every business that makes a profit pay a trading licence. 

Observations

1.	The illegality of the Trade (Licensing Amendment of Schedule), Instrument No.2 of 2009. The committee observed that the Trade (Licensing Amendment of Schedule), Instrument No.2 of 2009 provided for different tax rates to businesses presumed to be operating under different grades, which grades are not backed by any legal instrument. Today, the only recognised grading is that of the 1969 law as amended in 2000, which put Kampala into two grades. The additional grading that was done by KCC is illegal, yet it is on the same premise that the Trade (Licensing Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009 was based.

2.	The committee also noted that the Trade Licensing Amendment of Schedule Instrument No.2 of 2009 just like KCC has been doing, levies trade licence fees to trade of businesses that are required to pay a separate license fee under other written laws. These include pharmacies, foreign exchange bureaus et cetera. This contravenes section 8(f) of the Trade Licensing Act, 1969 as revised in 2000 that stipulates as follows: “No trading license shall be required in any event for any trade or business in respect of which a separate licence is required by or under any written law”.

3.	Another area of contention in the Trade Licensing (Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009 is the base figure that was used to compute the licence fees for the different businesses. This figure should have been the figure in the Trade Licensing Act, 1969 as revised in 2000. This, however, is not the case because KCC has been cumulatively increasing these fees since 2000 without any legal backing. It is against the arbitrarily increased figures that this statutory instrument was based. 

From the three scenarios above, it is clear that there are illegalities crowding the Trade Licensing (Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009. The committee, therefore, observes that retrospective action in regard to the fees already paid by the traders to KCC over the last ten years would prove fatal to KCC and detrimental to government as a whole. 

In the face of the current increase in the operations costs of KCC coupled with inflation, it is inevitable that licensing fees have got to be increased. It is important that all businesses benefiting from the services of KCC be charged licensing fees so that they contribute to the operational costs of KCC. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that:

The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry amends the law to re-grade the city as necessary.

The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry makes all businesses liable to paying licence fees irrespective of other licenses required of them. This is because it would be unfair for these businesses to benefit from the services of KCC without contributing to its operational fund.

The implementation of the Trade Licensing (Amendment of Schedule) Instrument No.2 of 2009 be stayed until the illegalities have been straightened out. The committee observed that multiple taxation is not fair. It noted that KCC should desist from over-burdening the business community because this discourages the private sector and in some instances scares away investors. They are not the only sources of revenue available in the city. 

The committee notes that KCC should explore alternative sources of revenue and avoid multiple taxation. 

The committee observed that the lack of basic sanitary and safety facilities like toilets, dustbins and fire exists in some business premises where members of KACITA operate from is tantamount to neglect of duty by KCC. KCC is supposed to ensure that the basic standards of health and safety as stipulated in the law are conformed with. The fact that traders pay taxes to KCC, grants them a right to receive the expected services in return.

In areas of KCC where sanitary facilities and garbage collection have been privatised, KCC should supervise to ensure that the basic standards are complied with. The committee further recommends that KCC ensures that public health and safety is guaranteed in the city. 

The Relationship between KCC and KACITA

The committee observed that it is not healthy for KCC to have a poor relationship with KACITA because the former largely relies on the latter for its resources. KCC should know that it exists to serve the people of Kampala who include KACITA. It is, therefore, important for KCC to listen to the problem of the traders instead of taking arbitrary decisions without consulting the stakeholders. The committee recommends that KCC should have an open-door policy for all the people it serves. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee hereby presents this report for your consideration and urges the House to adopt it. Thank you very much. 

(Full text of the report to be found in Appendix II of Issue 32)

3.08
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the chairman of the committee and committee members, for the wonderful work you have done. Although the report has come a little bit late, we hope it is going to sort out the mess on the ground. As we talk, there is a lot of confusion as regards the nature of the licence fees, which should be paid. 

Secondly, I beg to defer from some of the recommendations given by the committee. On page 10, (i), the committee makes an observation that, “The retrospective action in regard to the fees already paid by the traders to KCC over the last ten years would prove fatal to KCC and detrimental to government as a whole”. 

I do appreciate the concerns of the committee, but I want to draw the attention of honourable members to the findings of the committee on page 4, paragraph 2. It is very clear that, “Since 2000, KCC has continued to increase the licence fees of traders without a corresponding statutory instrument, and therefore proceeding illegally.” 

Our duty, under Article 79 of the Constitution, clause 3, is to protect the Constitution. When I look at Article 152 of the Constitution, clause 1 provides as follows: “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.” This provision is couched in mandatory language; “No tax shall be imposed except by the authority of an Act of Parliament”. And in this case, it is a finding of the committee, which is not in dispute at all. From 2000 up to the time the statutory instrument was enacted by the minister, the collections were not based on any law. 

From my little understanding of the Penal Code, particularly Section 255 about theft, if you take my property or wealth away from me without any support of the law, it is tantamount to theft – with all due respect, I am sorry to use that language. Government can only take away somebody’s wealth with the support of the law and short of that, it amounts for misappropriation of somebody’s property. Should we condone that as Parliament? What should we do under the circumstances? The Trade Licensing Act is very clear; Section 30 gives the minister powers that, “In case you feel like you want to increase the fees payable, please come up with a statutory instrument”. But the minister sat on his powers until recently when this instrument was made.

So, if there was need to increase the licence fees, why didn’t the minister invoke those powers? And if he did not do so, why should the business community suffer? My observation is that we are here to observe the rule of law and constitutionalism. Let us be firm and say, “Please, those collections were illegal, do the needful”. It is not so hard for KCC to sit down with the affected business community and say, “Look, we did something outside the parameters of the law, how do we go over it?” We would recommend that. 

For instance, we are saying that there should be a cordial relationship between KACITA and KCC. Short of that, the matter might not end here because KACITA might opt to go to the courts of law and you know what happens in the courts of law. So, we urge KCC to sit with the affected parties and sort this out.

Let me give you the experience on the ground. This 14 percent commission is a very absurd phenomenon. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am sure that you have been down town and in many of those urban centres where revenue is collected – these people use brutal methods. The people who are contracted to collect revenue on behalf of KCC are extremely brutal. Members of the Local Government Accounts Committee can bear witness to this. We have very big problems with these companies. They do not even remit this revenue to KCC after they have collected it with a lot of harassment to the business community. That is broad daylight robbery; we cannot condone this. I would like to suggest that we get firm on this particular matter. 

Lastly, let me say something on the recommendation that appears in paragraph ten. In this recommendation, it has been said that companies or business units that are required to take out licenses under different legislations should not be exempted from trade licence fees. That would be another absurdity. I think the spirit of the Trade Licensing Act was to avoid double taxation, which is a basic principle in the tax law and principles. It discourages the subjection of the same business to double or multiple taxation. In this particular case, Section 8 of the Trade Licensing Act was in that spirit. 

Business units like hotels, petrol stations and law firms – Mr Speaker, you are a practicing advocate and you know what is happening to that profession. I am sure you know that the legal fraternity is already up in arms because when you look at the statutory instrument, lawyers are also required to take out trade licenses - many lawyers are wondering. Annually, we are supposed to take out licenses from the Law Council on payment of a fee of Shs 400,000 on top of our contribution to the Law Society, which is stipulated in the Act. But after that you also have to pay for a trade licence at KCC. What I am saying is that the issue of double taxation has no place in any given fair and equitable tax system.

I am not supporting the recommendation that the minister amends the law to allow double taxation, because that will be detrimental. I thank the committee for its report save for those few observations I pointed out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before the next person comes in, permit me, on your behalf, to welcome Mr Kavakuru Tjikuzai and Mr Semi Mubukwanu from Namibia. They are clerks and are here on attachment to the Committee of Public Accounts. You are welcome.

Hon. Minister, do you want to talk now or you want to do it later?

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I want to thank him and go away. (Laughter) This is not my docket. With due respect, this is not my docket because the Minister of Local Government answers for Kampala City Council.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

3.17
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am referring to page 4 of the report regarding the services provided to traders by KCC. 

I would like to point out that we have a problem in the city, which emanates from lack of proper mechanisms by KCC and the Ministry of Health and that of Trade, in supervising businesses in the city. 

We have got a compounded problem as was indicated regarding toilet facilities. For example, you will go to a shopping mall, with small units, with people who pay their rent, but such people have got to pay a separate fee for using the toilet system. This is incredible. It would be understandable if the clients from outside were the ones to pay for the extra facility of the toilets, but for you to ask the tenant to pay an extra fee for the toilet in the same building, it is a primitive practice. The capacity to supervise such arrangements should be looked into by KCC and I hoped this would form part of the recommendations of this report. 

Secondly, there is the issue of parking. A person has to pay Multiplex or pay that organisation for a month to have his vehicle parked in front of his own shop. Because it is a street, that would be understandable, but there are three other sections of people operating from such a place; one of them being the owner of the shop and also purported owner of that parking. The second is an operator of a kiosk in front of his shop upon whom the owner of the shop has no control, KCC having allowed it to operate from in front of his shop. The third is another person selling shoes or other items in front of the kiosk. That gives us three sections: the shop, kiosk and the person selling shoes. There is a fourth arrangement where you get another person selling a few items in front of the same shop –(Interjections)– yes, some of these ministers are lucky because they do not move on foot in the city and so they do not know what is going on. From the fourth section, you will find a line of boda bodas in front of the same shop.

I think you can now see how the owner of the shop suffers from the time he opens the shop to the time his clients ask where he operates from. They have to be careful to go through that chain of business people who are not officially licensed, but operate from there with the knowledge of Kampala City Council. I hope when the relationship between Kampala City Council and businessmen improves, this will be sorted out. Otherwise, there should be a law to assist these individuals.

Kampala City Council also has a problem of deliberately leaving some businesses to operate on top of the others. When you go to Luwum Street now, you will see a number of taxis lining along the entire street; it is a chain and a client has no way of getting out of the shop to access the street especially given the fact that taxis keep moving in front and behind each other. And from the taxis, there are boda bodas. And when you move ahead, you will knock somebody’s tomatoes. Where is the favour for the trader who primarily pays a license for the shop? Something must be done.

When you get into the issue of rent, you will realise that this would constitute a whole debate. Traders in Kampala pay rent as agreed, but along the way there, are charges. There are some ‘big’ individuals who have got shops in town and they will say they want rent paid in dollars; and when the dollar loses value, they will ask for rent paid in shillings. This is a total disregard of the agreements. They will tell the tenant that if they want to go to court, they are free. We know that some people in this country are more powerful then others; but it is not enough to parade the law. It is important for us to recognise the fact that some traders are actually suffering in the face of powerful people. The traders themselves are not that powerful, so something has to really be in place to assist them.

Regarding supervision, we were here when reports regarding collapsed buildings in town were brought. I remember the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs making a commitment that he would see to it that some of the buildings that were in terrible and bad shape do not operate again. However, as we talk, if there was anybody ready to go to Nasser Road now, he would see a building, part of which collapsed and killed some people, still being occupied on the side that did not collapse. It is as if we are simply waiting for that part to also collapse and kill more people before we come here to lament. This gives an image of a government that either does not care or simply looks out for the money that comes out of organisations like KCC. Something must be done.

Lastly, I would like to refer to what I may call “small jobs.” Let us not categorise everything as business. I have continued to see it as a wrong practice for Kampala City Council to say that everything done within that area is a business. Kampala City Council goes to a place like Nakinyuguzi or some place in Salama or Buziga, finds an elderly woman, who in a bid to care for orphans is selling a handful of tomatoes in front of her house, and they ask for a trading license. They find a young girl who, in a bid to look after her siblings after the death of her parents, is selling chewing gum in front of the room that they rent, and asks for a trading license. What type of administration is this? 

I think a recommendation for the ministry to put up proper licensing procedures should look into a primary threshold, so that we get to know the type of businesses to be taxed in terms of a trading license. Otherwise, if we go on taking money from every person selling three pieces of bananas on their verandas as taxes for trading licenses, people are going to go hungry. This government does not provide for unemployment benefits. If one is unemployed, they have to find a way to survive. Let us help people to find ways out rather than hanging them onto their doors because of the purported rules and regulations of Kampala City Council. 

You will find somebody selling food to people at the roadside and you begin saying the person is operating a hotel, so he or she is supposed to pay for a hotel license. This is murdering the individuals who are trying to survive. I would like to kindly beg that the minister puts into serious consideration the issue of a threshold for minimum businesses. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
CAPT. JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for this report. My concerns are basically in regard to page 7 of the report where it talks about the role of revenue collection, which features in item No.3. I belong to the Committee of Local Government Accounts and I know that the committee was told that contracts are signed between KCC and the revenue collectors, but what we discovered as a committee is that contracts are not given. They run on a memorandum-of-understanding basis; there are no contracts at all. 

This becomes a serious matter because we also discovered that the memoranda do not specify which amount to be remitted. It is within the councils themselves. The money does not get into the KCC coffers, like Hon. Erias Lukwago said; it just disappears. I think the committee and the ministry need to look at that very seriously. Even when the contracts to collect this revenue are signed, if that happens at all, the money ends up in the pockets of the people who have been contracted, not KCC. A good example is in the special report in regard to Kawempe Division, which shows very clearly that this money does not get into the coffers of KCC.

On page 7, the committee observed something on payment of license fees to companies that are required to pay for licenses elsewhere. This relates to point No.4 on multiple taxation. When you interact with many traders in Kampala, you will realise that this is their biggest problem. Various private companies that have been hired by KCC to collect taxes go to areas that are not supposed to be taxed under this law. The best examples are the Internet cafes that are supposed to be taxed under a separate law, but you will find contracted tax collectors going to these cafes for more taxes. 

I think the minister, Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, and his team need to look at that very critically, because they seem to be just squeezing money out of our people.

Finally, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Has the hon. Member forgotten that I am now Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry and no longer in Ministry of Local Government? Or is he reassigning me responsibility?

CAPT. OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, it is true I was referring to the minister as the Minister in charge of Trade, Tourism and Industry, but who also has a very good experience as former Minister of Local Government. Even when he was minister of that ministry, KCC was still a very big problem.

Finally, let me say something on public health as outlined by the committee on page 12. The committee recommends that KCC ensures that public health and safety is guaranteed in the city. To me, that is a very strong recommendation because about four months ago, we talked about safety in regard to KCC. We talked about various divisions like Kawempe, Nakawa and so on, but there is still a very big problem. We have talked about it here in the House. 

The Minister for Health was actually asked to find out about the business people holding sugarcane in buveera, and I know that many of those buveera are picked along the railway line in Kireka. If you pass there every evening, you will find many people collecting those buveera along the railway line and they are washed and cleaned and that is where they put the sugarcane. The committee concerned should at one time come with me to Kireka and we shall find those people collecting the buveera. Even after they peel the sugarcane, you will see them pushing the peels into those buveera. It is a very serious health hazard to our people. 

Many times when you pass through the Container Village – the area around St Balikuddembe Market – there are food vendors all over that place, and it is even difficult for one to pass through. Kampala City Council must take control so that when traders in Kampala complain, KCC is able to tell them, “We are giving you services.” Otherwise, there are no services given by KCC. I strongly support the recommendations of the committee that these people should make sure that they provide health services to our people so that we remain healthy. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.32
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity and let me thank the chairperson for presenting this report. Honourable colleagues, there have been statements here that there are no toilets in buildings, no exits and no dustbins. I think the time has come when individuals should be responsible. Why do you go and occupy a shop where there are no toilets? Are you a kid? If there are no toilets and nobody is forcing you to go there, then do not go there – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honourable colleague on the Floor has alluded to the fact that if you want to do business or if you want to occupy a premise without the facilities in place, probably you would be stupid to go in for it. He knows for sure that in this country, you can buy property while still in the process of completing other facilities. He is well aware that he was one of the managers in this city where this total mess that we are talking about is and that it was mere negligence on the part of Kampala City Council. He should, therefore, not blame the business community for doing business with the knowledge that Kampala City Council will meet their obligation. Is the honourable member, who is a former city engineer -(Laughter)- in order to allude that those who do business in the messed up city premises are stupid? 

THE SPEAKER: My thinking is that he was saying that you should use premises which are habitable and you should use premises where an occupation permit has been issued. The occupation permit will not be issued until all the facilities are there. I think that is what he is saying.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. It surprises me; you will not drink dirty water just because the National Water and Sewerage Corporation have not bothered to provide you with clean water. You must be responsible as an individual. However, we should also recognise that there are some toilets provided for by Kampala City Council. They may not be enough, and that is different, but they are there. 

On the issue of double taxation, hon. Lukwago put it very intelligently on the surface, that if we have paid in the law council then why should we pay here? It sounds very intelligent, but what bothers me most is the fact that they do pay in the law council. They pay there because it is serving a purpose and they are asking you to pay in the city council because it is going to serve a purpose too. How do you expect the city council to operate without funds? Hon. Lukwago talks about Pay-As-You-Earn; why does he pay fees to the law council when he already pays Pay-As-You-Earn? –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I think this is a question of interpretation of the law. If I am in practise, I will not pay you because the licence that I get authorises me to carry out a business of a profession; and also, this money that you seek permits somebody to do so. So, why should it be double? As a lawyer, I would not pay you. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are requesting a service from the city council. Kampala City Council has no money minting machine; they must collect money out of the service. There must be money coming from this road on which you drive –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I presume the honourable member here is fully aware of the primary role and purpose of a licence. The primary role of a licence is to regulate a business. Is he, therefore, in order to proceed on the premise as if the intention of the framers of the Trade Licence Act intended to raise revenue away from the issue of regulating business? Is he in order to put at the forefront the element of money as opposed to the primary purpose of a trade licence? 

THE SPEAKER: I think this is a question of different interpretations. I think he is interpreting it differently and you have also interpreted it differently. However, you may persuade him to accept your interpretation.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the issue of contracting private companies, they have written here that they have taken away the authority of licensing from the Town Clerk. When going through ministerial policy statements here, I clearly recall the mandate of the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is to build, construct and maintain roads. Why haven’t you complained here about them contracting Sterling to do certain roads? They are just agents. I do not see why you complain that Kampala City Council has contracted somebody to do this. They are still in charge, but they are using agents. If we are to go by that, then all roads shall be built in-house by the Ministry of Works and all power lines will be done in-house by the Ministry of Energy. 

Hon. Kyanjo talked about the issue of street parking. This parking is not only for the shops facing the street, but is for everybody. It is a public place and it is for every Ugandan. If I come from Karamoja, I am authorised and I am allowed to park there. Otherwise, where will the people from Kigezi park their vehicles if they are gazetted only for those people with shops? This is public parking and it is on a first come, first served basis. 

Mr Speaker, I totally agree with the observations and recommendations of the committee on page 10. I think the earlier they are implemented, the better. I thank you. 

3.41
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for this report. I have three points to make. I have cited in the report that KCC has been violating the regulations on collecting licence fees. In my opinion, KCC should be urged to refund this money that they have been illegally collecting in arrears. 

Two, on the issue of lack of health facilities, I know very well that KCC has a health department that goes around assessing whether a premise qualifies to be licensed for trading. If KCC has been going on licensing these traders in such premises where there are no washrooms or which are unhealthy for trading, then that means that there has been a high level of corruption in the process of licensing traders. Therefore, the licensing department of KCC should be thoroughly investigated and prosecuted for these wrong procedures. This is a very serious issue.

My third point is on the relationship between KACITA and KCC. The committee pointed out that the relationship between KACITA and KCC has not been very good because of the various mistakes that they have made in the collection of licence fees. On the other hand, I think KACITA members are mainly to blame because there are instances where you find about six or seven traders in one shop, trading under different entities. These are different traders who operate under one licence, yet they are not directors of the company that secured the licence. Therefore, they are cheating Kampala City Council because they do not pay trading licences and yet they operate under one person’s licence. 

This kind of cheating is also not fair for KCC because KCC has to collect the trading licence fees in order to make our roads worthy and to provide services for the KACITA members in the city. Therefore, I think KACITA members should also cooperate with KCC so that enough taxes are collected -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I appreciate the fact that you have commented on the issue in regard to different individuals operating inside a shop under one licence. I do not know whether you are looking at that in your own perspective or whether you want to refer to any law that prohibits three or four individuals from operating under a single licence in a single shop. I work with my wife and my children are of age now, and we are together in the same shop and we operate under a similar licence. I do not know whether I am doing it illegally. Could you assist me by clarifying on that?

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): I would like to inform hon. Kyanjo that subletting is illegal. So, I guess what you are saying is not what the honourable member is talking about. He is talking about subletting, which is not accepted. 

Secondly, I would like to clarify on this question of illegal taxes and irregular taxation. Local governments are allowed by law and by the Constitution to collect taxes. What happened is that there was an irregularity. They were doing something legal, but the procedure for collection was irregular. Hon. Lukwago is, therefore, not being very honest as a lawyer to say that what they were doing was illegal. Yes, the Constitution is supreme and it says that local governments shall collect taxes, and that is what Kampala City Council has been doing. Incidentally, KCC is run by DP if you do not know -(Interruption)– Well, I may be out of order, but you have heard. (Laughter) What happened is that the minister did not provide for regular –(Interruption) 

MR PIRO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for redirecting the thinking of hon. Kyanjo who did not understand me very well. What I meant is that because of minimising rentals in shops, different traders assemble in one shop and in the process they have discovered that they can evade paying a trading licence to KCC by operating under one licence, yet they are different entities and they have registered different companies. In the process, they cheat KCC in terms of paying licence fees. This is very wrong. They cheat the Government of Uganda of revenue because they do not pay their yearly 30 percent taxes to the Uganda Revenue Authority. That is very wrong. 

On the issue of multiple taxation, the committee clearly recommends that it is unfair for KCC to continue collecting several taxes in the premises that belong to the same person. Again here, KCC accepts that they will go and study the system and if they find that their staff have been wrongly collecting fees, they will refrain from it. However, what will happen to the multiple licence fees that they have been collecting? They should be urged to refund this money because this is another form of corruption. 

People have been growing fat stomachs and building multiple houses in Kampala using public funds. There are so many business communities here that have collapsed over taxation. We cannot accept our fellow Africans to be displaced to the shambas in the villages because of KCC defrauding them yet roads have developed a lot of potholes and we do not see how they are putting to use this licence fees. I think KCC should be brought to book to refund this licence fees. I thank you so much. 

3.49
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for this very comprehensive report, and I would also like to thank hon. Lukwago for coming up with this petition.

I look at this report as an eye opener, not only to Kampala City Council, but to other municipalities and town councils. Most of the issues which have been raised here are also felt in other urban areas. Therefore, my humble request is to ask the two ministers, that of Local Government and that of Trade, to come out with a solution to this, because it has been an outcry everywhere. 

It is good KACITA came out with this petition. Maybe other traders from other urban areas will also come here with petitions. Most of the issues which have been raised here affect especially me, who comes from Fort Portal Municipality. I have a number of traders like Rwepanga Market traders, Kabondaire and others. 

His Excellency the President has been very fair to the traders in this country, especially the low income earners. He has on several occasions appealed to those who are concerned, I presume the ministers, to look into the issue of taxing even these gonja, tomato and onion sellers. He has been very emphatic, and I do not know why the concerned people have not taken action. 

I would like to thank KACITA for coming up with this petition and I would also like to thank the committee for clearly pointing out issues, especially in the recommendations. I agree with the recommendations of the committee, only that on the first recommendation, I wish other than concentrating on Kampala City Council, they could also add municipalities and other urban areas. I thank the committee once again for coming out with this report and I hope when we adopt it, the responsible people will take appropriate action. I thank you.

3.52
MS LILLIAN BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this report that has come across. It is very clear that KCC is not in charge and these traders have come out at the right time. 

I want to agree with recommendation No.2, where the committee says that all businesses liable to paying licence fees should do so, but KCC has failed to be in charge. You will find that much of this is intentionally done because KCC itself, with its officials, will keep a blind eye because they are the beneficiaries. 

I would not exonerate KACITA because they connive with KCC officials to get where they are. You will find KCC giving occupational permits and trading licences where they are not supposed to. These traders accept to connive with KCC to create this mess. Kampala City Council has failed the government, and the nation -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and thank you very much, hon. Colleague, for giving way. We are addressing ourselves to a report which has come to this Floor as a function of a petition by KACITA. I am wondering how the petitioners themselves got the guts to come to this Parliament, and at the same time remain in the category of those who are conniving. They have come here to report all the matters and the honourable member is referring to the same report that has been compiled as a result of a petition. I would like the Member to clarify why she thinks that KACITA connives with KCC.

MS BAKEINE: Thank you, hon. Member. I have said that because I am on the Local Government Accounts Committee. We receive a lot of information from KCC and it is on that ground that I am raising what I am saying. 

While all businesses should pay their licence fees wherever they are, I support the idea that there should be a threshold of categorising how much is in a business, because they are at different levels. It is a very good idea if we can categorise the businesses and draw a threshold for the minimum depending on the grade. 

Otherwise, I think if city council was asked to bring out a schedule of all the businesses in their area of operation, you will not find any because it is the individuals in KCC that are the greatest beneficiaries of these small businesses where KACITA is crying out. If you do more analysis to find out who constitute KACITA, you will find that many of their members are also part and parcel of the city council administration. Thank you.

3.57
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for this report and I have the following observations or comments to make.

On page 7, the committee was informed by Kampala City Council that their capacity to collect revenue is very small because of a skeleton staff. This is contradictory, if at one point it is indicated that double tax collection was done. My concern is, how could the skeleton staff, which could not cover the whole area from which tax is supposed to be collected, have enough time to do double tax collection? I am wondering whether the committee, having observed this, received any plan by Kampala City Council on when they will improve this situation. I am just imagining how long such an excuse can go on. They should have put this clearly to KCC so that such an excuse is put aside. 

On page 10, the observation of the committee is on retrospective action in regard to the fee already paid over ten years. Well, under the circumstances, it would probably be the best option or recommendation, but my concern is whether it is fair to all the parties involved. If somebody has cheated you for the last ten years, and you have caught up with the person, is it fair that you let the person go free? We are saying, it will be futile to KCC, the cheater, and the government as a whole, but not to the person who has not been cheated. I think this is not fair. The traders who have been cheated for the last ten years should have had some consolation. I would propose that KACITA seeks redress over this. You cannot be cheated for 10 years and then somebody is let free while you look on and he continues to come around collecting more illegal taxes. I think it is high time KACITA sought redress. 

On page 11, I am concerned about the observation of the committee that KCC has neglected its duty. This is common knowledge. I want to say that the dirt and the filth of Kampala City Council or the city as such, is due to such negligence. Kampala City Council has not provided the much needed sanitation and toilets. If you went down through Kikuubo, Kiyembe and the rest, you would be shocked. The drainages are all blocked and the flying toilets are a reality. 

I took one trip downtown sometime. I think when we drive along the roads we do not know what happens inside there. If you just lifted all those drainages which are covered, you would not believe it. I wish the committee could go downtown and do some on-spot check. You will clearly believe it. This negligence points to one fact, that is, where does the money collected from the double taxation go? It is all about corruption; corruption in this country and this time in KCC.

Tax in this country is collected most of the time by force, not because the citizens do not want to pay tax, but because the concern all through is that, “We pay tax and there is no service delivery.” What are the taxes for? We cannot continue taxing people’s pockets. Service delivery is expected to be given in turn to the people who pay tax. It is not only in the city here; it is all over in the country. Taxes are collected but service delivery is so thin. Where does the money go?

I propose that with such massive negligence which has been unearthed - well, it is common knowledge anyway - it is high time Kampala City Council was thoroughly investigated. I do remember that this House gave more money for sanitation to KCC to improve the sanitation in the city and it all went to individual pockets and houses were built around. We would want value for money. Therefore, I would be delighted if we took on KCC with a full investigation so that we can trace where the taxes of the citizens and the traders go. It can even be the starting point for investigation into corruption. It is not only in isolation. 

Lastly, on the same page, I also turn to KACITA. As much as sanitation is now a problem or an issue raised by KACITA, recently I was surprised that KACITA was not supporting the ban on kaveera and yet this is one of the things which are used in the flying toilets and in blockages downtown. Bottles are everywhere! If you go to Pan African Freedom Square - actually every two days I pass there - you will find it overflowing. If you went into Kikuubo itself, it is all a problem. I think it is high time they realised that some of these things affect us all. As much as we think about the money to be got out of kaveera, it is a health hazard whose ban they should fully support so that kaveera is given a total ban. 

I would also want to advise KACITA to impress upon its members, behavioural change, because all these flying kaveeras and the sanitation problems are because of poor behaviour. 

Honourable members, when we do not know where to deposit our dirt, we cause a problem - even in the Kikuubo area. Let individual members of KACITA take it upon themselves to change their behaviour on how to dispose their waste. You find a kaveera from clothes; you find all the mineral water bottles and the like. Let them also join hands with KCC and every Ugandan so that we improve sanitation, because we cannot think that only KCC will do it. It is behavioural change that will do it. Let behavioural change be one of the activities that KACITA should seriously undertake to keep Kampala City clean.

4.08 
MR AKBAR HUSSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): I would like to thank the committee for bringing this report. On page 6, it is stated that KCC advanced an argument that they are increasing license fees because there is need to increase cash flow in the city given the increase in the population and inflation. I think some of these people need a public lecture on matters of economics. To increase cash flow is the work of the Bank of Uganda, not the work of KCC, and practical examples can even serve to show this. In countries like China where the population is high, the increase becomes automatic because where there is high population people are going to venture into businesses and at the end of the day money will flow.

When hon. Santos was advancing the point that four or five traders combine in one shop and are, therefore, defrauding, that point needs a lot of consideration before it is advanced. To begin with, if I have a tenant agreement with landlord X and he has given me premise B, as long as I follow the agreement - I have paid the dues; and the two of us combine because we want to manage the rent. We are living in an economy where people are very poor. That is why people come to Kampala to share like that.

There are issues of double taxation; a case in point is that in hotels, where you pay the overall hotel tax, then you pay for each of the restaurants that are within the hotel; then each of the bars; and for the liquor in the bars as well. There are petrol stations and they have supermarkets. These ones pay taxes for operating an underground storage tank, then a different tax for operating a service station and yet another for a supermarket within the station.

In canons of taxation, a good tax system must be uniform - that is actually the principle behind section 8, clause 8 of the Trade Licensing Act, 2000. It states that, “No trading license shall be required in any event or business for which a separate license is required by any other written law.”
 
Based on these submissions, I implore the House that to bring KCC to account for all the taxes they have been collecting; and for the arrears that have been collected; so that we make an audit inquiry into their activities. 

I want to urge the traders in the areas affected like in municipalities and KCC, to try their best; should they be defeated by numbers, they should seek redress in courts of law.

I want to task the chairman of the committee to give an explanation as to why he deleted my name on this committee report yet I was there. I did not sign, and I do not know whether it was intentional or inadvertent.

4.11
MR MICHAEL MABBIKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): We are going to have so many other petitions about KCC for one reason that we do not have a city authority worth the name. KCC began declining many years ago and we cannot blame anybody right now for the mess. Because, in KCC, we have got political managers and technical managers. In fact, technical managers in KCC have been there longer than the political managers and it is them who recruit the politicians.

I am reporting because I have been in Kampala for sometime; I do not come from a village. (Laughter) The only blame on the political managers is that they have failed to reverse the decline over the years.

We are going to have many petitions about licensing. We are going to have petitions on nearly every aspect in KCC. I would like to submit that I agree entirely with the proposal by many speakers before me, that we should have a judicial commission of inquiry into the running of KCC. Short of that, we are going to come here and lament year in, year out.

Part of the problem in KCC is political interference, corruption and incompetence. There is a lot of corruption in KCC, but even the traders themselves cannot be absolved. For sure, we have a vivid case here of the parkyard market. That market was burnt, and so many companies came up to make donations. The Catholic Church made donations; the Kabaka of Buganda; URA; the President promised Shs 2 billion; FDC made a donation; even a party called SDP made a donation; but ask me what happened to the monies that were donated to the rehabilitation of the parkyard market; these are traders. So, this disease of corruption is everywhere; it is within the traders, and within KCC. 

As hon. Kyanjo from Makindye - you know men from Makindye are always very intelligent like him - said, “We need trade order”. The issue he talked about concerns where you have got a shop and in front of it, somebody is selling chakala; another one is selling tomatoes; and another one is on boda boda. We need some interventions, perhaps from the Ministry of Trade and Industry. We need interventions to restore order in the city and within the city authority itself.

Finally, the issue of contracting out services rendered by Kampala City Council to private companies, was a conditionality given by World Bank in order for the city authority to qualify for Aid. But frankly speaking, over the years, this practice has become more problematic than problem solving. This is because, as you know, most of these companies that have been contracted to collect licences, as many speakers have said, have ended up pocketing this money. Even then, the commission of 14 percent that is given to them is too high. It more or less depletes even the little monies that are collected. 

Within the same setting, you find fictitious companies and groups. You find a councillor or a technical officer setting up his own group, then they come collecting money from traders, and that money of course, because the centre can no longer hold in Kampala City Council, ends up in the pockets of those who collect it, and maybe some of the powers-that-be.

So, I want to wind up by saying that we must stop the lamentation. Government must take action. The President took action when we had a problem like this in the Police and today we are seeing a bit of improvement in the Police Force. I think we need a judicial commission of inquiry into this city authority if we are to put matters straight. I thank you.

4.18
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Johnson Malinga): Mr Speaker, I know Kampala City Council can do better. I want to applaud KACITA for making observation number five on page four. They said that despite the fact that they pay high taxes, they do not receive most of the expected services. They do not get toilet facilities or garbage collection services, and instead they hire services from other private providers.

I think almost everything has gone wrong in KCC. If you look at the process of licensing, I will give you a testimony. In one division where you have a planner, in a whole financial year, only two occupational permits were issued and yet there were a lot of structures being built in that division. There were also a number of trading licenses issued. 

The issue of contracting in KCC has totally failed. Out of 100 contracts, you might find only three have followed the right procedure. Where is the problem? I think the problem is the mode of our financing local government activities. One way to improve performance is by doing comparative studies. 

I know that many of us have visited many other parts of the world. I was privileged to visit the town of Upper Darby in Philadelphia. I was also privileged to visit the city of Windhoek in Namibia. In Upper Darby, the local government finances 95 percent of its budget. The money that comes from the centre is only five percent. In Namibia, in the city of Windhoek, the city council finances 100 percent of their activities. (Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Malinga. I remember some time back, we borrowed money to clean up KCC. In my famous speech of cleanliness,  which is next to godliness, I supported the government to borrow money to give to KCC to clean the city. Where has the money gone -  before you say that the Centre should put in more money?

MR MALINGA: Well, your observation is exactly the reverse of my thinking. My thinking is that as much as we receive more money from the Central Government or Local Government, we are going to witness this kind of confusion; lack of service delivery to our people. I was building a point that in Upper Darby, where the local government finances 95 percent of the budget, the community is totally concerned. They watch every step that the council takes in the administration of their finances. 

In the city of Windhoek where they are not naturally endowed like us, they have recycled water since 1969. They do not have a water body like L. Victoria here in Kampala. It is very difficult to get green coverage like there is in Kampala, but it is ten times cleaner than Kampala. Why? Because we think that money comes from Government and we can afford to use it the way we want. We can afford to use it to build our own houses, actually to chew it like hon. Awori is demonstrating. 

So, I would like to propose that one way we can solve this problem is to ask Government to do a thorough comparative study with other governments so that we improve the financing of our activities.

Secondly, the government should reduce the financing of activities of local governments. The Centre should reduce financing of Local Government activities, especially municipalities and town councils. 

I have had the privilege of studying the audited accounts of municipalities and town councils – at least the districts have something reasonable to present. You look at Moroto, Tororo Municipality, Mbale, Masaka – the only punishment an accounting officer is given is a transfer. I think this is very unfair for our country. Government should do another thorough study and find another mode of financing local governments. 

Finally, I would like to call upon Ugandans to take interest in what happens to our finances. The thinking that this money comes from a party or from Government is what fails us. This is money, which we have given Government to hold for us in trust. It is our own money; whether it is from taxes, or from loans, or grants; it is our money. If we do not take interest in this money, we shall see people building goloofas and find a planner on a U3-Scale issuing only two licences for the whole year. 

Mr Speaker, if Ugandans take interest in what happens in our local governments, I really think we can improve. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that subject to the observations you have made, we adopt the report. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2005

4.26
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Rebecca Amuge Otengo):  Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the report of the Auditor-General for the accounts of Government of Uganda for the Financial Year ending 30 June, 2005. The report is huge, but we have tried to summarise it so that we see what is in the whole booklet. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the report? 

MS AMUGE: We gave the report to Members sometime back.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Is that the Executive Summary? It is a big volume.

MISS AMUGE: Yes, Mr Speaker. The fonts are big; otherwise, it is not big.

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise the Executive Summary? (Laughter) 

MS AMUGE: This is the Executive Summary.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, try.

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the report is for the financial year ending 30 June, 2005.

1.0 is Introduction.

1.1 Examination of the reports of the Auditor-General

We examined the reports of the Auditor-General and this was done in accordance with Rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the under-listed Members were appointed by you, members of parliament, to examine the Auditor-General’s report and we did it. You will look at the list of Members as attached.

I wish to report that Members appointed to this committee did the work, and we all cooperated, and did not have any problems even with our different political affiliations. Although the committee was primarily tasked with ensuring compliance with Financial and Accounting Regulations by Government in the management of public resources, we went ahead to also recognise the concerns of the public. They were welcome to give us information, which was very useful to us.

The committee has continued, as I have already told you, to work together using this information. The information was vital to us. On several occasions, we found that our work was made easier because of that information. 

The press was equally instrumental in exposing the misuse and abuse of public offices by public servants. Time and again, we used the relevant information, which was given to us, in our investigations.

The participation of the public in the debates of this House is a welcome endeavour and also, as the Public Accounts Committee, we view them as allies. The public has been helpful and we would like to congratulate them. We also congratulate the press for the work well done. 

The vigilance shown by this Parliament has also given us practical effort and effect on whatever we were doing.

I would like to thank the members of parliament who joined us while we were doing the committee work.

1.2 Terms of Reference.

The Public Accounts Committee proceeded with its work under the following terms:

1.	Evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency and economic value of Government projects and programmes according to their set objectives.

2.	Assessing the consistency of the budget lay-outs in relation to increasing outspending by ministries and departments of Government, which acts amount to violation of the Constitution and commitment of our control.

3.	Demanding in writing, from the concerned ministries and departments, was one of the methods we used. Where we deemed it necessary in the assessment and fulfilment of our work as members of the oversight committee, we demanded for that information in writing.
4.	We assessed the accounts of the ministries and departments and the overall management of the public funds, with special attention to allegations of fraud, corruption, waste, abuse, diversion or any sort of irregularity that may constitute abuse and misuse of monies charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

1.3 	Procedure of the work of the Committee

Mr Speaker, in carrying out our committee work, we called various accounting officers before the committee to explain what had been raised by the Auditor-General against their ministries or departments.  

During the year under review, we managed to interface with about 51 accounting officers, who appeared before us as part of the process of accountability. Some of the accounting officers did well and cooperated in production of the relevant information required by the committee and, therefore, made our work easy. In some cases, however, the performance of accounting officers was wanting, which raised a lot of concerns on their suitability to be appointed accounting officers. 

2.0	Specific issues of concern by the committee

The committee reviewed the whole report of the Auditor-General and wishes to bring to the attention of this House the pertinent issues with recommendations to the House for approval. 

2.1	Allocation of Government land

The Auditor-General was concerned that the land held in trust by the Government of Uganda under the Uganda Lands Commission was allocated to individuals, institutions and investors, but without consultation with the in-charge concerned, and parent institutions, that is, Ministry of Lands. 

In some cases, the report noted that rampant encroachment of Government land was attributed to it not being surveyed. The committee observed that this had made it very difficult for the mother ministry to know which land exactly belonged to us.

It was, however, recommended that since most accounting officers attributed the inability to survey the land under their jurisdiction to lack of funds and titling of the land, the matter be urgently addressed by the government. 

We recommend that all the land should be titled in the names of the respective ministries or departments although it remains under the custody of the Uganda Land Commission. 

There is also need for the Uganda Land Commission to make land allocation as transparent as possible, by carrying out consultation with the responsible institutions and following the established procedures relating to sale and disposal of public assets.

Government should budget for all the money required for titling and surveying all the public land. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry in charge of Lands and Housing, and the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, should upon these recommendations make sure that the Auditor-General’s report and that of the committees are acted upon. You remember that there was a report in this House about this land issue and we pray that this issue is handled.

2.2	Repair and maintenance of Government vehicles 

The Auditor-General reported that a lot of money is spent by Government every year on repair and maintenance of vehicles by various ministries and departments. These repairs are necessitated by all the fleets of vehicles which are held by ministries and institutions. The problem attributed to this is lack of a vehicle replacement policy. The problem is further compounded by lack of proper fleet management in Government institutions that has led to uncontrolled movement of Government vehicles, resulting into increase in the level and amount spent on fuel and repair costs. Weaknesses were also noted in internal control procedures for vehicle maintenance. 

The committee thought that although repair and maintenance are carried out by garages or workshops which are prequalified by the required procurement regulations, a review of the repair and maintenance of the vehicles revealed various weaknesses that exposed the ministries to the risk of not obtaining value-for-money for the work carried out. 

It was also noted that the system of documentation was lacking in many ministries. In many cases, repairs were not supported with requisitions initiated by the users’ drivers or transport officers. 

Most of the workshops where the repairs were carried out did not have the proper systems for documenting the work they have done. They did not maintain supervision reports, job cards to indicate the works carried out, release notes confirming release repairs and gate registers to record the entries and exists, and histories of repairs of vehicles in the garage were lacking.  

A proper system of documentation should allow a ministry to properly monitor the repairs carried out, and it could also allow one to verify the works carried out. It was further noted by the Auditor-General that in carrying out the repairs, some of the vehicles were fitted with substandard spare parts, a factor that explained why the vehicles were breaking down time and again. 

The committee recommends that Government sets up a minimum standard to be met by the workshops, in order to be prequalified for the repair of Government vehicles. 

There is also need for Government to come up with a policy on the use of substandard spare parts as their use may not be cost effective in the long-run. 

The committee observes that a proper fleet management observance system in all ministries will be a big step ahead in reducing the expenditure o, public administration, which is already a public concern. 

During the discussion with the accounting officers, it was noted that all the ministries did not have vehicle control measures in place which raised heavy administration costs. Most of the administration costs were incurring from vehicle repairs; they did not have log books and had poor systems of documentation among all the repairs that were being carried out. 

The committee further noted that some of the transport officers lacked technical knowledge to manage the vehicles in the government departments. 

Now, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and that of Public Service, should enforce standing instructions on acquisition, use and maintenance of Government vehicles. 

The committee further recommends that a minimum standard of qualification be put in place for the transport officers in all Government ministries, institutions and departments. Transport officers in Government should be able to assess mechanical conditions of Government vehicles rather than relying on the garages. 

The committee further recommends that vehicle movement log books be maintained for all Government vehicles.  This will show the maintenance and movement of vehicles.

It is also recommended that only certified drivers be allowed to drive Government vehicles and any officer who drives himself or herself in a government vehicle without express permission commits a punishable offence. 

It is also recommended that no officer should use a government vehicle for non-official work outside Government working hours. The committee was particularly concerned with the use of vehicles under the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Public Service and also the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Uganda Police should ensure compliance with the Government Standing Orders on this.

Noting that most of the vehicles purchased under the projects in the ministries’ departments usually violate the required Statutory Instrument for a capacity of not more than 2800 cc, the committee recommends that the ministry responsible should stick to Government regulations during the purchase of project vehicles.  The accounting officers who fail to comply should be held accountable by Parliament. 

2.3	Domestic Arrears and Contingent Liabilities

The Auditor-General reported that domestic arrears as at 30 June 2005 stood at Shs 266,546,109,048 compared to Shs 237 billion for the previous year, 2004. This reflects an 11 percent increment.

Although details of each vote are discussed in the body of this report, the continued incurrence of domestic arrears reflects a breakdown in the management of the budgets and abuse to the whole accountability process.

From 2001, you find that some ministries continue having the same cases even when the Auditor-General and the committee continuously remind them to review the way they are doing their work. Domestic arrears have been a big problem to us. The committee notes that this abuse is done against the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development instructions to all ministries, to only commit Government on funds available within their votes.

Government should endeavour to ensure management of its budgets are adhered to, and they must desist from accumulating domestic arrears, which could have an unplanned impact on the economy.

The Secretary to Treasury specifically, should discipline the accounting officers who fail to observe Government regulations and continue to incur domestic arrears against the advice.

The committee also observed that delay in release of funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development contributed greatly to accumulation of domestic arrears.  Most of the ministries and departments would say that they get money towards the end of the financial year and sometimes they have to remit it back to the Consolidated Fund and it keeps making their domestic arrears accumulate. This in itself was noted as the Ministry of Finance’s failure to adhere to the budgets as appropriated by Parliament. The committee directs that this must stop.

The committee further recommends that all domestic arrears  should be verified and sent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for settlement, and that the commitment control system in Government ministries, institutions or departments be enforced, and accounting officers, who in future accumulate domestic arrears, be held personally liable.

The committee further recommends that all unutilised cash balances at the end of the financial year be the opening balance for the vote in the next financial year, so that we avoid hurried procurement, which leads to wastage. It is this cash that will be appropriated as the opening balance to handle programmes which were not finalised at the end of the financial year. This may need some bit of debate, but we are saying, if you give me money in May and I must do my procurement while following the PPDA Act, and by 30 June, you want the money back, why don’t we keep it and use it in the next financial year as our opening balance? Parliament may have to look at that. 

2.4	Outstanding Advances and Unaccounted for funds

During the year under review, the Auditor-General reported that advances totalling to Shs 8 billion and above, remained unaccounted for contrary to financial regulations that require all advances to be retired by the end of the year.

The committee observed that lack of accountability and reporting on the work for which funds are advanced, constitute a criminal act, which should be dealt with decisively.

The committee recommends that all Government officials who receive advances from Government and fail to account when required to do so, should be made to make good of such funds advanced to them, forthwith.

Although the committee has been directing that advances not accounted for be recovered from the salaries of the concerned officers for a specific period, the committee found a situation whereby, for public officials advanced funds for private businesses, attaching their salaries proved very impossible. For example, an advance of Shs 100 million would take approximately 68 years for you to recover the money advanced from the salary of the officer. So, although there is a regulation that we recover the money advanced from your salary, it takes like all these years we are talking of. If we are to recover Shs 100 million, it will take us 68 years, which is beyond the retirement age of the officer in question. 

Therefore, the committee directs that in making an advance to any public officer, accounting officers should evaluate risks of ensuring accountability, otherwise the Public Accounts Committee will hold the accounting officer responsible for failure to produce necessary accountability before the committee. Any officers who have not accounted for any advance should immediately be held for corruption and abuse of office.

Financial Audits

During the year under review, the Auditor-General reported that in the Directorate of Central Government, 20 accounts had received unqualified opinions, 57 qualified opinions and six disclaimers. 

In the Directorate of Local Government Authorities, 129 local governments were not audited but there were efforts underway to audit them. 

He reported that under the Directorate of Statutory Bodies, he was unable to issue reports of 22 accounts due to the failure of the bodies to submit their financial statements for audit. 

Under the Directorate of Projects and Administration, 70 projects were audited and their accounts certified and 19 were being audited while two remained outstanding. Audit reported that the main problem encountered during audit, included delay in submission of final accounts by a number of projects and that the two remaining projects had not submitted their accounts.

While appearing before the committee, the Accountant-General informed the committee that the quality of financial reports had improved and that the nature of audit queries had changed from transaction to system related queries. 

It would be good for us to report that the kind of queries we used to have when people were acting with impunity has somehow reduced. This time when you asked the accounting officers or the auditors in those places, they would tell you that, “We had a problem with our computers.” It is no longer just doing things with impunity to that extent. 

He reported that the Ministry of Finance through the Office of the Accountant-General had undertaken various activities to minimise the audit queries and these include the following: 

We are now restructuring the Office of the Accountant-General into four departments namely, financial management services, technical and advisory services, treasury services and inspectorate and internal audit. 

They are now moving towards harmonisation of legal and regulatory framework of the PFAA, 2002; the Local Government Finance Act, 1997; the PPDA Act, 2003, and underlying regulations and instructions to iron out the conflicts that lead to audit queries.

They are also undertaking professional training and accreditation to professional bodies. They have also moved towards review and management of statutory reports. 

The committee was, however, informed that there were still challenges in the financial management in local governments that include not attracting qualified accountants. Most of these qualified accountants do not accept to go and work in the rural areas. 

The quality of financial management at missions abroad has also been poor. Our missions have not managed their books well and probably that should be looked into, and they say this is mainly due to lack of accounts staff, the conflicts in the Acts which has slowed down implementation of public financial management reforms and inadequacy in funding to support the above initiatives.

The committee recommends that adequate funding be provided to streamline recruitment, training and roll-out of programmes in all ministries and departments of Government to reduce wastage of resources and minimise audit queries. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry should urgently finalise procedures of posting qualified accountants from the Treasury to handle accounts in missions abroad to avoid further wastage of our resources.

We also recommend that Government urgently tables the amendments to harmonise the Public Finance and Accountability Act, and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act so that the disposal of our public assets is done with express authority from the Secretary to the Treasury. 

On the projects that remained outstanding, the committee directed that two project coordinators be removed from office.

The committee also warns accounting officers to ensure that the projects under their ministries are audited. According to the PPDA Act part VII, a deviation from the use of a procurement or disposal method or documents may only be permitted by the PPDA. 

Accordingly, test checks revealed that various accounting officers were seeking for a waiver from procurements so that they do not follow the rules citing questionable exceptional circumstances. Sometimes the accounting officers are telling us that it is not just possible to follow the PPDA Act. So there is a lee way where the Act accepts you to ask for a waiver and most of them are asking for that waiver. 

We propose that probably it should be looked at further and we see if there is merit in what they are trying to do. The committee was informed by the Executive Director, PPDA that deviations from the applicable PPDA Act, methods as reported by the Auditor-General were as follows:

The accounting officer of the Ministry of Works requested for authority to get a list of firms to carry out ex-post audits on road projects to evaluate the performance of road procurements. The Executive Director, PPDA said the authority, under Section 40 did pre-qualify four firms to carry out procurement audits on its behalf. 

The four firms were recommended to the ministry on the basis of the advice sought and therefore this did not amount to a waiver of the Rules of Procedure under the PPDA Act and Regulations, 2003. He, therefore, advised that the accounting officer should explain how the procurement was done and proposed that the audit be carried out so that we can look at the issue of value for money.

The secretary, Electoral Commission, requested the PPDA for approval of change of procurement method for several procurements including road blitz, billboards and banners required for the referendum exercise. The request was to change the method from open bidding method to request for quotation method in accordance with regulation 339 of the PPDA Act 2003. 

The Executive Director, PPDA reported that the PPDA granted a waiver to use the quotation method. He, however, reported that the cost of the procurement was not submitted but the authority was monitoring compliance with conditions of this waiver and proposed that an audit should be carried out so that we can look at the area of value for money in this procurement.

It was reported that the process of approval by the Executive Director was an outcome of a technical review process by the Department of Legal and Compliance in accordance with regulations 339 and 340 of the PPDA Regulations. 

The committee was assured that management had established guidelines for approval of the waiver, which are to be approved by the PPDA Board of Directors. The Director, PPDA however noted that the request for the waiver was as a result of the late release of funds, which we have mentioned before, lack of procurement planning, and ignorance of the law which should be addressed by the concerned parties.

The committee recommends that given the above explanation, value for money audits should be carried out in all ministries. We recommend that the Ministry of Works and the Electoral Commission, which did not adhere to the proper procurement procedures in line with the PPDA Regulations, should explain why they procured items which had no history in the area that they were told to provide and left out experienced people with lower quotations.

Creation of Limited Liability Companies by Government under the Companies Act

During the year under review, the Auditor-General reported that he was being precluded from conducting audit where government or the government bodies established under the Act of Parliament, create joint ventures undertaking companies in which government does not hold the majority shares. 

Under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, an audit is only performed in those companies that fit in the definition of “state enterprises”. Whereas the Companies Act provides that the majority shareholder can appoint an auditor to audit the companies, government being a minority shareholder ordinarily have to abide by this.  

It must, however, be noted that Article 163(3)(b) of the Constitution empowers the Auditor-General to conduct the financial and value for money audit in respect of any project involving public funds. The above provision, therefore, is in contravention of this Article of the Constitution and the Office of the Auditor-General should be enabled to conduct audits of any public fund to their finality. 

Mr Speaker, here we have a situation where we invest in a company and unless we are majority shareholders, the Auditor-General cannot look into that account and we feel that we are losing out. So, the committee directs the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to facilitate the Auditor-General to audit these entities so that he can report on the share investments of the Government of Uganda. 

Foreign Debt: Penalties and Commitment Fees

The Auditor-General reported that by 30 June 2005, we had loans of Shs 1,794,469,423,197 due for disbursement and were not drawn by beneficiary projects. The money has been sitting there and was not drawn. 

The committee was informed that in accordance with the credit terms, creditors levy penalties in form of commitment fees on loan amounts not disbursed. Commitment fees totalling to above Shs 6 billion were paid during the period under review.  

The committee observes that the extent of the un-drawn loans and penalties signalled a poorly managed government loan portfolio and therefore a wasteful expenditure.

Further scrutiny of the performance of active loans whose disbursement regime expired and hence terminated revealed that many loans are expiring without loan amounts being fully drawn. Between 31 December 2004 and 31 December 2008, of the loan accounts closed, 24 were partially drawn and this was US $101,851,922 which is Shs 177,803,918,754 representing 28 percent of the total expected amount. We forfeited the money as a result, because we did not utilise it. For some of the loans, forfeited monies are far in excess of 50 percent contracted loan amounts. Mr Speaker, this is not a very little amount of money. 

The committee was however informed that in many cases, government had been made to pay commitment fees not because of the delay on the part of the executing agencies, but because of section 3.03 of the loans agreement, which in effect charges commitment fees on the total un-disbursed resources and not the arrival of the programmed resources.  

The committee observes that this is an unfair provision and directed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development immediately renegotiates this section such that commitment fees are charged only on unutilised, programmed resources and per annum.

Although the Accountant-General attributed this to the loan commitments signed at different periods, the committee found out that this mostly arose from poor absorption capacity of government, fluctuations in exchange rates, over-estimation of contingency funds and poor counterpart funding from government.  

The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda team negotiating these loan agreements should ensure that government gets fair terms of the funding deals.

The committee also observes that the negotiating team of the government on such loan agreements urgently needs to be technically strengthened to ensure that government always gets fair terms of funding.

The committee also recommends that government should not negotiate loans beyond its absorption capacity.

The committee further recommends that any accounting officer who cannot absorb the amounts as agreed be charged penalties and removed for inefficiency.

Disbursement outside the Approved Budget 

During the year under review, a close scrutiny of the approved budget revealed that various projects received funding from un-appropriated sources or mostly donors. A sample test showed that a total sum of over US $23 billion was disbursed to various projects outside the approved budget. It appeared to the committee that the information provided to Parliament for budget approval was inadequate with regard to donor-funded projects. 

We discovered that a lot of money, which goes to ministries and departments from donors, is not declared, but we believe that as Parliament we are in charge of appropriation. We should know and such monies should also be declared in the budgets and we should be able to appropriate it as the Parliament of this country.

The committee observed that non-capturing of all projects in MTEF leaves a loophole and makes it difficult for Parliament to oversee the project implementation. This also shows that there is off-budgeting which puts some ministries at an advantage over others under the guise of MTEF.

The committee noted that many of such cases are in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health. Those two ministries were sighted as having advantage over other ministries.

The committee recommends that the process of capturing all projects in the MTEF ceiling should be handled as a matter of urgency, to enable Parliament to effectively carry out its oversight function as commanded by the Constitution. 

It is recommended that all projects be audited by the Auditor-General, and all figures be captured in the budgets as amendments to reflect the true budget position for all these years.

The committee warned that any accounting officer of a ministry who spends outside the budget should be held for abuse of office and corruption.

Funds Forfeited on Expired Loans

During the year under review, the Auditor-General reported that he had carried out a review of performance of active loans whose disbursement regimes had expired and were terminated. He found that many loans were expiring without loan amounts being fully drawn. For some of these loans, forfeited monies were found in excess of 50 percent of contracted loan amounts. 

He also informed the committee that although his office had not carried out selective performance audit of these projects, it was unlikely that projects that received less than 50 percent of the resource envelope could perform satisfactorily. This raised doubt as to what value was achieved where only partially drawn amount of loans had occurred.

The accounting officer informed the committee that only four projects closed as opposed to 24 reported, and in no single case did un-disbursed percentage exceed 50 percent as observed by audit. He attributed the causes of expiry of disbursement period without exhausting loan amounts to the following:

•	Delay in fulfilling the conditions, which are needed for disbursement.
•	Foreign exchange fluctuations.
•	Over estimation of contingencies in the funding projects.
•	Donor procurement process that is long and involving international competitive bidding. They tend to say that when the donors give us this money, some of the strings they put across are not easy to handle especially in the area of procurement. So the accounting officers were also trying to bring this as a case.
•	Government’s poor counter funding. We get the money and when the government is to counter fund, it takes a bit of time to do that.
•	Parliament was accused of late approval of loans.
•	Termination of contracts like the Jinja-Bugiri Road.

He also reported that the office of the Auditor-General had been restructured and equipped to monitor the absorption capacity in the projects.

The committee observed that while the Executive has all the technical expertise to conceive and plan the projects, it normally takes long to bring loans for approval to Parliament. So the committee was defending Parliament and when it does, it is done without proper study and consultation. The reasons for delays are within its capacity, which should be urgently addressed.

The committee recommends that Parliament be involved early enough in the process of loan disbursement for it to carry out a detailed study and consult with both the technical officers and the public who are the beneficiaries of the projects.

The committee further recommends that the input of the Treasury Services Department on the Debt Negotiation Team should be urgently addressed.

The committee also recommends that the Auditor-General audits the impact of the loans, which were never procured, to confirm if the desired objectives are met.

Pension Arrears

The Auditor-General reported that as at 30 June 2004, the government had pension gratuity liabilities to the tune of over Shs 177 billion. During the period under review, Shs 38 billion additional claims were processed and added. Out of Shs 215 billion pension gratuities payment, only Shs 10 billion, that is five percent, was allocated, released and paid. You know this is accumulative. However, the Minister of Public Service has been trying to update us but still it is quite an issue, which must be handled by Parliament.

Audit noted that pensioners are not adequately catered for although substantial amounts remained at the end of the budget year. There was a surplus yet the pensioners were not catered for. It recommended that while government prospects long term, sustainable, social security schemes for the public servants, pension funding should be increased and considered as one of our high priorities while we plan to have these other areas done. 

The accounting officer informed the committee that the Cabinet was considering a paper to reform the pension sector and this would be made public once approved.

The committee noted and hereby reports that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance have agreed to clear all pensions and gratuity arrears due. That is the undertaking they made before the committee. 

The committee recommends that the Sessional Committee on Local Government and Public Service should follow up this matter.

The committee further recommends that a retired civil servant should be put on the pension payroll before his or her name is deleted from the usual payroll, and he or she should be able to access the terminal benefits within six months.  The committee directs that the Ministry of Public Service implements this and ensures compliance. 

Late Release of Funds

The Public Finance and Accountability Act requires that all voted expenditure be made by 30th June of each year and any unspent balances by year end should be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. 

The audit observed that late releases in a number of cases fail to be utilised or led to hurried utilisation of the funds. Those hurried utilisations are fertile ground for corruption tendencies and lead to most of the accounting officers contravening the systems and the laws that are in place. For example, examination of records by the Auditor-General reported that over Shs 7 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance between June 25th and 30th to ministries or departments.

Mr Speaker, this is quite serious and I think Ministry of Finance should look at this because this is where shoddy work is coming from; this is where people use money and they do not use the PPDA Act and you find that money has just been wasted and that is how we end up not getting value for money because money gets there late and the departments try to utilise the money. In the process there are leakages in procurement. 

Although the Secretary to the Treasury attributed late releases to the timing of the inflows and that at certain times some expenses are critical, the committee’s view is that the ministry needs to run a planned budget.

The committee recommends that ministries and departments be allowed to plan for their activities three months early and wait for the cash releases. The committee will hold accountable any accounting officer who spends out of his or her budget at the end of the financial year for violation of his/her roles as accounting officer. 

Unauthorised Expenditures/re-allocations

During the financial year under review, the appropriation account had an over expenditure of over Shs 2 billion. The accounting officer informed the committee that Uganda Revenue Authority requested and was authorised a supplementary budget to renovate their buildings. Whereas Shs 2 billion was approved, the actual expenditure was over Shs 2 billion. They spent above that by over Shs 41 million. Although evidence was presented to the committee, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure Parliament’s approval for the Shs 41 billion. The committee directs that no money should be spent without approval of Parliament.

Unauthorised Virements/Reallocations 

During the year under review, a total of over Shs 1 billion was re-allocated from the development budget to meet recurrent expenditure and this contravenes the Appropriation Act. The committee noted that such re-allocations always lacked required parliamentary approval. This is further worsened by the revelation that the users on the IFMS find it easy to charge any item with funds and get paid, leading to misleading budget information and accompanied risks. 

In his explanation to the committee, the Secretary to Treasury said that there were no unauthorised re-allocations/virements but direct charges on project funds to settle outstanding, recurrent bills. He said this was done to avoid accumulation of domestic arrears. He reported that most of the funds were used to settle outstanding bills on computer paper for the payroll, printing of the budget documents and travels abroad. 

The committee noted that such expenditures distort the budget as passed by Parliament and directs that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must stop such reallocations, unless agreed by Parliament.

The committee further recommends that the sessional committees should follow the budget to see that it performs as agreed. 

Mr Speaker, I have attached the list of members who constituted the committee, which came up with this report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the report and I also thank the members. Honourable members, you got the executive summary. I think each of you has got this copy. In order to facilitate structured submissions, I suggest that you use this executive summary, decide which area - because you are not supposed to debate everything that is here - you debate a subject of your interest and, therefore, go deep into the report or even the ministry concerned. If you want to talk about a ministry, prepare your submission rather than generally talking about everything. That is not helpful.


I thank the committee for this executive summary and I think all committees should start doing the same thing because nobody can read a 100-page report. But you can understand what is in a 100-page report by reading this one. Should I propose that you go and make your preparations for submission tomorrow?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a bit of a problem with our rules that requires you to invoke it -(Interjections)- the rules here regarding the Hansard specifically. That is what I am seeking your guidance on. Normally the Hansard reproduces what is said or what is spoken and so I am seeking your guidance that you invoke your powers so that the Hansard can produce these reports in totality. It will also save time.

THE SPEAKER: There are precedents where sessional committee reports are put in a booklet; that is not a problem because she was presenting the report by reading the summary. That is the report, which she presented because she could not read the entire report and, therefore, in our notes she read a summary. So, it will be published as a committee’s report of the Auditor-General. But, please, prepare so that we have structured submissions. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope that your decision also applies to the Committee on Local Government Accounts that has also been passed.

THE SPEAKER: Do not be worried. They will be published as reports of the committees. But I hope my point is appreciated so that tomorrow we start the debate. I wonder whether we can start earlier than 2.30 p.m., around 2.15 p.m. I can see we have some questions, which were not answered last time. There could a statement so the earlier we start the better.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 November 2009 at 2.15 p.m.) 


