Thursday, 5 November 2009

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I must say that yesterday we had agreed that we should start at quarter past but I waited – anyway, thank you for coming. 

In the VIP gallery we have Ambassador Jean Charles Okot, representing the Democratic Republic of Congo in Uganda. (Applause) We welcome you, your Excellency. I am also happy to note that together with His Excellency the Ambassador of the DRC is our Ambassador to DRC, Maj. James Kinobe. (Applause) That shows that we are moving together. You are most welcome.

In the public gallery, we have teachers and pupils of Golden Brown Primary School, which is represented by hon. Kyahurwenda. You are welcome. (Applause) We also have teachers and pupils of Kikandwa Church of Uganda Primary School from Wobulenzi. You are welcome. (Applause) There are other visitors; when we get the details, I will formally introduce them, but I welcome you.

Hon. Members, as you were previously informed, tomorrow there will be celebrations for the ten years of the existence of the East African Cooperation. We shall have a walk, which will start from the Constitutional Square at 8.30 a.m. and end here with tree planting by the chief walker who is His Excellency, the Vice-President. There will then be a symposium at Serena Hotel at 10.00 a.m. and His Excellency the President will be the chief guest. You are all welcome to participate in these events.

2.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on an issue of national importance. If Ugandans die under unclear circumstances, it should be the concern for all of us. Right now in Gulu we are experiencing deaths. On Sunday we lost six women due to crude alcohol. Crude alcohol has been drunk in Kampala, Gulu and is still being drunk. Why should our people continue to die because of this crude alcohol? I came from Gulu yesterday and I was told that the alcohol comes from Kagadi. There is also another type, which they say comes from Jinja. 

Some of us saw the brewing of crude alcohol in the villages; when people went to buy, the owner had to taste it first. Now it seems the level of corruption and people wanting to get rich quickly in Uganda is going to kill all of us. To date I think up to 15 people have died because of this crude alcohol since Sunday, and there are some in the hospital. 

The women are very vulnerable because I think biologically, women cannot contain concentrated poison. At least for the men, some just go blind, but even then, when you become blind life is still difficult. Imagine a teacher becoming blind; he cannot cope! 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that this alcohol is not only found in a few areas of this country, in Gulu for that matter. I want to inform you that four days ago, I was in one of the sub-counties of my constituency, that is Orom in Akilok parish, and I found out that the biggest business in Akilok is bringing this alcohol from Jinja. I found over 20 Sudanese flocking in to buy it. I was told that was normal business in Akilok. It is, therefore, not true to say that death is only here. We have not even accounted for the deaths among our neighbours. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS AOL: Thank you, my sister. The issue looks simple but it is a very big one. Yesterday evening, before I went to bed, they rang and told me that in the parish where I come from another woman had died because of that alcohol. 

We do not have the technical people. I believe those technical people should be chemists. Gulu does not have even one, but Uganda should have chemists. I am not saying that all crude alcohol is bad, but who are these people who decided to poison the people of Gulu? They should be traced and made accountable for the lives, which are lost. I appeal –(Interruption)

MR GODI: I would like to inform the honourable member that the matter is not only about deaths. It has reached the extent that some people who take that crude waragi get blind. Four teachers from Atiak who had been discharged from Gulu Hospital cannot see; they have lost their sight. They say that they do not feel any pain, but they cannot see. We are, therefore, seeking government intervention to have samples of the alcohol tested by the Government Chemist and we find a solution. Parliament has discussed this issue of crude waragi time and again, but there is no solution yet. Therefore, I implore you again. Thank you.

MS AOL: Finally, I want to say that this is the work of the Social Services Committee. We should get a way of stopping the deaths of Ugandans, and death is now concentrated in Gulu, in Layibi Division and Badege Division, and it has now gone to Loro Division. We really need help. If one life gets lost due to unclear circumstances, all of us must take up our spears and search for the reason why that life is lost. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.43
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on another matter, but I thought I should first make a remark on the matter that has just come on the Floor. I was saddened by the contradictory reports from the government side. We at least had a ray of hope when the Minister of Health made a statement banning the consumption of this waragi. However, while we were preaching that gospel to people in our constituencies, the Minister of State for Trade and Industry again came up with a contradictory statement actually blaming the Minister of Health. All the people out there are very surprised and are wondering whether we still have one Cabinet. How could the Minister of State for Industry come and shut down the efforts that the Ministry of Health had made? They made that statement in order to save the lives of Ugandans. We would like to maintain that the position taken by the Ministry of Health was the best for this country. (Applause)

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to comment on the issue raised by the member from Gulu. I have not yet received the technical report, but from the papers it is very clear that people have died. From the surface of it, they have died of adulterated alcohol, most likely adulterated by methanol, which is the same problem we have been dealing with. 

You know very well that this matter was referred to a committee of Parliament, the Social Services Committee, together with the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and they are working very hard on this matter. While we await their report, we shall certainly go in and establish the real cause. However, from the surface, this must be methanol poisoning. 

What should we do in the mean time? The last time I was here on this matter, I said that this matter has a lot to do with trade, but I was not believed. If the source of this adulterated alcohol is somewhere in Jinja and it goes to Gulu, Sudan and anywhere in the region, then you can see that this is not a matter that should be kept to the Ministry of Health alone. That is the matter I was trying to raise the other time.

THE SPEAKER: Are we continuing with this matter? This matter was here last week and we referred it to the Committee of Social Services, the Committee of Trade and the Ministry of Health to come up with an answer. I think a report has now been made. Let the committees to which we referred the matter take up the task. 

MRS SENINDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to express my condolences to the families of the bereaved. I would like to appreciate the gravity of the problem. I remember when this problem was raised on the Floor of this House two committees were given the responsibility, the Committee of Trade and the Committee of Social Services. 

I would like to inform this House that we are doing our best working together as the two committees to ensure that we present a report on the Floor of this House. I realise that we were given only two weeks and as I speak, I think we have gone half way that time. I would like to confirm that God willing, we are going to present our report on the 26th. We are going to work with out colleagues, the Members of Parliament, and we shall invite you as stakeholders as we discuss. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.48
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I am rising on another matter of public, urgent importance regarding the Teso sub-region. Teso is at it again. Not long ago we had the problem of the floods, and I do not want to go into the history of the floods. This was immediately followed by drought and massive crop failure, which culminated into government intervention by way of providing relief food. 

As of now, the region has again been hit by the hornworm which has attacked potato gardens. Once you see one caterpillar in the garden, they can destroy an acre within three days. The people are desperately looking for a chemical to spray and kill the hornworms. 

Therefore, I am rising to call upon government to expeditiously intervene by way of providing the chemicals for spraying them in order to save the potatoes from failure, which will eventually culminate into famine. The worst hit sub-counties are those which were again worst hit by the floods. For my case, all my sub-counties in Ngora constituency are affected. So, I am calling upon the government to make an expeditious intervention to avert yet another famine caused by the pest. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I know and I heard is that the Ministry of Agriculture is aware of this. This morning the Minister of State for Agriculture, hon. Bagiire, mentioned that they are aware of this problem and that they have bought 62,000 litres of chemicals to contain the situation. Unfortunately, there is no minister from that sector here now, but there was a public announcement aired on a number of radio stations. Since you brought it up formally in Parliament, maybe the Government Chief Whip can help us understand it better.

2.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to comment on this issue as has been brought up by hon. Dr Epetait. 

The issue of the worms was brought to the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries some time ago. As the Rt Hon. Speaker has pointed out, this ministry is on the ground. What I know is that they have also been trying to reach the hon. Members of Parliament from that area to request them work together with the ministry to effectively handle this problem. We shall be apprising you, as Members of Parliament from that area and this House, on the progress that is being made by Ministry of Agriculture in regard to averting that undesired situation.

2.52
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people I represent who use Wankulukuku Road, allow me raise a matter of public concern. 

Since that road was tarmacked, accidents have increased due to reckless driving. Since January this year about ten people, especially school-going children, have lost their lives because of reckless driving. Just on Tuesday this week, a primary six child was knocked by a saloon car, registration No. UAH 911J. Although this child did not die, she sustained serious injuries on the legs and arms. 

The aggrieved people have demanded, through several appeals extended to the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Nasasira, that humps be constructed on that road all the way from Kabuusu to Wankulukuku Stadium especially from Kabaawo Market to Sembule Steel Mills. The minister has totally ignored that appeal. We have over 15 schools in that area with all the children using that road. My question is: how many people should die on that road before those who are concerned get to know we have a very big problem? The road has become a killing field. We have lost so many people since the beginning of this year. 

I call upon government to immediately come up and address this problem. I also would like to ask the minister to tell this House why he has ignored the people’s appeal. Is he aware that that road is a highway because it joins Uganda to Kenya and Tanzania? I would like to know when he will provide a remedy.

We have to be concerned about the big number of people who lose their lives due to accidents. It is well known that Uganda is one the countries with the highest death rates due to road accidents in Sub-Saharan Africa. Recently, it was Fr Byaruhanga - may his soul rest in eternal peace - who died in a road accident because of speeding. I would like to emphasize that government should get very concerned about the lives of many Ugandans who perish in road accidents. 

The problem here is that hon. Nasasira has overstayed -(Laughter)- I think if someone overstays, that can be a reason for him not to be mindful –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you do not have to get personal. The point has been made and I think let us wait for the response.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, hon. Nampijja has raised an issue of accidents and loss of lives on our highways, in particular, in her constituency. The sector minister is away in Arusha. Although hon. Byabagambi is around –(Interjections)– no! He has just walked in. We shall be communicating to him all the information that you submitted so that he can be in a position to provide a comprehensive response. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have women leaders from Nazigo sub-county in Kayunga District led by Mrs Madina Seti, a district councillor and secretary for health. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the hon. Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had been requested by this House to come up with a statement on ghost voters as has been reported by the media. However, there is communication from the Attorney-General to the effect that he has taken up this matter but that it has turned out that he needs more time in order to be in a position to come up with a statement that captures all the issues that would be of interest to this House. The Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, has requested that he be allowed to make a statement on the Floor of this House in the last week of November. I so request, Sir.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We find it very unfortunate that such a serious matter can fail to attract a quick response from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The issues that are insinuated in this report are very critical to democracy, stability and the credibility of the Electoral Commission itself, and the future of this nation. 

Most interestingly, as far back as 2007 the Electoral Commission proposed reforms to the electoral processes in this country. Unfortunately, the Executive has never taken heed of these proposals and therefore not tabled any. As far back as four or five months ago, we in the Opposition proposed reforms, which are available to this House, but still nothing is being done yet the next election is barely 15 months away. 

We cannot afford to have this country guessing about the credibility of the Electoral Commission when there are very serious insinuations by the Executive or the ruling party itself saying the commission created one million ghost voters. I find it very unfortunate that government cannot come here and defend or put up a position or just clarify to this country what is happening. We cannot afford to take Ugandans for a ride for a long time. The electoral reforms are long overdue. Failing to respond to the reports in the media means that there is lack of political will to ensure there is a clean-up in the Electoral Commission’s voters’ register and that electoral reforms are put in place in time before the 2011 elections.

Therefore, I think giving the honourable minister up to the last week of November will be a disservice to this country. You know, the ruling party, NRM, has never come out to denounce that report. The report is yours as NRM. Why have you created that report and at the same time fail to either defend or disown it? My prayer is that the minister gives us a position next week.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think many people are going to take us for a ride, even the person who wrote that report. Imagine, you go and look at a register ten years after it was made, in 1996, won’t you find ghost voters? Ssekandi who registered in 1996 might be dead now, but you will find his name on the register. Aren’t you going to say the register has got ghost voters? It could be that ten years ago, I was staying in Entebbe but after some time I moved to Kotido. When you ask the people in Entebbe whether Ssekandi is there or not, they will say, “No”. Won’t you call me a ghost voter? I think the exercise is ridiculous.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I do agree with you and it is precisely for those reasons and many more that we want the debate to kick-start.

THE SPEAKER: A number of genuine voters might have died within ten years. So, it is a question of cleaning up the register. Anyway, let the Attorney-General give us a statement within two weeks from now rather than taking us to the end of the month.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your protection from the all-powerful hon. Alaso.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you give reports that have not been properly analysed?

MR MIGEREKO: Precisely, Sir; the explanation you have given clearly requires that a thorough study of what is pertaining on the ground is carried out so that when the minister comes here – and I am going to communicate your directive – within two weeks he should have a statement that clearly explains –(Ms Bako rose_)- order on what now? Mr Speaker, I need your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have the right to accept or not accept that information.

MR MIGEREKO: I always accept your information – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the Electoral Commission wrote to Members of Parliament and Parliament as an institution saying the deadline for anything to do with the Electoral Commission, whether it being electoral laws amended or other reforms being brought in, should have been June this year. June has passed. 

I was with Eng. Kiggundu when we were presenting to them our recommendations as far the Electoral Commission is concerned, from the National Planning Authority through the African Peer Review Mechanism process. I would like to say that you are aware that the report being talked about was generated from government cycles and this was not just yesterday; it was sometime back. Are you now suggesting that since then until now, you have done nothing about it yet you know, from within your own sources and the Electoral Commission, that the deadline given to you was June of this year? Are you, therefore, not just cheating this country by doing what you are doing? Can I inform you that if you walked to the EC right now, they will tell you that every reform you are bringing is four months late? 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I am sure hon. Christine Bako is fully aware that NRM members are usually not in the habit of cheating. (Laughter) The directive is going to be communicated but I also would like to point out – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you go and do business? I have said that let the Attorney-General make a statement within two weeks.

MR MIGEREKO: But I also wanted to assure Members that the reforms and amendments required are being worked on and they are going to be brought before this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this was a simple matter. The Attorney-General was supposed to give us a statement today but unfortunately he is not here. He said he would give us a statement by the end of November but we are saying that let him give us a statement within two weeks. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: With due respect, Mr Speaker, this issue of the national register is very important but we are just taking it very lightly. In my constituency and in Masaka District, we share a border with your constituency, the NRM parish chiefs have been given national registers and they have been asked to tick on every register -(Interjections)- I am talking as a Member of Parliament representing Bukoto South in this House. The parish chiefs are asked to tick at every polling station. Where they see that this is an opposition member, they put a mark. Where they see that this is NRM they put a mark. Therefore, when it comes here – and we are taking these matters very lightly, Mr Speaker, I think you should –(Interjection)- I respect the point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we conclude this debate because there will be a time when we will talk about reforms of the law? If you ask me how we should improve on this, I will tell you that let us have notice boards with the lists of voters in a polling station so that when somebody dies, someone crosses that name out. When somebody leaves that constituency to go to another constituency, he is crossed out and we have this as a permanent exercise. That would be my proposal when we are talking about reforms but we are not talking about reforms now, we are talking about the statement which we had expected from the Attorney-General. We have ruled that he will make that statement within two weeks. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I know that we are getting to questions for oral answer but I want to know how questions get to the Order Paper because I have raised questions for two years and they have not got to the Order Paper. What is the criterion for my question –

THE SPEAKER: The question which is going to be asked was because of my directive. It was not answered last week and I suggested that it should be the first question on the Order Paper.

QUESTION 86 TO THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

3.12
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): “Would the minister inform the House:
(i)	Why government has failed to implement or enforce the Rent Restriction Act, Cap 231 Laws of Uganda 2000 whose primary object is to regulate rent payable by tenants in respect of commercial and dwelling premises in Kampala and other urban centres?
(ii)	Whether government has plans to come up with other alternative policy measures to protect tenants occupying commercial structures within the central business district of Kampala against unconscionable rent charges that are being hiked by property owners from time to time?” 

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, I would like to give a response to the question raised by hon. Erias Lukwago. 

The Rent Restriction Act, Cap 231, Laws of Uganda 2000 –(Interruption)
 
MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure. As the person who raised the question, under our rules, I am entitled to a copy of the response before the answer is given but I do not have one, and Members have also not been given copies.

THE SPEAKER: The proper procedure should be followed. This question will be answered next week. 

QUESTION 90 TO THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

3.15
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I rise to ask question 90: “Would the minister inform the House:
(a)	What action is being done about the continuous encroachment of Naguru Rehabilitation Centre land?
(b)	The steps the minister is taking to alleviate the overcrowding at the Naguru Rehabilitation Centre;
(c)	The whereabouts of the land title for the Kireka Home of the Disabled;
(d)	The completion date for the replacement of the asbestos roofing in Kampiringisa Youth Rehabilitation Centre with iron sheets.”

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you. I rise to answer the question. Since 2007, the warden of Naguru Remand Home reported that there were some investors that had encroached –(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, the minister has not given me a copy of her answer and since I asked the question, the rules require that I have a copy of her answer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Why didn’t you follow the procedure?

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I was just introducing the subject but I was coming to the stage where I would request permission from you to give some Members copies of my answer. I have come prepared and I have the answer.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS ALUPO: The question that has been raised by hon. Lagada is a very pertinent one and I would like to respond as follows. 

The Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development reported the matter to the Ministry of Lands inquiring whether the land had a land title. On further inquiry, it was discovered that part of the land was allocated to an investor who also had a land title for the same land. The Minister of Gender then wrote to the Ministry of Lands to open up the boundary for the ministry land. 

A surveyor was sent to do the work but because of the threats to his life, the work was abandoned. The matter was reported to police and to PAC where the matter had originated. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is investigating the threat for further action. 

On question (b), I wish to respond that the government is addressing this problem by tackling the issue of street children from Karamoja as follows. We are addressing the factors that pull them to Kampala. We are also resettling them back home in Karamoja. We are taking them back to school in Jinja where over 500 of them are now schooling. We are also tracing and resettling those children in homes elsewhere other than Karamoja. 

We are also collaborating with foster homes for temporary upkeep until their homes are traced. We are also collaborating with those interested in adopting the children according to our laws. We are also taking those children who have broken the law to Naguru Remand Home for rehabilitation or to the courts of law.

On question (c), hon. Lagada raised the question of the land title for the Kireka Home for the Disabled. The response, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, is that the Kireka Home for the Disabled is not a government institution but rather an NGO collaborating with the Ministry of Gender, under the public-private partnership arrangement. 

The land, therefore, does not belong to government. The land title is in the names of the Uganda Foundation for the Blind, which is an NGO. That means that the land was donated by Kisonsokole.

The response to question (d) is that this financial year, the Ministry of Gender has planned for the rehabilitation of Kampiringisa. A firm has already been selected to execute the works, which are already ongoing. Work on the principal’s house has already started. We have started work on a separate wing for street children to separate them from inmates. It is expected that the work will be complete by the end of this financial year. Thank you very much. (Applause)

3.21
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for the response. I want to ask another question. When we were looking at the budget of the Ministry of Gender, I remember that the committee directed the ministry to spend their funds on rehabilitating Koblin Home in Karamoja, so that these children who are being moved are resettled there. 

In the minister’s response, amongst the things that she has stated, she said that they are resettling the children back home in Karamoja. My question is: where in Karamoja are you resettling these children? Because when the committee went there we found that the ones that you had taken there – and it is good that the minister who has just given this response was with us on that trip and she saw the situation in which the children were. So, where exactly are you resettling these children and what are you doing about Koblin centre for reception of children in Karamoja? Thank you.

3.22
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a supplementary question about the encroachment of land in Naguru Remand Home. The minister reported that the Ministry of Lands assigned a surveyor to go and come up with a clear demarcation of the land but the surveyor abandoned the work. He fled for security reasons. We would like to know who chased the surveyor and since the surveyor was chased, it means, therefore, that maybe the encroacher should be somebody in the security domain. 

How can we protect a civil servant, a surveyor, leave alone the owner of the land? If such a thing can happen in the centre of the city of Kampala, can you imagine what is happening elsewhere in the rural areas?

THE SPEAKER: But do you expect a proper answer to be given by the Minister of Gender who is not in charge of surveyors? And can you direct a supplementary question to a person who has not answered the question? This question should be directed to the Minister of Lands but the Minister is not in the House. The other minister is just reporting to you that what happened is that the Ministry of Lands sent a person who was chased. Now, it is the Minister of Lands to answer that question and I do not know whether he is able to answer that question.

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, it is true. We normally send surveyors to the field on request by sister departments. The report that what the honourable member is saying about the surveyor is yet to be verified. Therefore, I will get in touch with the minister to establish exactly what led to the fleeing of the surveyor from the scene and then we would be able to report back. 

3.25
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I am still concerned with question (a) where there is no response on this paper. Maybe it is written in white but I cannot see the response.

According to the minister’s response, I heard her stating that there were two land titles. I want to know which one was the first. Is it that one of the investor or the one of the public-private partnership? How could they have two land titles when Naguru has been there since time immemorial? I suppose it has its land title and then an investor came to have a land title attached to this important institution? Can I, therefore, know why there are two land titles and which one was the first, in which year and then this second one of the investor? When was the investor given the land title? Thank you.

3.27
MS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman representative, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, my concern is on part (c) of the question. Is the Minister aware that Kireka Rehabilitation Centre, although it is for Uganda Foundation for the Blind, has been run by government for quite some time in agreement with the foundation? It was supposed to be paying some rent to the Uganda Foundation for the Blind. Is she also aware that the fact that the blind people are now asking for the land title is because they want control over their property?

Can she really instruct and direct the staff in the Ministry of Gender to give full information about this rehabilitation centre and the relationship between government or the Ministry of Gender and Uganda Foundation for the Blind because? If they had full control, they would go out and look for their land title in the land offices. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How can this be a supplementary question to the answer which was given? The answer which was given was that this property does not belong to government. Therefore, if it does not belong to government, you cannot expect the government to have the title. They have told you the title is in the names of an NGO, so what else do you ask for? This was a complete answer.

MS SSEKABIRA: I am aware of what the minister is saying but I also have all that information that she needs to give to this House. That is why I am asking this question. Government has to be open to know that the blind are looking for control over their land.

THE SPEAKER: The purpose of the question was to find out where the title is. So somebody says “Do not ask me for the title, I am not the owner, the property belongs to Patel”. Then what else do you ask for as a supplementary question unless you dispute that the title does not belongs to you and you say, “I think Patel is keeping it illegally”.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. I am seeing some contradictions in this submission. According to the minister’s statement, the land does not belong to the government and the land title is in the names of the Uganda Foundation for the Blind. My colleague is submitting to this honourable House that they need some information so that they can go out there and process their title. I am confused -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Has the NGO said that it is selling property? How do you process a title, which is in the names of the owner? 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would really want to seek is that according to the minister, the title is already there in the names of the foundation and according to the submission of my honourable colleague the Foundation for the Blind has not yet secured the title. They are looking for more information to enable them - I want this to be clarified. Who is fooling who? Which one is right and which one is wrong?

THE SPEAKER: If the foundation has not got the title, which should be in their names, you do not ask the Minister of Gender for details. You ask the Ministry of Lands and the Minister of Lands is not in the House. Let us be orderly. The Minister of Lands is not answering these questions so he cannot come in to answer a supplementary question. The Minister of Lands cannot answer a supplementary question when the Minister of Gender is the one answering the question. The questions were directed to the Minister of Gender not the Minister of Lands.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Board of Directors of the Uganda Foundation for the Blind. We have the title but the problem is that government has built some houses there and it has occupied most of the places and has refused to let us have full possession of the place. That is our concern. When will government leave these premises for the Foundation?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should know how to handle item questions. It is not for discussion. If the Foundation thinks that the government is trespassing, that is a different question. It does not fall under these questions which are on the Order Paper and therefore if your Foundation thinks that government is trespassing; there are many ways in which to evict the government.

MS MWEBAZA: Mr Speaker, the question which was raised by hon. Lagada – actually, these issues are very serious. Question 90, part 1, on the encroachment of the investor on Naguru land; our Committee on Gender visited that land. They told us that the title was there in the names of the Ministry of Gender but they do not know where the title disappeared to. Then all of a sudden they saw an investor coming up encroaching on the land. When they contacted the Ministry of Gender nothing was taken up.

We went to Naguru Reception Centre and Remand Home; the investor has developed the land and there is a permanent car bond in that land. The Minister of Lands told us here that they are going to take it up. Where there is a permanent car bond, is the Ministry of Gender going to recover that land? 

We heard that there is a threat to sell the land in Kireka and the owners of that land, the NGO, came to our committee and told us. We asked the Ministry of Gender, they told us the title is with them. Now all these issues are contradicting.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see any problem. I think with the first problem, it is that there are conflicting claims over a piece of land and this normally happens when you do not know the boundaries of your plot. Therefore, what happens is that you get a plot number and the other one gets a plot number so that they clear the boundaries so that you can know which piece. Land can be adjacent to each other so what is required here is to clear the boundaries of the plots.

MS MWEBAZA: Mr Speaker, this land was for Naguru Reception Centre and Naguru Remand Home. We moved around the land and they told us the investor has encroached on it. The evidence is there, the minister says that there are two land titles.

THE SPEAKER: For instance, if you say that somebody has encroached on your land and you go to court to resolve this issue, you will have to adduce evidence of the surveyor who will come and clear. The surveyor will say, “I went and saw the dimensions of this and that; and he has encroached on it”. That is when you can say somebody has encroached on your land, and the answer which you got was to the effect that I think when the surveyors went to do that they were interfered with. The fact that they were interfered with, does not provide you with evidence. It leaves you lacking evidence so what you need is to enforce it so that these surveyors can carry out their work and be able to give you a true position. That is what I see in their answer.

3.37
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister was telling us that quite a number of children have been resettled. I want to know from the minister what assurance we have that those children that have been resettled are well facilitated, catered for and live in a very conducive environment.

Secondly, on part 4, the minister talked about tracing and resettling those children back to their homes and elsewhere other than Karamoja. Karimojong children, we know very well are mobile, they move from one place to another, which other home is she talking about here?

Thirdly, we know very well that Lweza Rehabilitation Centre is one of the rehabilitation centres, which used to accommodate more than 500 children and this rehabilitation centre was doing well. It is true that Lweza Rehabilitation Centre was allocated to an investor by the Ministry of Gender. We would like to know from the Minister, which investor was this and even all the information about that rehabilitation centre should be known by this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not see Lweza Rehabilitation Centre on this sheet. It is not part of the question. When they say supplementary, it must be only in respect of the answer given. Supplementary can only be on Kampiringisa. You cannot go to Nsamizi or to Mutukula because they have talked about a rehabilitation centre. The questions are not for discussion, you either have a supplementary question then you go but it is not for debate. Haven’t we really exhausted this question?

3.38
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two supplementary questions to the Minister. On question (b), my major concern is taking children to school somewhere in Jinja. I would like to ask why in Jinja? Why can’t the school be established in Karamoja itself to take these children instead of taking them to Jinja? From Jinja they can run back.

Is the Minister aware that the streets are again overcrowded? In fact the main streets here, Jinja Road is really overcrowded with children and what steps does she intend to take to make sure that the streets are cleaned up? Thank you.

3.40
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would also like to react to question (b) sub-section (iv). The Minister mentioned that they are trying to trace and resettle the children to their homes and elsewhere. I would like to know how the ministry is going to be following up these people who are not even in their regions when it has always been a problem in their own regions. What capacity do they have to make sure that they monitor their welfare, their settlement and make sure that they make a follow up of this to its logical conclusion? 

On question (d), what is the completion date for the replacement of the asbestos roofing of Kampiringisa? Although, it was your guidance that if it is Kampirigisa that is mentioned, another institution should not be mentioned; we know these questions that have been answered by the ministry and the ministry cannot disassociate itself from other similar problems that are elsewhere. My honourable colleague from Kasese mentioned some time back on the Floor of this House that Mobuku Youth Institute, which is just like Kampiringisa, has its main objective of making sure that we have these youths who are dropping out of school getting education and basic techniques of how they can proceed in their lives -

THE SPEAKER: The reason why the minister should not answer other questions that were not part of the question is that the minister must come prepared to answer questions put to him. If you start asking about Kisoro, from Kisoro, Ssese; it is not fair.

MR KYETUNDA: Then she should be prepared before hand -(Laughter)

3.43
MRS THEOPISTA SENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As one of the former Chairpersons of the Committee on Gender, the issues that my colleague hon. Lagada has raised are very essential. This issue of land more so for the people with disabilities and children, has been a big problem in the Ministry of Gender.

We need clarity on what to do about it because if we hear that the Naguru Rehabilitation Centre land is being encroached on, that someone else is there, that you know the title is in the hands of the people with disabilities; there is that question which must be cleared.

I heard because I do not have the answers of the minister, but I heard her say that the surveyor was chased. There is a big question that still stands; if the encroacher is an investor and the title is in different hands and the land is almost under dispute now, who is going to clear this? We need to have this question answered and to have this thing ironed out because we have had this problem for a long time. If we just leave it hanging like this, it is not going to help us. Thank you.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Members and to respond to the main questions, which were raised. One of them was, “Where in Karamoja is the ministry resettling children?” One of the areas where we have successfully resettled these children is called Lomarotoit in Iriir in Moroto District -(Interjections)- but I also want honourable members to appreciate that as a government we have a policy on children, which says that we can only institutionalise the children when we cannot avoid it. 

There is supposed to be a children’s home in Karamoja called Koblin, which the ministry at the moment is targeting as one of its priorities to rehabilitate -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, the policy I am talking about is that -(Interruption)

MS NAMOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the minister in order to mislead this House that they are going to resettle these children in Lomarotoit, the contested area, and yet she is the area MP of Katakwi? Can she really give us an answer that that area is already cleared and that those children are going to be resettled there or is she misleading us for purposes of responding to the question? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am not in position to rule on that point of order because it is a factual situation and I do not know the correct facts to be able to say, “You are lying,” or, “You are misleading the House.” What you can do is to inform her and say, “In view of this, do you think this is possible?” 

MS ALUPO: Mr Speaker, what I was trying to say is that the Ministry of Gender is doing as much as it can to ensure that all the street children, not only those from Karamoja, are resettled in their areas of origin. I think my sister, who is also my neighbour at home, misunderstood me. What I was saying was that one of the areas in Karamoja where we have successfully resettled the children is Lomarotoit but I am not saying that we are resettling children there again. 

To go back to hon. Lagada’s question, she was asking about where we are specifically resettling those children in Karamoja and that is why I mentioned that place. 

I want to say that as government we do not encourage the institutionalisation of children because we know that the remand homes or the rehabilitation homes for these children, which we have, are not permanent homes for them. These homes are meant to give these children some skills that they can use when they go back home. They are also meant to keep these children as we identify their relatives. So, Koblin Rehabilitation Home, which hon. Lagada is talking about, is meant to be a transit place for these children.

On the question of where else we are resettling these children and why we are resettling them in other areas other than Karamoja, which was raised by hon. Susan Nampijja, this question is good but I also want this House to know that the children on the streets are not only from Karamoja. There are children from other areas of Uganda and those are the children who I was talking about - (Interruption)

MS WONEKHA: Thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I am a Member of the Parliamentary Children’s Forum. We went to Koblin, the centre that receives the children as a transit centre, and the question was asked, “What exactly have you done at that centre?” It was really dilapidated; there were no toilets and the windows in the place where the children sleep were broken. It is pathetic. So, we would like to hear what government has done at Koblin in order to act as a proper transit centre. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But are we going to finish answering this question? Questions are supposed to be answered within a very short time but now it is becoming a debate.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, it is obvious now and it is common knowledge that most of the children on the streets are from Karamoja. A number of them do not come from the whole Karamoja but they are from Lokopo sub-county and we do not understand why Lokopo sub-county, but the information we have is that the people of Lokopo were displaced for a very long time but that arising from the disarmament and the efforts taken by Amuria District Local Government, there is now mutual co-existence between the people of Karamoja and those of Teso. 

We would like to interest the ministry to go and study how best they can support the community to produce the best necessities in this area so that these children will go back to their own homes. We do not really need to look around for where to resettle them and resettle them here or there when they have their parents and when they have land where food can be produced and where these children can settle better.

MR ABURA: Mr Speaker, thank you. Let us accept - 

THE SPEAKER: I think we need a review of this item on questions and what we expect to do with the questions and supplementary questions because I realise that we are turning this item into a general debate, which should not be.

MR ABURA: I am sorry. (Laughter) Let us accept that this programme of collecting children from the streets and returning them to Karamoja is a failure. How many times have we taken children from the streets to Karamoja? And there is always the idea of Koblin. Let me tell this House that Koblin was a centre that was started in 1968 for the children of the poor by an American organisation. Why can’t the government establish their own centre with education facilities and a polytechnic for these people here?

As somebody rightly said, these people who are on the streets of Kampala were displaced in 1984. The majority of their parents were one time in Busia, in Nakasongola and other places. They have really lost what we call the economic status. The government has now turned it into a project, budgeting for the number of buses that can take the Karimojong to Karamoja away from the streets of Kampala. Why can’t government identify one NGO that can take care of these people? There are many NGOs, why can’t government identify one that can monitor them; then we give them the facilities to educate the children on income generating activities? Otherwise this issue of saying next time we shall do this or that is ceremonial and it has failed. Do something.

MS ALUPO: The issue of vulnerable children that we are talking about is so intricate to the extent that if we are to dissect all the matters concerning vulnerable children, we shall debate it until the cows come home. I want to say that the Ministry of Gender is doing its best to ensure all the children in the streets of Uganda are resettled back to their communities.

The issue of the land encroachment in Naguru and its solution is intertwined between the ministries of Internal Affairs and that of Lands. Therefore, I pray that the land title for this land be laid on the Table in the near future after the intricacies have been resolved by the concerned government officials. Otherwise, I would like to thank all Members for raising those issues.

PETITION OF KAKOOZA MARIAM BY HON. ERIAS LUKWAGO, MP, KAMPALA DIVISION CENTRAL

3.56
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Before I proceed I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that the petitioner is in the gallery. I beg to move a humble petition of Kakooza Mariam seeking for a probe into the unprofessional conduct of some medical personnel in the maternity ward of Mulago National Referral Hospital and the general appalling conditions in that wing. The facts giving rise to this petition are as follows: 

Your petitioner is a female adult Ugandan aged 29 years and a resident of Kampala District. On the 14 February 2008, she went to Mulago National Referral Hospital for medical check-up as she was expecting.

On arrival, she was examined by a doctor who told her that the contractions or labour pains were mild and she was advised to walk around for them to ease up while she waited for the next day when she would be re-examined. 

The following day at 9.00 a.m. the doctor in charge asked the petitioner if she had gloves and cotton to which she replied in affirmative. He harshly asked her if the government had paid him to examine her.

He continuously complained that government does not pay them as doctors but she is grown up woman who knew or who is supposed to have understood what she was supposed to do to get their medical attention. At that same time another pregnant woman came and was taken into a spare room where she was examined.

When that person left, the petitioner begged the doctor to check her too because she was worried and she explained to him what the first doctor who had examined her the night before had said. He asked if she had gloves and told her to have a seat.

At that moment the doctor who had examined the petitioner earlier came in and they both teamed up and started insulting her; telling her how tired they were of working for free. They constantly reminded her of how government has not paid them to handle patients.
 
A nurse who was nearby offered to check the petitioner, she handed her a polythene bag and handed her the gloves. The nurse pushed her hand deep into your petitioner’s uterus. As the petitioner was subjected to excessive pain, she pleaded to the nurse to stop but to no avail. The nurse kept on pulling the organs inside until the petitioner felt like some organ was being plucked out of her stomach. 
  
As she was in immense pain, she became helpless and could not move her body. The nurse winked at a colleague and ordered the petitioner off the bed immediately. Your petitioner could not move because of the immense pain, which had been inflicted on her. Fearing any further injury to the unborn child, she tried to slowly get off the bed but all in vain. She collapsed and fell down. 

She pleaded with the nurse that if there was any fault on the petitioner’s side she should refer her to New Mulago Hospital for treatment. 

The nurse told your petitioner that she could go to New Mulago and try her luck there. The nurse then said she was going to send your petitioner to New Mulago and told her to sign a document, which your petitioner did. 

The nurse then put a star on the file and then called people to help and take her to New Mulago. Because the petitioner was very terrified, she requested to be taken home. Her clothes were full of blood and she released a thick yellowish substance. This substance continued flowing even the following day. During this period, your petitioner had an unbearable odour and faeces were coming out at the same time.

Later, your petitioner felt she was chocking and some threadlike substance was oozing out of her mouth. She was rushed to a clinic in Bwaise called Kisa kya Mukama, in the suburbs of Kampala. The doctor told her that she was in critical condition and could die any time. She was advised to go back to where she had got the antenatal care because they could not handle that case.

Your petitioner was then taken back to Mulago. She explained to a new doctor who examined her and asked if she had been taking herbal medicine. She said, “No, it is not true, I have not been taking any herbal drugs.” He asked her what had fractured her uterus and she narrated the whole ordeal.

He told the petitioner that he was sorry the foetus was in pieces. Then the doctor read her file and prescribed drugs, which she was supposed to buy. He said she was going to be put on drip. The nurse told her that she had no spare bed on which to put the petitioner on drip. The petitioner found an empty bed and laid her polythene bag there. She gently climbed onto the bed. When the nurse found her on that bed, she said the bed belonged to only people in critical condition and your petitioner did not seem to qualify for that and, therefore, she should get off the bed.

The petitioner was not attended to the entire day till night time when she approached a doctor and explained her situation to him. He promised to come and put her on drip but he did not appear again.

On 20th February, the petitioner was finally put on drip whereupon she developed contractions and was assisted by another nurse to handle the whole process. 

As the nurse was assisting her to deliver, she handed the razor blade to her and the nurse said it is not necessary as the cord was rotten. And so she suffered a still birth.

Your petitioner has up to date not recovered and she is experiencing serious abdominal and genital complications.

Your petitioner humbly prays that Parliament probe into this abhorrent conduct of the medical personnel involved and the entire maternity wing in Mulago hospital not only for her benefit but for a score of other Ugandans who frequent this major national referral.

For that purpose, this petition is brought here so that this matter is investigated. Your petitioner has narrated the same story to hon. Seninde and she can confirm this. She has seen your petitioner.

For the House, I brought this same person to your office and I beg that this matter be investigated for us to get to the core of this rot in this national referral hospital. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I second the hon. Member’s request that this matter deserves full investigation because what is repeated in here is full of complete inaccuracies. I have been an obstetrician for forty years but most of what has been reported here is inaccurate. Therefore, it deserves full investigation. This is one side of the story. Let us go to the hospital and hear from the other side.

THE SPEAKER: Let the matter be investigated because a petition has been made. Let us commit it to the appropriate Committee on Social Services to investigate. The committee is free to co-opt people they think would be of assistance to them and subsequently report to us.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHARMACY PROFESSION AND PHARMACY PRACTICE BILL, 2006

4.10
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, Dr Nduhuura was handling this Bill. He was here but I don’t know where he has gone.

THE SPEAKER: Just move the motion.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I am supposed to be on leave. I came today because I was interested in the waragi issue, but as the hon. Minister is not here, I would request that the Bill be read for the second time. I so move.

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Social Services on the Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006.

The Pharmacy Practice and Pharmacy Profession Bill, 2006 was read for the first time on 04 April 2007. The committee on Social Services considered the Bill in accordance with rules 116 and 133(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection -(Interjection)- I am a teacher. The committee discussed the Bill with a number of stakeholders. We have a list of all the people we met as a committee to discuss this important Bill.

The Bill seeks to, first of all, consolidate the law relating to the control of the pharmacy profession and the practice of pharmacy. 

Secondly, it seeks to establish the Pharmacy Council of Uganda.

Thirdly, it seeks to establish the Pharmaceutical Society of Uganda. 

Lastly, it seeks to repeal the Pharmacy and Drugs Act, Cap 208.

Observations 

We observed that the Bill establishes the Pharmacy Council of Uganda. The council’s roles include development and regulation of the pharmacy profession and the practice of pharmacy in the country; issuance of operational licences for wholesale pharmacies, registration and publication of a register of pharmacy practice at all levels and the regulation of all aspects of pharmacy practice.

We also observed that the Bill also establishes the Pharmaceutical Society of Uganda. The Pharmacy and Drugs Act, Cap 208, provides for the control of pharmacy and trade in and use of drugs and poisons. It does not specifically regulate the pharmacy profession whereas there are laws that regulate other medical professionals such as the Nurses and Midwives Act, Veterinary Doctors, Dental and Medical Practitioners Act and the Allied Health Professionals Act.

The Ministry of Health introduced the Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill to have a law specifically regulating the pharmacy profession.

The Bill stretches to regulating pharmacy practice, which cuts across many professions. Pharmacy is not only practised by pharmacists. As a trade, it is practised by dispensers, nurses and midwives, veterinary practitioners, dental and medical practitioners.

The committee’s opinion is that the Bill interferes with other professions’ right to practise pharmacy. The other professionals like the nurses and dispensers are regulated under existing laws like the Nurses and Midwives Act and Allied Health Professionals Act.

The proposed composition of the council is not representative. As mentioned above, the practise of pharmacy involves different stakeholders whose interests should be represented on the council.

Various stakeholders, who will be the implementers of the law if passed, were not consulted during the drafting of the Bill.

The Bill proposes that the pharmacists will be in charge of all pharmacies, including those that deal in veterinary drugs, yet the pharmacists in Uganda do not undergo any training in veterinary practise. 

There are very few pharmacists in the country and we appreciate that. Restricting pharmacy practise to the control of pharmacists will only disadvantage the population and critically curtail the smooth flow and use of medicines.

The Bill also proposes that the Pharmaceutical Council should be responsible for the regulation of drugs, a function already vested in the NDA by an Act of Parliament. 

The committee proposes that the ideal situation would be to place medicines under a neutral institution, specifically the National Drug Authority, whose duties the Bill duplicates with those of the Pharmacy Council.

The committee further proposes that the National Drug Authority should be strengthened to handle the functions proposed to be performed by the council to avoid duplication and conflict.

The committee further noted that there are a number of contradictions in the classification of drugs to be handled by the different practitioners and this could render the implementation of the law impractical.

With all those observations, the committee recommends that the Bill be referred back to the ministry for re-drafting in consultation with the relevant authorities and stakeholders. I beg to present. (Applause)

4.17
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that one minister is responsible for handling the Bill in the ministry. Dr Nduhuura has been handling this Bill. However, the issues raised by the committee are not correct -(Interjections)- for example, I will go through all of them, give me time. The microphone is too short. (Member adjusted the microphone) (Laughter) Thank you.

I will go issue by issue as raised by the committee, if I am allowed -

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am surprised by the manner in which a senior member of this House, a person whom I hold in high regard, is leading this House. 

My understanding is that his ministry, that is the Ministry of Health, is a key stakeholder as far as this Bill is concerned. It is also my belief that during the time when the committee was considering this Bill, the committee had an opportunity to interface with all the stakeholders, including the Ministry of Health. (Applause) I expected the issues the hon. Minister of Health is disagreeing against to have been brought to the attention of the committee. So, I am now at a loss as to what procedure we are adopting. 

The committee has rightly come up to recommend that this Bill be withdrawn and probably goes back to the right ministry to have a re-draft and a fresh submission. (Applause) Procedurally, what are we up to at this stage when we are hearing this sort of disassociation from the line minister who should have owned this Bill from the word go? I seek your indulgence and your guidance, Mr Speaker. How do we proceed?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister of Health. Since we started considering this Bill, hon. Dr Richard Nduhuura was in the lead. When the hon. Minister of Health, Dr Mallinga rose up to move a motion for the second reading, he even made a comment that hon. Nduhuura was supposed to handle this Bill but he was wondering where he had gone. 

It is true that hon. Dr Mallinga did not attend most of the meetings that we held with the stakeholders; it was Dr Nduhuura who handled it. So when the minister now comes up to say the issues being raised by the committee were not brought up to their attention, I think that they were not  comparing notes, because we have held about three meetings with the Ministry of Health. 

So, I am not surprised that the hon. Dr Mallinga is not very abreast with the issues because he did not attend most of the meetings instead it was his colleague who handled the Bill. But the recommendation that this committee has come up with has come out after a long and thorough scrutiny of the Bill and we think that that is the right way to go. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, we have listened to the submission of the committee, and it is the view of government that we take off time and study the recommendations of the committee without any further discussions of this Bill. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the business on the Order Paper was the motion for the second reading of the Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006. So it is the honourable minister’s motion to ensure that the Bill receives the second reading. You have heard from the committee, which handled this work, so go ahead and recommend that the Bill is not ready for the second reading because it requires a lot of structural adjustment. Now it is up to the owner of the motion to see whether I can put the question to his motion or not. (Laughter)  

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, it will just be introducing collusion for me to go through this and be critical. The safest way is for us to go back, make further consultations and this time –

THE SPEAKER: So you are withdrawing the motion from the second reading.

DR MALLINGA: Yes, Sir. I would like to withdraw the motion –(Applause)– so that we can go for further consultations. This time, Mr Speaker, I would like to go to the committee and address most of the issues, which have been raised. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the prayer of the minister is that he withdraws his motion, which had come up for second reading; he wants your permission to withdraw it. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion withdrawn.)
              
THE SPEAKER: So the motion is withdrawn and we go back to square one. We can now go back and deal with the committee. Thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2005

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday the chairperson of the committee tendered in his report of the committee on the Auditor-General for the year ended 2005. We agreed that since you had an executive summary, you go, look at the detailed report and therefore decide on which sub topic of the report you intend to make submissions on, because we do not expect you to make contributions on all issues handled by the committee. So I think that you are now in position to make structured submissions on the report. The debate is now open.

4.26
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the good work done. 

My major concern is on government land held in trust by the Uganda Land Commission. It has been reported that land was allocated to individuals and investors without consulting the parent institutions. This is issue has come up on a number of occasions on the Floor of this Parliament and we have debated it, but I unfortunately do not see any action taken against it. 

Sometime back we had a serious debate on the Butabika land and we even put in place a committee, but it seems the committee has never reported back. It is really annoying to find that land in this country that is entrusted in the hands of the Uganda Land Commission is just being given out anyhow. 

Here the report has not given the names of the individuals, but I would wish to know who these individuals are that have been allocated this land such that we can continue from there. Who are these investors because the report did not mention that but as Parliament we would like to know?

The other issue is on government vehicles. A number of issues have been raised that there is almost no control on government vehicles, which is true – (Interruption)
 
MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way. I am referring to the issue of land that you have just alluded to, and I am informing you that probably we will have to work from top downwards. Every final allocation, which is either made or done by the authorities that are in place, has the approval of the head of state. It is the practice of the President to determine at the end of it all who takes which part of land and therefore it is difficult –(Interjection)– I am just giving information –(Laughter)- are you just changing your mind? Mr Speaker, protect me. As I was saying before the interruption, it is clear –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: I thank my colleague for giving way -(Interjections)- I have listened to my colleague and I respect hon. Kyanjo. For him to stand here and say that for every allocation in this country with regard to land it is the President who sanctions; we have institutions and the Constitution is very clear! The Land Act of 1998 is very clear – the body that allocates land with respect to government or public land is the Uganda Land Commission. There is nowhere the President comes in to allocate land and, therefore, is he in order - unless he substantiates – to stand here to say that the President allocates land? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: You want to substantiate before I rule? Hon. Members, I think this issue of land ownership is very clear. All public land owned by government is vested in the Uganda Land Commission. Even where we stand as Parliament, the owner of this land is the Uganda Land Commission. It can give us a title for purposes of planning but the land is vested in it and it has very wide powers. I think what we have to examine in this is either to curb the powers, or to put conditions under which the Land Commission exercises its powers, otherwise the Land Commission has power to allocate any land to anybody. 

The question of consulting the user or Parliament is courtesy and not a legal obligation of the Land Commission. Most of this land is not registered by the ministry but vested in the Land Commission. I think what we have to do is to study the relevant law and see whether we can curb the powers of the Uganda Land Commission. 

As for the President, the President may advise or make his wishes – the Land Commission is free to accept or not to accept although most likely they will accept but are not obliged to. They are free to reject and they can give reasons.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. It is true the Uganda Land Commission is the one which manages public land. But again under the Land Act, it manages it on behalf of the people of Uganda, and when it has public land, like the Ministry of Health land, the amended Land Act says it must first consult the user. In fact if it wants to follow the Act, it must – if it is for health, the land must be used for activities of health. It is good that land is supposed to be allocated by the Uganda Land Commission. But how do they do it? I come from Sironko and I sit in the mountains. So how will I know that there is land in Nakawa? If it is a public asset, it must be given publicly where everybody sees. The President, like what my brother was saying – I have evidence – okay.

MR LUKWAGO: The information I wanted to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that this Parliament enacted a law called the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. The question that has been hanging around for some time is whether that law is applicable to the allocation of land. And when you look at it critically, the law is quite comprehensive and it talks about leases, allocation of land and all those things. The reason as to why that law was enacted was to regulate the procedure of allocation of land, among other things. 

In 2006, there are regulations that were made pursuant to the provisions of that Act and those were meant to regulate local governments in allocating land and also disposal of public assets. So the question of saying that the Uganda Land Commission has got absolute powers, which are not regulated, I think is not proper because the laws are there to regulate the Uganda Land Commission and also the District Land Boards. 

The other information I want to give you is that not all public land is vested in the Uganda Land Commission, because Article 241 gives land, which is not owned by anybody in this country. It vests it in District Land Boards. That land – I do not know because in all the laws we have today in our Constitution, there is no concept of public land. You will not find a phrase anywhere that says this is public land – it is just brought in by context. Article 241 says, “… land not owned by anybody … vested in District Land Boards ….” So whatever it means, I do not know. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much – 
 
THE SPEAKER: I think we may have to adjust the law and say that, “For avoidance of doubt, when disposing of land, the Land Commission should comply ….” But as of now they can do it competently. But for avoidance of doubt, maybe we may adjust the law and say, “Public Disposal … should be followed so that the attendants can ….” But for the moment, you go and make a search and when you find that there is available land, you make your application to the Land Commission that will consider the merits of it and they give you a good title.  
       
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is very good. Maybe I can ask a question: Is allocation procurement? Some of these things we need to understand –(Interruption)- it is disposal of a public asset. So if you are disposing of a public asset you must follow transparent methods. People have got land – he gets land here and after one day he sells the same acre of land for a lot of money and he comes up – he has used his office or his connections to an office to make money and that is very dangerous. 

Having said that, I have some documents, which I want to lay on the Table for Members, to substantiate what hon. Kyanjo was saying. One of them was made by the President, he said, “I am directing you to allocate land to the following: IUIU, SITEMA Uganda Limited, National Library, Mr William Nkemba; and the acres are here. It is signed by the President of this country. The names of the beneficiaries are here: IUIU, 10 acres; National Library, 2 acres; SITEMA Uganda Limited, 6 acres; William Nkemba, 6 acres; House of Dawda, 10 acres; Access Uganda Limited, 13 acres; and there is no name for any Ugandan here. You can imagine. I can lay them on the Table. (Applause) So in short, the Minister is not in order. 

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, it is good that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said that the President directed. If I direct you, it is up to you to guide me –(Interjections)- because he said it is the President who allocates and I do not think that is the allocation. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, this is a House of mature adults of an honourable member grade. These are adults who have gone through a scheme that was presumed to be reasonable enough to understand every piece of information that is brought into this House in the English language. The honourable minister stood up to give us an elementary lesson on what a directive really means. Is the honourable minister in order to attempt to defend a position that is indefensible by way of trying to teach these distinguished members of the House and inadvertently, Mr Speaker, including you? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, I did not follow. I was scrutinising these documents. What was the point?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, at the time you were busy scrutinising the documents, an honourable member of the Executive on the Front Bench, hon. Werikhe, stood up and started to teach this august House the meaning of the word “directive”. I stood up on a point of order and I said that this is a House composed of distinguished members who are mature adults, and who have undergone a stage in their education that was deemed reasonable enough for them to understand some and many of the words in English. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to stand and presume that the honourable members do not know the meaning of the words “directive” and “inadvertently”, Mr Speaker, including you?

THE SPEAKER: No, it depends. I think he may be one of those people who think that learning never stops. (Laughter)

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can see the amount of debate that land has generated. So, it means that there is a problem. 

THE SPEAKER: No, but these are documents which hon. Nandala-Mafabi tabled here. The impression I had when he made the submission was that these were directives to the Uganda Land Commission. I have not seen any of these documents being directed to the Uganda Land Commission and I think this should be known. 

One of the letters that I have is from State House to the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice. The other is a letter addressed to the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I have also seen that the other one is again directed to them. So, honestly, you cannot say that the President was directing the Uganda Land Commission. These are the facts and these are the letters tabled here. I thought I should correct the impression. 

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move on to the repair and maintenance of government vehicles. The committee put it clearly that we lack a vehicle replacement policy. I do not know how ministries and government institutions work when they do not have this policy in place. 

There is no proper system management of the vehicles that government owns. Some of these vehicles are fitted with substandard spare parts and to the best of my knowledge; we have technical people in all these ministries. But I really do not know what they do if the committee can give all these reports and nothing is done.

Lastly, I will comment about AGOA. It is a good venture that Uganda was given this opportunity. However, on a sad note, the momentum that it had has slowed down. We no longer talk about it that much and what is annoying is that from the report, we have been told that we lack technical people - the economists - to implement the AGOA project. This raises questions. We have very many people in this country and even if we did not have a person skilled in this respect, we would bring someone from abroad just like we did with the Uganda Revenue Authority. It worked because we are now getting enough revenue. So really, the issue of the AGOA project should be addressed. 

The other saddening aspect on AGOA is that it is being handled by State House. I believe State House has a lot on its plate and I do not see why we should add AGOA to it. It should otherwise go to the Ministry of Trade but not State House because State House should oversee everything that is going on rather than have specific institutions to cater for and when you take AGOA there, it creates a lot of questions in our minds. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.47
MRS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this good report. I want to raise an issue on 2.1.1, on the pension arrears. This report clearly brings out the fact that government has not given due respect to its senior citizens because when you look at the amount that government was able to pay, it was only five percent of what was due to the pensioners. This shows that pensioners in this country are not a priority and yet these are senior citizens who have sacrificed a lot for this country. These are people who worked in the civil service when their salaries were not worth talking about. I beg that Parliament makes pensioners a priority and since the ministry has promised to clear the pensions and gratuity arrears, they should do this such that the last days of the senior citizens of this country are worth living. 

I welcome the recommendation of the committee that civil servants who are retiring before they are deleted from the government payroll - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssinabulya, please bear with me. But I see this provision that pension is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. What is the significance of this legislation? Shadow minister, maybe you want to respond? 

4.49
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, the significance of that legislation is that we do not have to spend time or address ourselves to appropriate funds to that specific category of expenditure. By the very fact that the law was passed to provide for that aspect of expenditure, it means that by that certificate of financial soundness, government should find money and pay directly without further appropriation. Therefore, there is no excuse whatsoever in this case even for arrears to accumulate. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. 

MRS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I welcome the recommendation of the committee that before the names of the pensioners are deleted from the payroll, government should ensure that the pensioners are already on the pension’s payroll. 

The other issue that I want to raise was the issue of the foreign debt but mainly in reference to the fact that the loans, which government contracts are sometimes not withdrawn and sometimes loans expire before the amount that was contracted has been fully withdrawn. Also, the committee observed that some ministries lack the absorption capacity and I wonder why because we have so many people who are trained to work in the government service. We have so many quantity surveyors who know how much we need if we are going to work on a road or if you are contracting any loan for any particular purpose and it hurts when certain ministries take on so much more than they can use, yet such amounts of money could have been contracted as a loan for another sector.
 
For example, now and again we have talked about the inadequacies in the health sector and we have been urging government to seek financing for maternal health and financing for the general improvement in the health system but government has not done it. So, it hurts when we see that there is money, which cannot be absorbed by government somewhere, which was contracted as a loan yet government could have contracted a smaller loan for a particular ministry and then another smaller loan for another sector. Maybe as Parliament, we need to look at this more seriously because nearly every week, Parliament approves loans. So, as we approve loans, we should also look at the performance of loans in particular ministries such that we do not just approve loans, which cannot be utilised by the ministries. 

Finally, the issue of late releases of funds is one of the reasons why corruption will not be kicked out of this country. When money is released maybe two weeks before the end of the financial year and ministries and departments know that if they do not utilise it they will be required to take it back, then they have to find all ways of utilising this money. That is why you find that towards the end of every financial year, there are so many seminars and workshops taking place. Some just fall by because the money has to be used and when you talk of workshops and seminars, you know what this involves. If government is committed to kicking out corruption, then the Minister of Finance should ensure that finances are released timely even to districts. I know that there are so many workshops taking place around end of June because the money has to be used and sometimes you find that this money is not used for what it was meant. So, if we are to ensure accountability, proper use of funds and fighting corruption, the Ministry of Finance must ensure that funds are sent on time and accountability given on time. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.54
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for a very elaborate presentation, and I want to comment on allocation of government land. In some other cases, the report of the committee noted rampant encroachment on government land and attributed the problem to most of government land not being surveyed and therefore having no titles. The government knows about the importance of land. Land is one of the most important resources in Uganda and all over the world and most of the government land has not been surveyed and titled. This is very dangerous for us because in my constituency, land under the Ministry of Education which was given by traditional people to build senior secondary schools and primary schools is now being claimed back by the owners because the people who gave out that land have since died. 

Their children have no land now and the schools do not have the titles or the land has not been surveyed. So, it has caused problems. Can I then ask the Local Government to go ahead and ensure that all land belonging to schools - whether primary schools or senior secondary schools - is surveyed and titled? 

Accounting officers in different ministries are claiming –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. The point that you have raised about non-titling of land, which houses schools, is very important. On the other side, you also need to note that most of the schools, especially those first schools, which were constructed were on Church land. It is either a Catholic founded school or Anglican founded school and in most cases this Church land or missions are referred to as “Toli” which means title of land. In the local languages, they refer to them as “Tolis” but in reality it is title of land, which is owned by the religious institutions.

It may be very difficult for government now to come and survey the land where this schools are without obtaining the consent of the religious institutions that had given that portion of the land. I think the best thing is to encourage government to work hand in hand with the founding bodies of those schools so that the missions can come up and say, “Look, this is our institution; we now want this portion of the land to be surveyed and be registered in the name of that particular school”. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, church land is registered in what we call registered trustees. You find Namirembe Diocese has got registered trustees and Rubaga has got registered trustees. Those are the owners of missionary land.

MS ANGUFIRU: Thank you very much for that information. Accounting officers who work in different ministries claim that surveying the land and titling it is very expensive and I do not believe this statement. I believe if they took surveys of land and titling as a priority, it will not be looked at as something, which is expensive, only that their priorities are quite different. I am requesting that the Land Commission - because we have already agreed that land is under the Land Commission – should ensure the survey of every land that belongs to all the ministries and see that before they sell out the land, which is already occupied, they survey it and attain a title for it.  

I want to comment about the vehicles. The ministry vehicles, which we waste a lot of government money to purchase, are very expensive. I am very disappointed to learn from here that these vehicles are being mishandled and a lot of money goes into the repair of the vehicles. This is all going on because of corruption.

We should budget very well and we know that this is a vehicle, which we are using to provide services to our people and every weekend if you find the officer in charge in this vehicle going very long distances to the villages, collecting a lot of charcoal, overloading the vehicles so that within no time, these brand new vehicles get spoilt - at times the vehicles are not spoilt but the drivers want to get money so they remove some small parts and just park the vehicle and say, “The vehicle is spoilt, I cannot do work”. Then when they take it to the garage, they connive with the mechanics. It is all about corruption. People are not committed to providing services in this country.

The group that was honest and wanted to develop our country are now not there. The youths who qualify from the university want to build and own property within no time. You find somebody qualifies from the university and he is in the office for two years; within these two years somebody has bungalows and yet for us we worked and were very committed for so many years before we were able to put up small buildings for ourselves. (Laughter)

What we are now saying is we need to sensitise our people. We need people to become committed to providing services to our people. We are very selfish these days. The youths have been brought up to look at themselves and not the communities. What can Members of Parliament and we in government do to reduce the corruption? (Applause)

I am asking all of us to be very sensitive now and be able to talk to people. Let us find a way of bringing down this corruption because Uganda would have developed so much —(Interruption)

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is that she was one time a senior civil servant and heading a very important nurses training institute in Arua. At that time actually that institute was given a lot of vehicles to run the activities in the school yet the students were not performing very well and she is able to talk about other institutions mishandling vehicles? Can she clarify how she failed to run the institution to effectively to deliver services?

MS ANGUFIRU: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable member is in his normal senses. (Laughter) There is no order here. (Laughter)

MR PIRO SANTOS: I rise on a point of order, Mr Speaker. The hon. Member, Angufiru, on the Floor raised an utterance that is very defamatory by saying that I am not in my right senses when I have not been referred to any hospital for mental disorder. Is she, therefore, in order to assume that I am not in my right senses -(Laughter)- when I have not been referred to any hospital for mental disorder? Is she in order to assume that I am not normal yet I do not feel any sickness in my mind and brain and I have never been referred to any hospital? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: No. The impression created is that you know each other very closely. (Laughter)

MS ANGUFIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Member was just trying to tell the House that the person talking, Margaret Angufiru, was a very good and committed civil servant and she worked very well. She was one of the first to use school fees to buy a school bus, which no other institution had done. So it is because of the capability - and the performance was one of the best in Uganda. The people in the Ministry of Education can verify that. That is why he wanted me to talk; he wanted to amuse the House. (Laughter)

Our biggest problem now - one time in this House we said that we were going to change the system of providing vehicles to ministries. We even sent a group to go and learn about it in Rwanda. I do not know what happened; it has died off but it is very necessary for us to see what to do. We should find a way of controlling our vehicles -(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I want to get clarification from the honourable member that at one point we were informed that a Bill was being drafted by a member of the NRM caucus. It was brought to the caucus and we were waiting for it to come to the House. She seems to have the information. Could we know how far that Bill on the control of the vehicles has gone?   

MS ANGUFIRU: Mr Speaker, I am not aware of a Bill having been brought to caucus about how we are going to handle the vehicles in our ministries but I am aware that at one time on the Floor of this House, we discussed providing vehicles to all ministries and we actually sent a group of people to Rwanda because there the vehicles of the ministries are not being handled the way we handle ours here. In Rwanda, I understand all officers who use government vehicles park them very early and during the weekends they do not use them and that they pay part of the cost for the vehicle and then the government pays the other part. After five years, these vehicles are left to the officers who paid the money. Thank you very much.

5.09
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Auditor-General and the committee of Parliament for the presentation; and the analysis in this report. My regret is that we are discussing a report of four years ago so it is not clear whether some of our observations and recommendations have not already been overtaken by events and worse still, if there have not been any corrective measures taken, the situation is not four times worse than it was four years ago. 

For that matter I would like to suggest that we should start discussing these reports in the order of the latest since we are already doing pathology anyway. For instance, if the report for the year ended June 2009 is ready, we should start with that or the one for 2008 so that we are on top of things instead of just trailing mismanagement four years behind. This will make Parliament an effective watchdog rather than an effective pathologist.

Having said that, I will concern -

THE SPEAKER: So, you are suggesting that because we want to deal with the latest, this should be just a routine that we just adopt them so that we deal with the current ones?

MS KAMYA: The committee has done very well. They started with the report for 2001 and we are already discussing the one for 2005. That should be commended but just to improve our watchdog performance; we should now deal with the latest report of 2009 or 2008 so that our recommendations and our observations are current. We can then deal with the later reports for purposes of having our records correct. I think it would make this Parliament a more effective watchdog. 

Having said that, I will concern myself with two areas in this report; one, the positive impact of the press and the public as partners with Parliament in vigilance on the misuse of resources and misuse of offices; and two, the negative impact of the mismanagement of domestic arrears and foreign debts on the economic development of this country.

On page 2 of the report, the committee highly commends the public and the press for the vigilance that they have provided and the committee admits that this vigilance of the public and the press has given significant support to the committee’s report. The main venue of interaction between the public and government or Parliament is the press. We know that patriotic whistleblowers take reports or information to the press, the public takes it up and we have seen very positive results arising out of public vigilance. This has had a very important effect on Parliament’s work. Out of public vigilance, we have seen government come up to provide information, make explanations and even appoint commissions of enquiry in matters of public interest. Out of such vigilance we have seen, for instance, the Temangalo enquiry, the Police enquiry and other enquiries and out of that vigilance, the Domestic Relations Bill has been restructured; the Homosexuality Bill is a document of Parliament now, and the Land Bill has been amended several times and the big part of the credit goes to the public and the press.
 
My worry is government’s current clampdown on press freedom. According to government, and I listened to the President last night when he was visiting Rakai, when they asked for the opening of CBS, he said CBS would be opened once Kabaka has confirmed to him how they will stop their hate campaign on the Movement. That is not the purpose of my discussion tonight but I would like honourable members here and those listening to me to realise that in every situation there are negatives and positives.

The positives of a free press far outweigh the negatives of a free press. The positive of a free press in holding public officers accountable, the positive of a free press in bringing everybody to participate in the management of this country far outweighs, in my opinion, the negatives of a hate campaign against the NRM.

I would like to recommend that government immediately lifts the ban on CBS and Suubi. This is very important for the confidence that the press puts in the public to participate in the management of this country. Legitimacy lies with the people; the NRM Government may have the law and the instruments to enforce the law but legitimacy always lies with the people, whether they are right or wrong. That is what people’s power means, that if the people agree that the NRM Government needs a new coat of paint, legitimacy still lies with the people, you cannot be witch hunting CBS for bringing out the people’s views.

I would like to comment on domestic arrears and foreign debt management. We have been told that domestic arrears amount to about Shs 267 billion. Largely, the result according to the report is due to the breakdown in the management of budgets and abuse to the whole accountability process. I would like to put a human face to Shs 267 billion because if we keep talking about figures and just passing them off without putting a human face to the figures, they will just remain reports in the libraries and on the shelves.

Shs 267 billion held in domestic arrears is the equivalent of the annual budget of about 15 districts in Uganda. This is also the equivalent of the entire annual budget of the Ministry of Agriculture, including NAADS. Can you imagine the annual budget of 15 districts being lost in financial mismanagement and we just talk about it? Shs 267 billion is money owed to Ugandans, some of them small suppliers to government, now many of them are probably out of business.

I have an experience when I used to work in Uganda Leather and Tanning Industries - that industry supplied everything they had to the Ministry of Defence and because they were not paid for three years and they had nothing to do. There are many businesses like that that are going out of business. They get excited because they win a government tender; they borrow money from the banks, and they supply goods and services to government and go out of business because government is holding their money. Shs 267 billion that government is holding onto in domestic arrears is a whole life of a people.

MR WADRI: When government came out with the commitment control system, the purpose was to ensure no department incurs any expenditure over and above what is availed to it in terms of the resource envelope and that if any department or vote controller had any reason to commit government, he or she had to obtain the express permission of first the accounting officer and secondly, the Secretary to the Treasury. And if there is any accounting officer who has committed government outside the commitment control system, the Accountant-General is supposed to take action against such an accounting officer. 

From the explanation that I have now heard from my colleague, it looks like it is now collusion between the Accountant-General’s office and the accounting officers. Where else do we turn to if these institutions are put in place and the very people who are supposed to help government to ensure that unnecessary commitments outside the budget framework is not done are not working? I appeal to the Executive - these are good tools for management - to ensure some financial management discipline. If these are developed and Parliament passes them and they are just thrown away into the dustbin, how best can we help this government in curtailing unnecessary indebtedness? 

This is the information I am giving that there is negligence on the part of government because the tools are there to ensure that you do not commit government to incur any expenditure outside the agreed framework. Why are they not being used? Parliament should put the Executive to task to explain to us why they continue putting this country into debts which are not within the agreed framework.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. colleague, for emphasising the point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank hon. Kamya for giving way. There are two categories of arrears. If you budget for Shs 100 million, then you give Shs 90 million, he incurs Shs 10 million as a debt; that is an arrear that is approved here already. But there those, which are incurred as an excess and that is a crime. So there are two types of arrears we should look at. The one which is the excess of what we have approved is a crime and we have already recommended to those accounting officers to be disciplined and not to exceed the approved budget.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for that information and for emphasising my point. 

In further emphasis of that point, whether the arrears are approved or not, in most cases there are small business people who have been lured into providing goods and services to government, which does not pay them for years. This means that they are not just arrears but real life children who cannot go to school or access medical services and who are denied the life that they are entitled to just because the government is not able to pay for their services. 

These are not figures but misery, hunger, disease, illiteracy, broken homes and deaths to many people just because government is not able to meet its obligations. That is why I said that we need to put a human face on these figures so that we understand that they have a significant impact on the lives of real people. We must deal with the culprits in a manner that shows how much we feel for these people.

In conclusion, I will also comment a little about foreign debt. We are informed in the report on page 18 that Uganda’s foreign debt amounts to about Shs 1.8 trillion and that almost a third of this, nearly Shs 7 billion, was paid in penalties although many of the loans expire without being fully drawn. In other words, we as a country are quick to borrow money, which we do not use but pay heavy penalties for and then return to the lender because we are not able to use it. As the report says, 24 of the loans - we sit here every week and pass loans in billions of dollars and 24 of them have been returned unused but we have paid heavy penalties for them!

This House is as guilty as the Executive over which we watch because why can’t we say no? Many times we have stood here and said, “Must we borrow for everything? Must we have everything that we need? Is it real life that you must have your entire wish list as you want it?” I think that what we are doing here –(Interjection)- may I be protected from my Chief Whip?

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS KAMYA: I am winding up. What happens here is that we borrow for a wish list. Developed countries have admitted that the current credit crunch was largely because of indiscriminate and reckless use of credit facilities and they are doing something about it. Three months ago, the Parliament of India passed a resolution to down scale the benefits of the Members of Parliament. They are now not allowed to travel by business class. Using public funds, they travel economy. If a Member of Parliament wants to travel business class, he tops up. 

In Ghana, ministers use public transport. In Uganda, we consume as if we are the only people in this country. We need to review our spending culture. We do not have the money to spend and borrow as we want. Even in our own homes, you do not borrow for everything. We sacrifice or scale down our expenditure -

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS KAMYA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker, give me just one second. Finally, I find it hard to consolidate our wastage and the mismanagement exhibited in the domestic arrears and foreign debt management, with government’s figure of over seven percent growth in the economy. The growth in economic development is a macro interpretation of a country’s profit and loss account. Profit, as we know it, is a result of hard work, efficiency, sacrifice and saving, none of which are available in this country.

How can we talk of economic development when we have none of those? I strongly recommend that this Parliament critically reviews government claims of over seven percent –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You are an incoming leader of a party, is it agreed that we allocate five minutes so that we can cover as many people as possible?

5.29
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee but would like to observe that ever since I have been involved in politics, I have not comprehensively heard about these accounting officers who play around with taxpayers’ money being convicted. It is important that we really bring these people to book. Moreover when –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my dear sister for giving way. I want to inform you that some accounting officers have actually been convicted. One, I can state offhand is Prof. Senyonga who was accounting officer and Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture. There are others and I will avail you the information. The names will be made available to you.

MS AOL: Thank you. Maybe it is important to make this public also so that these accounting officers are restrained from mismanaging taxpayers’ money. 

On the land issue, I want to make reference to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. If you go to this hospital right now, you will not like it. The buildings are overcrowded and this is simply because the people who were managing the hospital were the first to encroach on the hospital land, which was given to individuals. This is very unfortunate. Right now there is nowhere to expand from if more buildings are to be constructed.

The mortuary land was supposed to be found very far away from the hospital, which I think is not appropriate. If only Ugandans were truthful and if only those who hold high public offices were not immoral - right now we are very immoral. We are so selfish and just think inwardly. We do not care about public resources and we do not care about people who are around us. We would not have those challenges otherwise.

Concerning Butabika land - I was once a member of the Social Services Committee. We went there and to my greatest disappointment, less than one third of Butabika land is with Butabika right now. The greater part, which is over two-thirds, has been given to individuals. These individuals are not just small people; they are big, and this is not the first asset they are acquiring. They want to acquire assets everywhere. That is how bad we are. 

How can we, therefore, try to help those other people who come after us from the universities? They also want to get rich as quickly as possible. Unless those who hold high offices in government, whether political or technical, are completely truthful, transparent and accountable for their actions, it is not going to be easy.

I know Butabika is not yet experiencing the kind of problem that Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is experiencing. Butabika is a national referral hospital and it keeps mentally-ill people. They need –(Interruption) 

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to my colleague and I am interested in the case of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. My colleague has said that land has been given to individuals and even the mortuary is far away from the hospital. I want to find out whether she knows who did this allocation and who was given the land. I do not have information about Uganda Land Commission giving away Gulu Regional Referral Hospital’s land to anybody. I want clarification.

MS AOL: Thank you, colleague, for that clarification. I was a district councillor in Gulu District. At one time I was secretary of health at the district level. So, when we were trying to discuss where the mental health unit of the hospital should be located, that issue came up – (Interruption) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am standing on a point of procedure. Looking at the report, I would say it is full of lamentations. Article 164(2) of the Constitution says, “Any person holding a political or public office, who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.”

When you look at this report, it is silent about recommendations on individuals. However, isn’t it procedurally right for the chair of this committee to have given us names of people who erred so that this Parliament can take a decision? It is very soft. It is as if it is business as usual and after the discussions, we shall move to another report. I request for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, because if I look at this report - I will give an example from page 11 –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But I thought you are looking at the executive summary. That is the executive summary. There is a detailed report.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, the committee should give us their recommendations. They are being soft.

THE SPEAKER: Did you read the detailed report? The executive summary helps us to highlight the key issues.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I have found out that the report has lamentations -(Interjections)- no, that is the Auditor-General’s report, but what is the committee recommending?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is wrong for a member who has worked on a huge document like this to come and say there are no recommendations. When you look at the executive summary, we also request that you go to the attached details of every ministry.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I told you last time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, you should thank us. (Laughter)

5.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report.

I am concerned about only two issues. One is pension. On page 23, the report notes that there were excessive pension arrears, especially on gratuity, and to date the Ministry of Public Service is still unable to meet the pension arrears in terms of payment of a lump sum for gratuity. Also, whenever we discuss pension, what comes up is that the Ministry of Finance has set a ceiling and it is within that ceiling that we appropriate money. Little money is then allocated and the Ministry of Public Service just decides to pay only a monthly pension and excludes the lump sum, the gratuity.

I would like to ask the Ministry of Finance to reconsider this position so that subsequently, we do not have excessive pension arrears. This is because after they have paid out the monthly pension, the little that remains is given out according to criteria, which is not known to any of us. Somehow they choose – I do not know in which boardroom - which pensioner should get his gratuity and which pensioner should not get it. I think government must style up on the matters of pension because this is unfair.

The second issue is loans. Without going into the details of loans on page 18 as observed by the committee, I want to put it to the Executive that gradually, you have mortgaged this country. While you are mortgaging the country, every other day you make us borrow. You come here and you are all looking at me, you plead with this House to borrow, you beg to borrow when you do not have the capacity to utilise the loans. 

Moreover, the report notes that you over-estimate the Contingency Fund and at the end of the day we, Ugandans and our children’s children, will forever be indebted. They will have to repay these loans with interest yet the loans are expiring when you have not even used them. 

The report notes that up to 50 percent of the value of the loans that we have were not utilised during the period under review. This is intolerable. This is unacceptable! I propose that this House puts an end to further borrowing by these ministries. There are ministries here that are totally incompetent. How can you borrow money and fail to use it and then we have to pay for generations and then come again and borrow? This House should put an end to this begging and mortgaging syndrome.  

We should also review all these loans and see which ones never used the money like Agriculture; they should not be entitled to borrow again. The only loan I can make an exception to is like that of maternal health; that is the only exception we can give a leeway to but let us put a ban on borrowing until the Government of Uganda accounts. Otherwise, one of these days we shall wake up and find investors like the Chinese whose money we borrowed and failed to pay having locked up the gates of Parliament and State House –(Interjections)– yes, they constructed State House. Really, how do you explain this failure to absorb when you borrow? Shame on you! Shame on the Executive! 

5.44
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for this good report. I, however, want to make some observations.

Most importantly is the concern that Members have already raised relating to allocation of government land. I do note that government land seems to be the most vulnerable to encroachment and in this particular case, I saw that the report talked about Bugolobi Radio Uganda Broadcasting Station, which has 8,000 –

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to stop you but I would suggest that if a subject has been contributed on sufficiently, you do not have to deal with it. For instance, I think we have dealt with land and so you do not have to deal with it again. But you can continue with your submission since you have prepared for it. 

MR EKEMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just citing the Bugolobi one because I know that the Deutsche Welle external broadcasting station land is also in that kind of land problem. There are some big names that are being mentioned that have taken over this land. So, probably the minister could clarify on that one because that is the specific question they are asking us and we are telling them that it has been taken over by some specific big names. So, that is why I want to concur with hon. Kubeketerya when he said names should have been put to some of these issues so that we could have actually followed up and had a sound debate. 

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. We would appreciate if you gave us this kind of information together because together we can easily come up with a list of people who have benefited. This is not something that we hide; if one has benefited under the Uganda Land Commission, we have records because Uganda Land Commission in allocating land has minutes of all the persons who were allocated land. So, we would appreciate it. If there is any information, we could corroborate that information with ours and the records are there. We are really not doing anything in darkness; we are doing everything in the open. We are ready to work with you and bring out the list of whoever has benefited. 

MR EKEMU: Thank you, hon. Minister. I will bring that information to you because it is coming from our constituents the other end. Of course according to the Auditor-General’s report, the excuse that is normally given is usually lack of finances to survey and title this land and I am aware that your ministry is supposed to have that so that if that is not happening, definitely the blame should again stand on you. 

MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Alaso. (Laughter) Currently we have taken the inventory of all government land across the country and as we talk now, some funds have been set aside for surveying government land. It is not only that but we have systematic surveys and adjudications across the country, which are piloted in various parts of the country with a view of having all citizens benefiting in future from the surveys by government. Actually this is already in the ministry. So, apart from government land, we would also like the citizens of this country to have land surveyed and titled because this is one way of improving on the management of land delivery system in this country. Thank you. 

MR EKEMU: Thank you, hon. Minister. The second issue that I would like to make a comment on is what I see as a channel for misuse and abuse of our scarce resources in the name of repair and maintenance of government vehicles. Members have already alluded to that; they have already identified that the heavy expenditure that we continue to suffer on public administration is actually a burden to the taxpayer. 

And when the report cites colossal amounts of money, I believe that it is a lot of money although it has not been exactly attached in there. My fear is that because of the deficient system that we seem to have, we might be dealing with ghost repairs also. We might be paying for repairs that are not taking place and billions of shillings are going down the drain. But I did expect the committee to have proposed recommendations because we have government standing instructions on all these; acquisition, use, maintenance and whatever they are there but we are not operationalising them. 

5.49
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity and I would also like to thank the committee for the report.  

I am going to hang my observations on two issues. The first one is on pension as in pension arrears. The pensioners out there are really suffering and they have their recommendations, which they have sent from Lira. I have been meeting them in Lira for a week and they are of the view that in order to ensure that they are paid, the staff in the Public Service, especially in the pensions department, all be removed and then new ones be put in place because corruption in the Public Service especially in the pensions department is the worst. In order for the military men to get what they call the pension number, it takes something in order to get that number and those who have got it have never been paid. 

The second question they are concerned with is that how come that some people who have just entered the pay roll of the pension this year are paid while others are there for almost 30 years and not paid? 

What criterion is being used to pay these people? That means that you must give the money to these officials first and then you are paid – and this is true. I am charging the government with the question about the work of the CID – is it only to benefit the government or our common men also? Because if the government’s ears are on the ground, to hear from these pensioners, I think you would have learnt a lot and therefore they would have suggested that officials from this Parliament go from district to district to meet all the pensioners so that they can learn about the challenges of the pensioners and the pension arrears.

I want to comment on the financial audits, which have been done fairly well by the Auditor-General in directing the central government, local governments and statutory bodies, especially the projects. I think management of finance in Uganda is rotten from the bottom to the top. I want to applaud the President when he was complaining about the accountants and indeed if you want corruption to die a natural death, it means the auditors and the accountants who write the books must be dealt with seriously by the justice. The justice system should handle these corrupt accountants and auditors appropriately, then I think corruption will come to an end because when you go down to some institutions like primary schools, it has reliably been learnt that their books are prepared for them by the local auditors down there. When they learn that there has been misuse and abuse of office, then they just come in and help these poor head teachers to make their audit work look better and yet actually it is rotten. Then you come up to local government and then the projects. 

I want to give an example of NAADS in Lira. I think recently in Lira, five big shots were arrested for this NAADS business and then the government local fund was there. The arrested included the CAO, internal auditor, the coordinator of NARO in Lira district, the NAADS and then the statistics department. And then lower down to the sub-country coordinators, they created their own accounts, which nobody authorised them to put the government money in. 

As we speak now, they are at large and the reason is simple because people have reliably learnt that in Uganda when you have erred with the account or you have taken a lot of money like that one of the NFA - how come it takes three months to investigate Shs 900 million, which is kept in a house? So you just say, “I am a Movement supporter,” and then they can delay anything about you up to when people can forget – and we are watching. You can say no here because that is the system. We are trying to challenge the system because we are now watching what is going to take place in Lira. If in Lira nothing is done to address this very serious matter where the farmers are crying and it is an obvious case that they have been cheated and people have not been arrested from the lower level here, they are at large and they are telling us that, “We are going to transfer them from one sub-county to another.” 

Is that enough punishment for these people who have stolen public funds? It, therefore, means that we are all invited to also misappropriate the funds because when you see that nothing is done to your colleague, you are also attempted to also misbehave. Is this going to be the order of the day and of the government? I think we should not be lenient with the loss of funds and that is the reason for sending the money late - it has been observed here. When it said that teachers should be paid on this date, why should they be paid later? If money is supposed to be sent for NAADS at this particular time, why should it be sent at the end of the financial year? So they take advantage of this kind of opportunity, which is actually abused by top government officials. 

So, in order to address this report seriously, I think the recommendation by the committee should not appear next year if we are serious because year in, year out we are coming out with the same recommendations. The Auditor-General has pointed out here like in the case of the Directorate of Local Governments where 120 of them have not been audited and we are talking about 2005. What is this when this is a report given to us this year and no action has been taken? I think our implementers must be serious, especially the NRM caucus – I think this one can be discussed at the NRM caucus. If you are forgetting about this, then this is a very serious matter because everything is in the hands of the majority and therefore when it is on the Floor like this, please take heed and be serious because for us who are shadowing, it means the shadow may become real –(Member timed out­_)

5.58
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much. I also want to thank the honourable members of the committee for the good report particularly concerning their recommendation about the use of government vehicles. But currently as we see, the solution would be for government to at least stand with the existing standing orders. 

It is true that we have at least some standing orders that would cause some sanity in the management of these government vehicles. I have read them but we have had a problem that those who are in charge of implementing these orders have no will at all to follow them. 

For instance, there is a standing order of giving particular vehicles to a particular category of officers. From the rank of the Prime Minister upwards, they recommend 3,500 CC, but what we are currently seeing – we are even seeing office messengers driving V8s –(Interjections)- this is incredible and we want the Front Bench to own up to this because none of the Front Bench members is not driving a V8 and the standing order says they are not supposed to drive V8s –(Interjections)- on record – you can go and check on one of the windows on the sides of your vehicles and you will at least see a V8. A V8 means that the CC you are driving is above 3,500 CC. So you are even above the Prime Minister –(Interruption)
 
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Can I give you information?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I will not take the information because I am more informed on this matter –(Interjections)– I pray that as we adopt this report, more standardisation of these vehicles is adhered to. 

The committee is recommending that in the meantime these standing orders should be adhered to. We also want to know how many vehicles government is running, repairing and servicing –(Interjections)– you had your time and you will take my time so first hold on ­–(Laughter)- it seems we are incredibly having more vehicles than we even need save for the fact that we are driving V8s. A V8 can build a health centre –(Interjections)– so practically you ministers are moving in health centres. You are moving in health centres. (Laughter) And we cannot continue to see this mess going on and we keep quiet. So I really thank the honourable members of the committee that you have brought out this –(Interjections) 

I want to correct something very small from one of the colleagues who said that Parliament sent a team to Rwanda to study – it never sent any team to Rwanda. These were individuals who looked at the budget of 2006/07 and realised that our accumulated budget for repairs and maintenance of government cars was standing at Shs 200 billion, which was incredible. In my region Bunyoro, the percentage share they get is Shs 48 billion in a year and here you are repairing government cars with Shs 200 billion, which is incredible. That is madness! Therefore, when you look at all those things, I think that we better pay closer attention to service delivery more than the comfort we enjoy in these offices. As we preach patriotism, I want to see it begin from the Front Bench –(Applause)– I want to see at least –(Member timed out­_)

6.03
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County, Kyenyojo): Thank you. Just to add on and complete hon. Tinkasiimire’s argument, I cannot see how a government vehicle can find itself in a garage without a requisition form requesting for repairs from the transport officer of a particular ministry. 

I cannot even see when that vehicle is repaired, how the payment can be sanctioned because there is no official requisition and therefore the ministry or permanent secretary cannot sanction payment unless that vehicle went to a pre-qualified garage; there was a requisition form for repairs and which spare parts have been used. Spare parts are written on another form that shows how much each spare part costs and therefore the transport officer and the under secretary for finance and administration get a demand note to pay that particular garage. 

I am really surprised that our civil service has deteriorated in terms of knowing how to manage government property – and really this is not the Executive. This is what anybody who has been in the civil service should know. When you finish university, you become an assistant secretary, senior assistant secretary, principal assistant secretary, under secretary and then permanent secretary. How can you skip all these stages, which show you how a government vehicle should be managed and payment done? That was just to add on what hon. Tinkasiimire was saying.

However, my two points that I found very curious are here. How can one be advanced Shs 100 million to do business? I even do not know how the committee knew that some money can be advanced to me on my salary or my allowance to do business because that is not your – you should not inquire beyond that. If money has been advanced to me, it is up to me to decide - since it is already on my account - how I am going to use it. But if I have ten years to go, how can you give me Shs 100 million knowing very well that in ten years’ time, I will not be around to pay? Is that not a decision of the accounting officer? Is that not corruption? Should such money be sanctioned to be given to you when we know that even we Members of Parliament cannot get anything beyond five years? Everybody knows that in 2011, all loans and funds from this Parliament ends. Isn’t it? 
Therefore -(Interruption)- -(Laughter)

MR OKUPA: When we were getting loans from Centenary Bank and you were more than 65 years; you would not qualify for a loan, which was supposed to be given for five years. 

COL (Rtd) BUTIME: I thank you for that information but I have made my point. My last point is on state enterprises where the Auditor-General can only audit companies where government has majority shares and these are referred to as state enterprises. What is ridiculous, as I said before, is the constitutional provision 163(3)(b), which actually provides that the Auditor-General can audit any institution or any business where government has an investment. But what the committee says here is that the above provision, therefore, is in contravention of this Article of the Constitution and the Office of the Auditor-General should be enabled to conduct an audit of any public funds to their finality. 

And they say that the Minister of Finance should now facilitate the Auditor-General to audit these entities so that he can report on the same investment of the Government of Uganda. 

These are two contradicting laws - of course the supreme law is the one in the Constitution. Will this require the Attorney-General to come here and give us his last, legal and official opinion authorising the Auditor-General to audit any business enterprise where government has an interest? I find that ridiculous. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.09
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Having listened to the debate on this report, I would like to give the following summary as it were. That all the weaknesses that have been identified by the Office of the Auditor-General and echoed by the Public Accounts Committee relate to lack of respect for institutional responsibilities. 

There are institutions in this country, which have got constitutional mandate, and if they were allowed to carry out their duties without undue influence from outside their ambits, I believe we would not have many of the problems that have been raised in this report of the Auditor-General. 

In Uganda today, there seems to be one central command post and that is the Office of the Presidency, which seems to have usurped all the powers of the various constitutional institutions and even the ministries that are supposed to work under the supervision of the Presidency. This has been clearly reflected in the case of allocation of land in this country. If, as a Ugandan, I want to apply for public land, there is an institution in government where I should go. There is the Uganda Land Commission and there is also a ministry responsible for land matters but the problem that we are faced with in this country is that both Ugandans and foreign investors believe that in order to have any allocation and get any service, they must seek the attention of his Excellency, the President -(Interjection)- yes, that is what is happening. 

Mr Speaker, you did allude to some correspondences, where you rightly said that those correspondences were not directed to the competent authority, which is the Uganda Land Commission. But allow me share with you colleagues, a document that I have, which is addressed to the Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission and there is a common saying that a request by a boss to a subordinate is a directive - (Interjections)- yes, if you are the boss in an institution and you politely request your subordinate to do something, that indirectly is a directive. You cannot run up to him and say, “My boss, I could have done this but I cannot”, because you have actually been commanded. 

Therefore, I have before me a letter from the State House dated 8 October, 2008 addressed to the Chairman, Uganda Land Commission, Kampala. The subject matter is: “Allocation of land to Access Uganda at Nakawa Housing Estate. Reference is made to the above subject. I have been approached by a group of investors - Access Uganda Limited, who would like to put up the first ever export promotion centre in Uganda. The centre is meant to offer the following services to the business world.

1.	Commodity auction feasibility instead of using Mombasa for auctioning our produce.

2.	Warehousing and cold storage among others…”

But not to waste a lot of our time, I want to take you –(Interjections)- if you will allow me to read the whole text – 

3.	Office space for all Uganda’s exports and investments related institutions to help investors and exporters find services in one place.

4.	Lastly, high speed broadband services to enable online auctioning of products with the ability to host call centres and trade point offices for all international buyers. 

In a bid to promote investment in general and for this investor in particular, I have no objection in availing the remaining land – 13 acres – which you stated has no encumbrances, in your letter dated 19 August 2008.

The investor requires 17 acres to realise this project but this leaves a deficit of four acres only. The purpose of this communication therefore is to direct you to avail the said land to the aforementioned investor, if there are no complications involved. 

Signed, 

Yoweri K. Museveni, President.”

Mr Speaker, I have not read this letter just for the sake of it. There is even a second one, which is here. With your permission, I will lay it on the Table. The point I am making is that should every investor come and look for the person of His Excellency the President when there are institutions out there -(Interjections)- they are there; the Uganda Land Commission is there and we have a minister for lands right here in front of me -(Interjections)- he is here in front of me. Why is he there if his powers and duties are going to be usurped by His Excellency, the President? We have got the problem because these are institutions, which have been created and they should be allowed to carry out their duties. 

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, hon. Opposition Chief Whip for giving way. Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully to what my colleague has read. What I did not get in that letter is whether this was a personal interest of the person of the President. What I read from that letter is that actually the President, as the Chief Executive of the country, and wishing well for this country, promotes investment and is actually advising -(Interjections)- subject to absence of any complication to say, “Please, go ahead.” Are we saying that the President is out of order if he travels and gets an interested investor outside Uganda who wants to promote the public good to say, “Please, I have identified this investor?” Is that really what you are trying to say that the President has no responsibility at all and it should be left to a technocrat or some other person as a chief executive of this country? 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought right from the word go I made it very clear that it is common sense that a request by a boss to a subordinate is a directive. You have actually very limited choice, if any, if you still need your office. That means, therefore, that –(Interjections)- even if you were the addressee of this letter, there would be no way to manoeuvre. You have no opportunity whatsoever but to do what the boss has directed. And I am saying that if, therefore, all directives are going to come from one person - just last week there was a motion here brought by the Leader of Government Business asking for Parliament to approve creation of two more ministerial posts.
 
If you know that one person can handle all those responsibilities, why then do you have to come and why do we have to have all the 80 or 72 ministers around if their responsibility is going to be usurped by one person? This is the point we are making. Let institutions be allowed to work. Where a technocrat or a minister has any difficulties, he is at liberty to consult the appointing authority. That is how things normally work in a civilised institution -(Interjections)– yes, I as Opposition Chief Whip, if there is anything, I am answerable to some structures in the Opposition and I do that very religiously. I do not work in isolation. 

So, what I see that is wrong is that there are many of these letters, even a directive to the same office that land must be allocated to Dauda. They are all here. The point I am making is that for us to run a government smoothly, let institutions be allowed to operate within the parameters, which they have been given and once we have that, this issue of non-adherence to commitment control, and coming to this Parliament saying we are going into this joint venture with a hotel management and yet we know that the Auditor-General is not going to have an opportunity to even audit our interests in such a joint venture; allow the right institutions to operate -(Interruption) 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from hon. Kassiano Wadri. If an administrative officer who knows what steps should be taken to requisition for a car to be repaired in a garage fails to do that, is there anybody stopping that institution from working? Is he waiting for the President to give him a directive to do that? So, there are institutions, which are working, but there is also incompetence of people. Thank you.  

MR WADRI: My experience in public service and holding responsibilities in those offices is that there are always avenues for assessing your performance as an officer. If, therefore, you are the transport officer and you are not able to ensure that right procedures are adhered to, the appointing authority has all the liberty to relieve you of that responsibility that you have been given. Equally, if you are the Minister for Lands and you are not doing your work, the appointing authority has all the liberty to relieve you of your responsibilities and try another person seen to be more competent than the present one. That is what I would have done, but allow the institutions to work.

I, therefore, would like to wind up by saying that I am making this very humble appeal to government. It is not just a fashion that we have institutions and that we have laid-down procedures and laws. They are there to assist us to perfect our performance. Let us adhere to the laid-down rules, laws, institutions and procedures. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the motion before us is to consider and adopt the Public Accounts Committee Report on the Report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2005. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the contributions you have made. This brings us to the end of today’s business. We should have continued with business tomorrow but because of the event I told you about, of the East African Community celebrations and the symposium, we will not sit tomorrow. I wish you a good weekend. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.28 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 10 November 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

