Wednesday, 3 November 2010

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. This morning, I hosted a delegation of prominent Ugandans who presented to me what they termed “citizens’ demands and expectations”. Their main concern was the CHOGM report which is before us. They expressed reservations on how it is being handled and they presented this document to me. I undertook to give copies to Members for them to study so that they use it or consider it when debating the CHOGM report. I directed the Public Relations Manager to provide these copies to you and I hope you have received your copies. The document was presented by Bishop Zac Niringiye, Chairperson APRM Governing Council and he was the head of delegation. If you have not received it, I hope in a minute or so you will receive it before we embark on debating the CHOGM report.

2.55
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have not yet seen the content of the issues raised by that delegation which you met this morning. But on the same note, I also take special interest in the business on the Order Paper. Many a time, we have had a lot of other business coming and then the CHOGM report tends to occupy the last position to the extent that for a number of days, we have not been able to reach that particular item. If it were possible for us to organise the Order Paper such that immediately after “Communication from the Chair” we go to the CHOGM report. You note that we are about to go to the field for issues of campaigns since nominations for Members of Parliament are around the corner. The CHOGM report requires due diligence and attention by this House so that we exhaustively discuss and put it off our “business to follow”. I beg that if it were appropriate, we would even amend the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I quite appreciate that for good reasons, you were not able to attend yesterday’s proceedings. That is why this issue is coming up. But I had explained this yesterday. And according to our rules, I am obliged to give priority to Government business. And yesterday, the business that came up to be handled before CHOGM was the law dealing with Kampala Capital City. That was a government Bill and it was indicated as an urgent matter that ought to be handled. The other one was a loan which I understand also had a deadline. Otherwise, we are quite conscious of the importance of CHOGM and I insist we are going to debate and finalise it before we go for the Christmas recess.

2.57
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we have to give priority to Government business, but if you look at our reports, they are basically Government business. It is unfortunate for us to categorise that when a Bill comes, it is Government, but when a report which deals with Acts within comes - for example, CHOGM was a budget which was passed by Parliament; it was Government business. We have said, “Government, you took our money, what did you do?” This is Government business. It is quite frustrating that we decide to have our own issues that we have dealt with as the last. It is frustrating. 

THE SPEAKER:  Can we move to the next business.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FLOODS IN TESO SUB-REGION

2.59
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of floods is bigger than the case of Teso. So, what we have decided to do is to survey the whole country in order to address this problem because it involves addressing the impact of the flooding which involves expenditure and, therefore, piecemeal work will not satisfy this House. So, we are undertaking to do an extensive study and will inform this House and possibly indicate fully the nature of intervention that is needed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I quite appreciate, but this matter was brought by the Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido and she was saying what water was coming out through the floor and the circumstances of some people in the area is that the children are sleeping on the floor, where water oozes out. Is there any measure you are taking to address that emergency?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, Mr Speaker. We are attending to all the emergencies within our means, for now. I would not want to come here and just talk about one area when other areas like Gulu and West Nile are under our attention - Pader and the whole of Eastern Uganda. So, it is a bigger problem than that particular one, but we are doing our best to handle the situation.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am surprised at the way the minister is generating answers for the issue that was raised claiming, “We are going to cover the whole country.” I know it is just a way of trying to delay the whole process and allowing the natural solutions to come by; it is surprising. 

3.02
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): In addition to that, Mr Speaker I think when such a matter arises, what I would have expected of the minister is to inform the House thus, “In as far as Teso is concerned, we have already undertaken these measures,” and he briefs the House as he goes to look at other parts of the country that are equally affected.  But to just refrain from making a statement and we are at the same time not informed of the progress of any intervention, borders on trying to run away from his responsibilities and duties.  And since he is here, he can do us a good service to at least brief us on the immediate steps already taken as we wait on other areas as well. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, for interventions of an emergency nature to succeed, you need the necessary information. Somebody can come to this House and say, “Water is oozing out of the ground.” The consultations that you need include technical evaluation of the extent of that up rise of the water.  It also involves what you need to do to help the people affected, and as we all know, when a message like this comes on the Floor of the House, we also go to the district to verify; we also get the information and check on what is available by way of intervention. So, it is not a question of abdication.

Secondly, when you send a team to one district and you find that the neighbouring district also needs the same attention, they continue to make sure that they cover the ground so that when you are intervening, you are intervening from a position of strength. 

I would like to assure this House that the problem we are addressing now is much bigger. For example, we are now in the process of using aerial surveying to see how far we can go. Aerial surveying means that you have to have helicopters and also seek information from satellite. So, it is not as simple a matter as being asked today and then you give an answer tomorrow.  

Let this House bear with us and when I say, “We are dealing with the whole country;” it is the whole country.  And when that happens, it means we may have to come here seeking a supplementary because our budget here has not catered sufficiently for these emergencies. So, do not think that tarpaulins are in the store; food is already there and so on and so forth. All this must be within the government system to see how we can intervene sensibly. So, I am not about to come here and give you a half-baked story.  (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t we really taking a lot of our time when the minister is definitely not ready? I think he has noted our concern that the statement is not forthcoming. Can you give us the date when you will bring this statement? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I am sure I will be able to give this information on Tuesday next week.  

3.06
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is not the first time this House has raised issues of disasters related to calamities of this nature.  I am even more disturbed by the response of the minister. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness was not in the House last week - I received letters here - I wish to appreciate the concerns of the Government Chief Whip. I am very grateful to hon. Daudi Migereko for the response that this matter would be taken up by the relevant ministry, and addressing it to the Prime Minister’s Office.  

But honestly, it is well over one month since the affected communities got flooded and the minister is coming to tell us that he needs an aerial survey. We have just passed the Budget; this is November and the budget process is still on, what have you been planning for to cater for disasters?  In fact, this is even more disturbing and that is why we keep on saying, “The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness ends up being a disaster in itself.” 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way. There is what we call the Contingency Fund – and I think it is very urgent for the Cabinet to come up with the law enabling the Contingency Fund so that it can take care of such issues as these floods.  

I have even heard the minister suggesting that he might come for a supplementary budget, but I think that the issue here is for the Minister of Finance to come here with an enabling law of the Contingency Fund so that when there is such a case, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness accesses that Fund to settle such a problem. Thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Banyenzaki.  So, Mr Speaker, where does this leave the people that we represent? The minister is talking about a supplementary which may come in a fortnight’s time. The minister was further talking of either hiring a plane to go and do an aerial survey; meanwhile my people who have been displaced do not have what to eat. The soil is sodden.

Although I have requested for support from the Red Cross and UNICEF, these are issues which the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness would be coordinating if you were organised. (Laughter) We do not need to come here every year to lament and teach you what to do with your ministry.  

It becomes very disturbing, Mr Speaker. What is the use of planning in every ministry? We are talking about things that you wake up one morning and you get; we are talking about a fully-fledged ministry; what does it do in the course of 365 days? If it is a vote-of-no confidence, or whatever, it should be clearly stated. And I think we should request for an intervention from the appointing authority and the Leader of Government Business; just come to our aid.  

This is not the first year. I was here lamenting over the stolen food last year under this very ministry.  Even the little that is released is all but eaten. Now people are floating in water and the ministry is talking of an aerial survey; will my people eat aeroplanes?  Honestly, something has to be done here.  I need an immediate intervention if this House really listens to the plight of the people.  

People of Kaberamaido in particular are swimming in water and no one has heard them for the last one month.  So, we should have a disaster team in every district; what is he coordinating?  I think I am beaten on this one, Mr Speaker. 

3.11
MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): There is something I would like to find out from the minister and Government because you see, there are certain issues which we gloss over and some people may not take us seriously. At times I think that - for some of us who read the French Revolution of 1789 - that if some of the peasants of this country knew how we sometimes handle affairs that directly affect them, they would rise up with machetes and come and decapitate our heads. When will these floods in Teso - how much money is required to come to the aid of these people; whichever part of Teso; whether it is Kaberamaido or wherever. 

The other day we wanted CHOGM here and there were marathon meetings and money was found; we never passed a loan. How much money, in terms of figures, is required to evacuate these people, bring posho which is not going to be imported from Washington - beans are here in this country to take to one part of the country so that our people can be fed. Is it such a gigantic problem that cannot be solved? Why are we really neither here nor there? A statement next week! What type of people are we? Where is the disaster preparedness?

3.13
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I would also like to give some information to the House. I want to say that what is happening in the Eastern region is the reverse in the South. My people have failed to plant anything because most of the areas are very dry. We are experiencing a very bad drought. So, I am trying to find out whether Government -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, could you please protect me?

I would like to find out from Government whether it can actually implement what hon. Kabwegyere has said and give us a national report as far as the climate is concerned and what is happening.  This is because we in Masaka are headed for food insecurity. I am very worried for my people because we do not have drinking water in some places because the shallow wells have dried up, bore holes are not working, and we have not been able to plant anything because of the drought, which is currently there. So, could we have a national report as far as this issue is concerned? I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think we should close this matter.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Mine is a light problem and not as heavy as that of hon. Kabwegyere. I must say that I will be ready tomorrow for the statement. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs who said that his statement will be ready tomorrow. Since Government business is always the first, don’t you think it is now ideal for the statement of hon. Hope Mwesigye about CHOGM to be presented because it would be better now?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 85.7 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO US$ 130 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE HEALTH SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING PROJECT

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this loan was brought before Parliament yesterday and important issues and matters were raised. So, my ministry, the Ministry of Health and the Committees of Finance and Social Services are still consulting and we shall come with the answer next Tuesday. We shall present the motion on Tuesday next week. I thank you.

3.17
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I am extremely surprised by what is happening today. We have an Order Paper, which I think Parliament participated in drafting or at least they must have been consulted, but it appears that Government is totally unprepared to do anything with what has been presented before us. Surely, we need some explanation. Serious matters like floods cannot be handled, missing persons cannot be handled, health matters and loans cannot be handled. Why were they put on the Order Paper in the first place? It looks like we came here to joke. I will ask the Leader of Government Business to say something about what is happening today, otherwise, you are going to become a laughing stock.

3.18
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, when issues are raised, we try to handle them. For example, on the issue of the loan, that matter was being discussed the entire morning and there were a lot of controversies, so it would have been improper for the minister to come here and present the loan because we would have had more controversies on the Floor of Parliament. It is clearly propitious that we should sort out our differences outside Parliament and when we have done so then we handle the matter.

With regard to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, he had actually pledged to answer that question on Thursday. So, when it was put on the Order Paper, he pledged to answer the question tomorrow because we do not want to give you inadequate answers. Our answers must be well researched.

With regard to the issue of floods, it is a major matter. In fact, I have been sitting with the Minister of State for Finance and I was asking him how soon he can handle that matter and I advised him that after this meeting, he should meet the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and sort out this matter. So, we are trying to handle the issues in a proper manner.

3.21
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not convinced with what the Prime Minister has told us. Initially, you informed this House that you are giving priority to Government business. So, it really does not ring a bell that the Prime Minister should come here and tell us that the Order Paper was printed and indeed the Speaker has given a lot of importance to Government business, and for all the items that have been mentioned, Government is not in position to answer. I think there is coordination between your office and that of the Prime Minister. So, I believe that the Leader of Government Business is not taking us seriously. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2009

3.23
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clause one stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 deals with interpretation. I propose that we stand over it because there are some more interpretations we could make on the way. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear that we consider this interpretation after because there will perhaps be interpretations coming in. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 stood over.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 3 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 4 was boundary. The minister had proposed to change some boundaries under the schedule. So, doesn’t he have to come and amend it here? 

MR MWESIGE: I intend to amend the second schedule. So, clause 4 just refers to the second schedule. I do not see any problem here because the second schedule will be there, but I will amend it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, will the amendment be reflected in the second schedule? I think it is clear. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is not clear because clause 4(i) is talking about the boundary. Unless we delete it and leave the others. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If we look on page 59 of the Bill, it is in that schedule that detailed boundaries of the proposed Kampala City are given. So, he says he is going to amend that. He doesn’t have to say it in the Bill, but it is in amending the schedule that you will remove any reference to Entebbe and this and that. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think if we now pass this clause as it is, we will have passed the schedule as it is in the Bill. So, I think they should be done concurrently because if we pass it now, we will have passed what is provided for in the Bill.  

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, clause 4 refers to the second schedule to this Act and not the second schedule to this Bill. So, until the second schedule is adopted, you cannot say that what we are referring to here is the schedule as it appears in the Bill because we shall amend it. So, it is really an innocent provision –(Interjections)- yes, I am giving my opinion; you are entitled to yours. So, what I am saying is that when we reach the second schedule, we shall amend it and it will not affect what is here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe, they will feel comfortable if you indicate the proposed schedule as it will be because they want to read this clause with the schedule. I think they will be able to appreciate it. They want to know why you will not indicate the kind of amendment you intend to propose in the second schedule, the second schedule having been mentioned. 

MR MWESIGE: As I mentioned yesterday, in the second schedule I intend to move an amendment to retain or to make the boundaries of Kampala Capital City the same as the boundaries of the current district of Kampala, and I have a description in an instrument which was gazetted in 1968, which I intend to rely on to amend the second schedule. The boundaries of Kampala as gazetted in 1968 have not changed to-date. So, that is the amendment I intend to make, but if Members want me to amend the schedule now – 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think they would feel comfortable if you could.

MR MWESIGE: I can, if you allow, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you read it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it would be against our rules. Even right now, the minister has distributed the intended amendments to the Bill and none of what he is talking about is on this sheet that he has given us. So, the best way to move on is to leave this or stand over it. Otherwise, Hon. Mwesige is very tricky. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Should we stand over it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

(Clause 4, stood over.)

Clause 5 

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 5 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, the committee has some amendments to clause 6. Considering what the minister told us yesterday about elections, we are proposing that clause 6 be amended as follows:
In clause 6(i)(c)the words “one councillor” appearing in the first line of the provision should be deleted and replaced with the words “a councillor or councillors” because we are not talking about one councillor but a councillor or councillors. 

And then in clause 6(i)(d), the word “two” appearing in the first line of the provision should be deleted. It should remain “councillors” and not “two councillors.” It should be as it is now.

In clause 6(i)(e), the word “two” appearing in the first line of the provision should be deleted so that it reads “councillors” and not “two councillors” and the justification is to maintain the status-quo of the composition of the current councillors. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, unless the committee can explain, otherwise, we are having one councillor because we need one councillor and we have two because we need two councillors. Now, the moment we delete “two” you can even say 100 councillors. So, the reason there is one and two is to have a numerical connotation to the numbers required. So, I do not know what the committee chairperson means if we delete the word “two.” So, how many councillors would we want to represent persons with disabilities because what the current law stipulates is two representatives for persons with disabilities; we cannot leave it open–ended.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the problem would be with (f) and not (d) and (e); it is about women councilors forming a third of the authority such that the councilors elected under this shall form two thirds of the Authority. I think we should be specific and state that the number of women councilors shall be this or that instead of talking of percentages. Otherwise, I would like to agree with Hon. Odonga Otto that we retain two councilors for the youth, two councilors for the persons with disabilities and a specific number representing women.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I would agree that we need to specify one councilor for those directly elected on the basis of adult suffrage, and the electoral area will be demarcated by the Electoral Commission. I also agree on the two councilors for the youth; two councilors – as it is in the Bill. But for the women, I beg that we retain the formula of one third because that is the standard at local councils. It will be up to the Electoral Commission to demarcate constituencies for women councilors.  You cannot state the number because that would be interfering with the work of the Electoral Commission that will finally demarcate constituencies for women councilors.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard what the honourable minister is saying. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I heard what the minister has just said and if that is the law, there is no problem. But Mr Chairman, if you go through this law very well you will realise that we are going to get a problem. I do not know how we shall come up with this one third; maybe we leave it to the Electoral Commission.

But if you go to (g) that talks about one councilor representing NEMA – the moment you are a public servant, you are not supposed to be serving – then when you continue there are others councilors representing ministries – are you making this law to appear different from other laws? I do not know what the minister is interested in – it should have come from (1)(a) and end at (f) for councilors. Otherwise, these other ones are not necessary, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is a matter of principle when you say that a member from NEMA can participate in a political set-up. How will this happen? Are they going to invite people not serving in NEMA to represent NEMA; because they will be staff of NEMA; and you will be involving public servants in a political set-up. 

MR KATUNTU: Furthermore, Mr Chairman. In all ordinary cases, representatives of ministries or Government departments are supposed to be technical. That is why when we are handling matters in this House we ordinarily have technical officers seated in that corner to advise the relevant ministers. In fact, as I talk, I can even see some people from his ministry – they are there. They keep sending in notes – they have even just given him papers, some of which he is still reading. Now, if we carry them into the chamber, it ceases to be a council for purposes of making policy. We are going to vulgarize this council where you have got technical people now engaged in other roles of politicians. 

My view is that you do not need these paragraphs (h) and (i). For example, can the minister convince us as to why we should have a member of the law society seated in the Kampala City Council? Why? If they need legal advice, then council can employ a lawyer. But we cannot have somebody in the ministry responsible for Justice, and another lawyer from the Uganda Law Society. What are you intending to achieve?

THE CHAIRMAN: Do we need to have made them ex-officios?

MR KATUNTU: Apparently, in (2), they are actually ex-officios, but they still remain members. To me, all technical staff can advise, but they should not be part of the council.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, when you look at the Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers, you realise this is an organisation of private practitioners outside. For them to be part of the authority, they can help, especially during the deliberations of issues concerning the city council.

The other group of private people is the Uganda Society of Architectures. Maybe if you talk of NEMA, that is a government authority, but also, which can be called upon anytime; maybe that will make sense. But these professional bodies that are in charge of the professionals, and especially those doing professional engineering work, should be part of the authority.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we should make a law that is law. If you want a professional engineer, Kampala City Council will not be barred from employing an engineer in that place. If they want to employ an architect, they will employ one. Please let us reason like human beings? We should have only technical people in the authority, who will advise that council.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you think we should have a technical team detached from the Council.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Constitution commands that Kampala will be administered by the Central Government; that is the starting point. So, it is not out of the ordinary for technical people to sit on boards or authorities, which are even purely technical. 

The Uganda Roads Funds Authority, for example, has representatives from ministries – technical people sitting on the board. NEMA itself has representatives from ministries sitting on the authority. So, we wanted to have a balance between the rights of the people of Kampala to elect their own representatives to the authority, but we also wanted to have strong Central Government representatives through its ministries, and of course, borrow the expertise. I do not see anything wrong with a qualified engineer from the association of engineers - provided the right is conferred by law – that prevents that engineer from sitting in Council to give on-spot advice to councillors at the political level in that council. So, as far as am concerned, there is nothing illegal or unconstitutional for that matter, with the presence of professional people and with the presence of representatives from Central Government departments in this council.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we have two bodies: The political leadership, which should have the councillors; and management, which can have the technical people? We separate the two. There is political leadership; these are politicians and councillors; then the technical people.

MR MWESIGE: There is technical staff, which is clearly provided for, but these professionals from statutory bodies and from ministries are necessary and after all, they are going to be ex-officio members. I do not really see the harm other than improving the efficiency of the authority that these people will —

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, I think what they are saying is, “Yes, they are, but you do not put them in the same bag. You do not put them in the same chamber.” The politicians are different; the councillors be they representing women, this and the other, then the technical people from these technical organisations be given a different name.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We need to appreciate the fundamentals in this Bill and here we are talking about a dichotomised institution with two different authorities. One, the authority headed by the executive director, and the political authority headed by the mayor. If you bring these technical people into the realm of the authority headed by the mayor, then you are missing the point. So, here we should have these professionals.

If the minister can get a framework where the professionals can serve under the office of the executive director, that would be acceptable, but the professionals such as NEMA which is full of civil servants, to sit down and elect councillors, I think it would not work because you cannot have a body like NEMA constituting itself into an electoral college to elect a councillor. Otherwise, you will tell URA to also elect a councillor because URA is equally necessary in this. So, are you going to call URA to participate in political decisions? No. Even UNRA would also bring a councillor. I do not see why UNRA is not there.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we put this on hold and consider others, and then come back to it.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, the way forward. I believe the minister has genuine reasons for the involvement of all these people from various organisations, but I think the best way to go about it is to request the minister that since these people are technical, there is a technical team and if the technical team of KCC is not enough, then we can make an improvement that, “The Central Government shall appoint a technical advisory board to the council from the following institutions...” and then you move, but they cannot be in the same chamber. These are political leaders, who are elected councillors and they cannot be together with the technical staff. (Applause)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, the mischief this clause seeks is trying —

THE CHAIRMAN: But can we explore the hon. Sebaggala’s-

MR ODONGA-OTTO: But before we explore that. The moment we accept that we have a technical team separate from a team of politicians then it defeats the exact essence of this law because we shall have the same politicians doing the same things they are doing. In fact, I am of the view that this technical body should be allowed to vote because it is useless to sit in the councils and watch the politicians making bad decisions. This is still at the centre of what we were discussing yesterday. So, what I would suggest as a middle way, maybe from (i), is that it is not practical. You cannot have one councillor representing Ministry of Health, one councillor representing Ministry of Justice; and you cannot have a councillor representing a ministry because a councillor has been defined. So, we could probably retain those professional bodies; but we do not allow them to be mere ex-officio members. Otherwise, to leave politicians to continue making the same decisions and to have a board that just sits there and cannot vote, we shall have not solved any problem.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, our own experience with local administration is a conflict between the politicians and the civil servants, where the civil servants have purported to do or to perform the roles and functions of a politician and sometimes, the politicians also purporting to perform the roles and functions of the civil servants.

This creates a conflict, and most of these districts and urban councils have been having this as their biggest weakness. For example, you find a mayor purely handling allocation of a tender. You find civil servants actually influencing the decisions of the politicians and not the legitimate advice of a bureaucratic. So, once you have a body like this, honourable minister, for example, when you look at the functions of authority to enact legislation for the proper management of the city, really, enactment of legislation or laws is a function of a politician. It can never be a function of civil servant, but in the process of enacting this law, the civil servants are actually part and parcel of the process by advising.

We have seen them even in this chamber when a committee is handling legislation, the civil servants come and have their input and advise the politicians. These are distinctive roles. You cannot have politicians and civil servants and say you sit and enact laws, no. You cannot.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am suggesting that we stand over this provision then later, a few of you from this side and this side will meet and find a solution so that we can proceed to non-controversial provisions. Okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes

THE CHAIRMAN: Right.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 9(2) be amended to read as follows: “The lord mayor shall be elected by universal adult suffrage through a secret ballot at an election organised by the Electoral Commission.” And 9(3), “The deputy lord mayor shall be appointed by the lord mayor with the approval of the authority”.

Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: But is this deputy from the councillors or any other person? 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think our intention is to select the deputy lord mayor from the council. I beg to clarify.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Yes –  

MR SEBAGGALA: We should just redraft so that we know what we are adopting – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you read it again?

MR MWESIGE: I have said the deputy mayor shall be appointed from members of the authority by the lord mayor with the approval of the authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Yes?    

MR KASIGWA: I think the minister should be a little bit more clear that if the deputy lord mayor is appointed by the lord mayor with the approval of the council or authority, I think we should have a limit; approval by at least a-third because if it is like as it is, then it is too general. It must really be very specific.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you should leave it at simple majority otherwise it is going to cause a statement. Okay? So, I put the question on the proposed amendment by the minister.

MR MWESIGE: I intended to delete Clause 9(4) because it is now redundant. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I see. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 12 stand part –

MR KASIGWA: I just want to seek some small clarification on sub-section (8). If a prima facie case has been established, then why would you need two-thirds? If a prima facie case has been established in the removal of the lord mayor –(Interjections)- if a tribunal determines that there is a prima facie case for removal, then why do we again need two-thirds?

THE CHAIRMAN: A prima facie case is a case on face of it. I think there is reason to support this one. But to confirm - because removing somebody - it is more than a half and, therefore, it becomes that fraction. Prima facie – face of it. Yes?

MR KATUNTU: Well, maybe the word should not have been prima facie. You see, a prima facie case is such that he has been found that he was in the wrong unless he explains himself. It is not that he is in the wrong, but on the face of it, he is wrong unless he explains his innocence. I think that is what it is in prima facie.

So, the authority actually is with the council and so the prima facie case is with the authority. The authority is with the Authority, of course; authority with a small “a” and authority with a big “A”. The authority to pass the vote of no confidence is with the authority with capital “A”. But the case is not coming from the Authority itself, but from the committee that has been set up and it is the one that has found the prima facie case.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think his concern was the percentage of necessary votes for removal. Was that not your concern? That you do not think it is necessary to tie it with -

MR KASIGWA: But I think he is giving it a good explanation.

THE CHAIRMAN: But was your concern not about the percentage that is required to remove? (Laughter) I think he is satisfied. Okay, I now put the –

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just wanted a clarification from the minister because most of these provisions regarding removal were drafted on the basis that the lord mayor and deputy lord mayor would be elected through the initial procedure suggested, which has now been changed. 

Has the minister looked through these provisions and he thinks they are still appropriate given the amendment that he has come with? Given that the nature of voting has changed, that the mayor is coming through adult suffrage?

MR MWESIGE: The mode of voting for the mayor will not affect the mode of procedure for his or her removal because even in other cases, the chairman LCV is elected by adult suffrage, but he or she can be removed by council.

The President is elected by adult suffrage, but Parliament can remove the President. So, as far as I am concerned, these provisions are sufficient.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question that Clause 12 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 13 – yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 13 relates to Clause 6 which we have stood over, and unless we delete - under sub-clause (1), we delete under Section 6(1) (c) and (d) or else we stand it over until we have dealt with Section 6.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you want to stand over 13?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, because it has implications -

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it related to the other one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes and so much.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is stood over.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 16 – yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 16 deals with the executive director. You say a person is not qualified to be appointed – you see, here they are talking of relevant qualifications in public management. Sebaggala has just been in the council for five years and he now has public management. He can now easily be appointed the executive director. 

Now what we want to do here is that for somebody to be appointed executive director, he or she should have qualifications as a permanent secretary in Government. Basically, it is that we want to raise the status of the executive director.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, how do you want to amend it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to say that under (3), a person who will be appointed should be qualified to be a permanent secretary in Government.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do we not exhaust that first?

MR KATUNTU: I think it is related to this. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Pardon?

MR KATUNTU: If the minister can redraft this particular clause not in the negative but in the positive. The person is not qualified –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. But now what about hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment?

MR KATUNTU: What I was thinking about hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s is a positive. It is a drafting in the positive. What is provided for in the deal is in the negative.

THE CHAIRMAN: And that is why I was going to vote on hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment. Is it not okay? 

MS HOPE MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I would like to oppose hon. Mafabi’s amendment because it is very restrictive. It excludes a lot of people who might have a lot of experience; it excludes people who work in the private sector yet we are looking for competent people. I support what is in the Bill – the rest would be detailed in the advert. But we cannot have an advert within the law. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he was saying is that we know the qualifications of the people to be appointed to be at the rank of a PS in Government and that this person should be of equal qualification. He need not be from the Public Service; he can be from outside, so long as he has an equivalent to these qualifications. I put the question to hon. Mafabi’s proposal - (Interjections)– hon. Member, can you repeat your amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Hope can help me –(Laughter)– anyway let me read. “For a person to qualify to be appointed the executive director shall be a person who qualifies to be at the rank of a permanent secretary in a Government ministry”. Then we can add on the other characteristics. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, under (2) it says, “The executive director shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Public Service”, I wanted to add an amendment that, “With the approval of Parliament”.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. I put the question that Clause 16 as amended stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 19(3) be deleted. This follows my notice to amend the Second Schedule to confine the boundaries of Kampala City to the current boundaries of Kampala District. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, the committee has the feeling that on Clause 20(2), the word “or” appearing in the fourth line should be deleted and the words “survey or social sciences” comes after the words, “public health”. What we are saying here is that we should have additional qualifications for the Chairperson of the Physical Planning Authority and the members to broaden their qualifications further by adding on survey and social sciences.

Mr Chairman, in Clause 20(3), we talk about the members of the metropolitan authority holding office for three years. We are proposing that the word, “Three”, should be deleted and be replaced with the word, “Five”, so that the metropolitan authorities hold office for five years instead of three. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now there are two amendments; I put the question on the last amendment – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the authority they are talking about is like a board. And physical planning is a very tough job. If you get wrong people, they can mess it up. It is better we stick to three years. The minister put there three years on purpose that you can tolerate poor work for three years – 

THE CHAIRMAN: If he has other problems you can find another way, but I think three years is such a short period. Give somebody at least five. So, I put the question on that; those in favour of five.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, the Committee Chairman, hon. Otekat, moved that under 20(2) we add social sciences and survey. I think we should leave out social sciences. I am a social scientist; that was my first profession and I do not think I can even manage any business like metro-physical planning. Let us leave there courses like civil engineering, architecture and environment other than broadening it. By bringing in social sciences, you have not excluded anyone. We should specifically leave social sciences out. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on the same issue, I think what the minister is trying to cure here – if you look at Clause 6 which we stood over, he is trying to take care of those professional bodies. So, to me, I think we should add, architecture and law, which he likes so much. The reason he wants this is to get somebody to help in the planning of the council. And that is why we are saying, they should have knowledge of physical planning; somebody who can determine where the road can pass, and if there are any illegalities involved, be able to represent that cause. 

So, I propose we put the names of the people he wanted under clause 6 so that when we go back to delete, he will be very comfortable. (Laughter).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question that clause 20 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, Clause 21(a), the words “Authority structure and development plan for the capital city and metropolitan area” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “Physical development plan for the capital city and the metropolitan area”. And the justification is to be consistent with the Physical Planning Act. If you read 2(1)a, it talks about developing a metropolitan authority structure and a development plan for the capital city and metropolitan area. We are saying it should just be a simple statement saying: “Developing a physical development plan for the capital city and metropolitan area” and the justification is that it should be consistent with the planning Act. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am just seeking clarification from the hon. Minister of Local Government. In Clause 21(b), one of the functions of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is to handle and address planning issues within the capital city and the neighbouring districts of Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso, yet in clause 19, we deleted sub-clause (3), which was talking about Entebbe Municipality and Kira Town Council. Now, when we expand the functions of the Physical Planning Authority to handle Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso, doesn’t it appear like over-stepping on the other local governments? I want your clarification.

MR MWESIGE: What we deleted from 19 was to confine the political jurisdiction of the metropolitan authority to Kampala District as it is now. But for obvious reasons, we need uniform and proper planning for Kampala City and its neighbouring areas. I thought that would make sense to everybody. Therefore, as long as this law confers powers upon the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority to plan not only for Kampala, but for the neighbouring districts, it is possible.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the minister. The essence of this Bill is for the Central Government to administer Kampala City through the authority we are creating. If that is so, what is the purpose of 21(5)?

THE CHAIRMAN: Which sub-clause?

MR KATUNTU: (5), because I thought we are just giving all this to the authority itself, which is certainly an arm of the Central Government that will be managing the city. So, what is the purpose of sub-clause (5)?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the authority is governing the city on behalf of the Central Government. That is very clear. So, there is nothing wrong with making it clear that for roads, subways, flyovers, sewers, transport ways, the Central Government will handle them through the authority. There is no harm in this because the Central Government is going to be in charge of Kampala in all aspects, including these. So, there is nothing wrong with emphasising it here –

THE CHAIRMAN: But in sub-clause (6) you cannot say, “The Metropolitan Authority shall be responsible for construction and maintenance of all roads and street lights, other than those mentioned in subsection (6).”  I think you must have meant (5).

MR KATUNTU: Sub-clause (7).

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we dispose of this first then we go to that one? So, it is not (6), it is (5). Right, proceed.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we are establishing this authority to take over the management of the city. So, you do not give it powers and say some of it is the responsibility of the Central Government. I am getting confused. We are establishing this authority to make sure that it runs all the affairs of the city. What is happening when you look at (7), it says: “The Metropolitan Authority shall be responsible for cleaning and de-silting of all roads in the city.” So, you are reducing the authority to cleaning and sweeping. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, the authority is not de-linked from the Central Government at all. But at the same time, there is some uniqueness in some of the services within the authority. That is the metropolitan area. Take an example of the trunk and getaway roads; there is no way you are going to move from Malaba then as soon as you reach the border of Kampala City on your way to Entebbe, and you say that segment confined within Kampala City should have a separate person working on it. There you are going to create confusion. That is why we said that the trunk and getaway roads – these are roads going through, connecting the highways – should directly be under UNRA.

MR KATUNTU: The argument he is raising cannot apply to sewers, for example, or even street lighting. So, if we have created this authority, we should give them the resources to manage the affairs of the city. But what you want is for us to retain these roads ourselves –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR KATUNTU: And that is wrong, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, Article 5(4) provides that, “Kampala located in Buganda shall be a capital city for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government.” This law is just making the other authority an agent of the Central Government, which agent is given some functions and other functions are reserved for the boss, the Central Government. There is nothing wrong. Let us exhaust hon. Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think there is something wrong. Really, there is something wrong. Once you create these bodies and you continue giving them piecemeal responsibility, then you will be pointing to each other saying, “No, no, that is not our function, it is a function of the Central Government,” because that is what has been happening. Let me -

THE CHAIRMAN: No.

MR KATUNTU: Let me say this, Mr Chairman. For example, you are talking about maintaining -(Interjections)- if you can be a little bit patient. Okay if it is to me, let me give way.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The information is that what you are talking about is what has been happening in Kampala City Council. This is the confusion we have been having. This law is trying to cure that confusion by clearly setting the delegated functions to the authority and those which will remain with other authorities like UNRA, National Water and Sewerage Corporation etc. because that demarcation has not been there. That is why up to today, you find that you move from Spear Motors on your way to Jinja and you are on a different road from that one from Kitgum House to Spear Motors. There has been the question of who owns which road to the extent that even the mayor had to take the Ministry of Works to court when we said we are working on these roads. When he failed and we did it he said, “Who gave you permission to do it?” 

There are trunk roads which go through the city and they are clearly demarcated; they are seen; why should we de-link a segment of that road and delegate it to one authority whereas the biggest section is with another authority? Why can’t it be together so that we have got a road going through? In other words, here we are determining giving - we are making the clear demarcations of who is supposed to be doing what.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think the minister is setting the House in confusion. It is true that the ministry that he is in charge of may be interested in trunk roads and getaway roads, but at the same time, the Bill talks about all roads and streetlights and the other things - subways and flyovers - that are different from trunk and getaway roads. 

Secondly, Mr Chairman, whereas the Bill seeks to give the Central Government the responsibility over all roads and streetlights in the central business district - yes, under (6) it says, “The Metropolitan Authority shall have responsibility over the other roads other than those in the central business district.” That is, in my view, relegating those roads to second class roads. As the House may be aware, most of the people who come to the central business district live outside the central business district and so, rather than make these demarcations and considering that the import of this Bill is for us to create an authority, which authority, I believe, we can empower with the necessary finances and other resources including technical resources - the problem with Kampala City Council, in my opinion, has been poor administration and also limited financial resources and this is why we have all these potholes and all these craters all over the place. 

But cardinally, the responsibility of the Ministry of Works, which is a government ministry, is to take care of all the roads including Central Government roads. I believe that if the Central Government is determined to empower this authority and not just merely water down its authority, it should be able to provide all the necessary resources including technical resources. That way the authority will have the capacity to maintain all the roads including all those in the central business district, all the trunk and getaway roads, and all subways and flyovers. And really, what the Bill seems to do is to give with one hand and take away with the other. I really would like to oppose this provision under (5).

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I think we are going far. The authority we are creating has got other functions: Administrative, whatever garbage, whatever, and whatever it is. But here we are talking of these trunk roads which will be going to a specific authority, which deals with only roads and nothing else. Their job is only to construct the roads and maintain roads, and this is UNRA. So, that is what we are looking at.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we need to go back to clause 7, which we have passed. One of the functions of the authority is to construct and maintain the roads within the city and now we are saying, “No, maintain a few roads then the other roads…” and hon. Byabagambi you may not even be the Minister of Works then when this authority is in place. You may ask hon. Rukutana. (Laughter)

So, Mr Chairman, my view is that we want to streamline service delivery in the city and we have said the Central Government, through this agency called the authority, should perform the function. Let us not take away functions which we are creating under this law and we retain some in Mr Byabagambi’s ministry.

MR YIGA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of the committee and I recall that in one of our meetings, we had recommended that we should be deleting this Clause 21 (5), (6), (7) and (8). When you look at Clause 21, it is functions of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. A Physical Planning Authority cannot construct and maintain roads. Its role is actually to develop and not to carry out construction of roads and maintenance, and for that matter, I think the minister should accept that that one should be deleted. 

On (7) also, the Physical Metropolitan Authority cannot be responsible for cleaning and de-silting. That is the work of the Kampala Capital City Authority for which the Central Government is going to manage Kampala Capital City. 

Then also, when you look at sub-clause (8), this cannot be done under the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. So, I would think that the honourable minister would have these sub-clauses put somewhere. Otherwise, to put them under the function of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, they are misplaced and they are bound to cause confusion.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, what hon. Yiga is talking about can be cured by redrafting because the provisions of clause 21(5) are very clear: The Central Government shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of those items listed. This drafting has nothing to do with the functions of the Physical Planning Authority. So, we can separate them by redrafting, but that is not good reason to delete (5). 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if the minister is saying that these are not functions of the Kampala Capital City Authority, then still he has not cured the problem because the Central Government is responsible for giving money to Kampala City Council to do x, y, z. I think that is the purpose of the Central Government. Now, for you to say that having given money, you also want to do specific work - the issue of trunk roads going through town is history. It is now common knowledge that Ministry of Works is supposed to construct roads, which go through the centre and that is why I say hon. Byabagambi is still young. This was a passed thing in the Seventh Parliament. It was a thing which was agreed that the Ministry of Works, if it is constructing a road going through a town, should be the one responsible for the road. So, if –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, it is clear that within our laws, nowhere is it stated that either Ministry of Works or the UNRA we have created are in charge of the trunk roads passing through the town. I have not come across that law and he says, “It is history.” I do not know which history. Is the honourable member, therefore, right to confuse the House that a trunk road being constructed through the city centre is already history? Is he in order? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman I have had a second look at this contentious Article 21(5) and I strongly believe that we should support the minister’s submissions. I do not see anything wrong with the Central Government maintaining roads in Kampala.

It is even better for us in Parliament because we shall have a minister here and we ask him/her why there are potholes on our roads. The Central Government can also come and ask for loans from the World Bank to upgrade the roads in Kampala. Let us not remove this role from ourselves and give it to councillors who are going to mix with other authorities and then we lose control.

THE CHAIRMAN: This situation can be compared with decentralisation; there were functions of the Central Government, but they were given to the local government. Under (5), the Central Government in Kampala is decentralising some of its responsibility to the authority that is created. I think this should not attract a protracted debate.
 
MR KATUNTU: If that is the spirit then we should remove the term, “central business district.” The authority should take over all the roads in Kampala.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I tend to support the position of my colleague hon. Abdul Katuntu by saying that Kampala Central Business District is just a small fraction of the entire Kampala City road network. The majority of the people coming into town actually come from outside the central business district of Kampala.
 
I think rather than create more confusion, it would be better for the ministry to take over all the roads within the city. We are not going to point fingers at many authorities because we shall have one authority responsible for all the roads and that authority will then be accountable to this Parliament. 

I think this is a good proposal because people do not have to wonder where the government ends while maintaining and constructing roads and where the authority starts.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I oppose this proposal. The central business district is a heavily congested area which needs specialised work. That is why we are saying that we give it a specialised authority which specialises in road constructions only, but the rest remains with the authority.

There is a division in the Ministry of Works that deals with helping the local governments in constructing roads.

DR EPETAIT: We have taken over 15 minutes over this particular clause. I beg to move that since it even requires some redrafting then we can stand over it and continue with other clauses.

MR SEBAGGALA: I would like to remind Members that the five divisions in Kampala were raised to municipality status with full powers. I do not buy the idea of saying that some of the works that can be done by the divisions should be taken to the centre. These divisions should be given enough power to run their own affairs.

MR ARUMADRI: I would have conceded on this if Kampala had been expanded in size, but the boundaries have been reduced to the original district of Kampala. This is a very small area. Many of our citizens live within the suburbs of Kampala City such as Kawempe, Nakawa and Makindye. If we are leaving these places then not much is being done. I am imploring Government to take over the entire boundary of Kampala District for which this Bill is meant.

MR OTEKAT: What hon. Latif has said really is right because within Kampala there will be divisions and they will be responsible for roads. If we say that the centre takes all roads in Kampala City, we shall be taking away work from the divisions because they are supposed to handle some roads.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have pupils and teachers of, God is With Us Primary School. They are from the constituency of hon. Betty Kamya, Member of Parliament for Rubaga North. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Honestly speaking, the central business district is more monetised than Kawempe or Namuwongo. They can even collect more taxes than Nakawa. Those who can collect more taxes are the ones the minister wants to attend to leaving behind slums like hon. Latif’s constituency. We need to make Kampala look like other cities. Take over all the roads and we will give you all the loans from the World Bank to clean up Kampala once and for all.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I agree with what you are saying, but it is already done. By creating an authority administered by the Central Government means that all the roads within Kampala are going to have a toll on the Consolidated Fund. There is no question about that one. Here we are delegating the implementing function. That is all. That is what we are doing now. That is why we are saying that this specialised unit -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, allow me to stand over this particular clause. We shall revert to it again so that you think of the best solution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 22 is talking of a deputy executive director. Mr Chairman, if we leave it, again we could have a problem. So, we should also add here the qualifications of the deputy executive director. Since the deputy executive director acts when the executive director is away, the qualifications should be the same.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I need clarification from the minister. Clause 22 is talking about appointment being by the President on the advice of the Public Service Commission. When it comes to the director, it is by the President on the - oh, it is the same. I thought it was not uniform.

Clause 23

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, on Clause 25(ii) the committee was of the view that the words “be paid by the authority” be deleted and the justification was to avoid double allegiance to both the Police Force and the authority. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: You want the Police to be paid by -

MR OTEKAT: We want the Police to be paid by Police.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think his view is that maybe there will be differences in the salaries and then there may be a struggle on mobilisation of these people. But if they are paid by the same person, maybe the salary will be uniform. Isn’t it okay so that you do not cause thoughts like, “I wish I were serving the authority…” you do not want to go to Kalisizo. I think it is okay.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I had an even radical view that the Police should have not been appointed under the Police Act because we wanted the authority to be in charge of its forces. But now that I personally dropped that radical view under (ii) honestly speaking, for issues of allegiance and proper continuity and to give some power to the authority, it would be proper that this Police is paid by that authority, so that if the mayor orders this, you do it other than waiting - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, now, what it is the position? Do you want to leave it as it is? [Members: “Yes.”]

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Police is the same. The only thing –(Interjection)– yes, give me a chance. There are many institutions which have Police, but they can only have additional allowances in the areas they work. But they should remain under a command of Uganda Police. If you create this, this is a dangerous precedent. It could be very dangerous for me to work –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what do you suggest?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I suggest that the Police – of course, the authority will have the Police Force which has been trained by the Police, but the payment of this – since Central Government is just putting its agency, there will also be a charge to the Consolidated Fund. They should be paid as Police apart from additional allowances.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you want to leave it as it is?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, Clause 26, in the opening sentence: The words “not more than 15 members” should be deleted and replaced with the words “the following members” because we are not restricting to only 15 members. It should be as open as it is now. And also, if you say, “division urban councils shall be composed of not more than 15 members as follows”, it means we are restricting them to what the bill is proposing. But now we should leave the number to remain as it is now.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do we delete?

MR OTEKAT: We delete “not more than 15 members” and leave it as “a division urban council shall be composed of members as follows…”

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I was just saying that I support the committee. Because the moment you have these electoral colleges, the numbers could go even higher.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 27(i) be amended as follows: “The mayor” – this is the division mayor – “shall be elected by universal adult suffrage through a secret ballot at an election organised by the Electoral Commission.” (ii) The deputy mayor shall be appointed by the mayor from among the division councillors with the approval of the division urban council.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that we import - when you want to remove the mayor or the deputy mayor, it should be the same as when you are removing the lord mayor and his deputy because it follows the same procedures. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall come to that when we are considering clause 31. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 29 be amended as follows: “A division urban council shall be managed by the division town clerk”. We preferred to use the nomenclature of “town clerk” for divisions to make it distinct from the technical heads of the Metropolitan Authority, who is the executive director. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having determined that they will be headed by the town clerk, we must also put the qualification of the town clerk. I want to propose that the qualification of the town clerk shall be a person of the rank of an undersecretary in the ministry. The justification is that this person is heading a lower level and at a certain time can head the Kampala City.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman I am advised that we could say that, “The qualifications of the division town clerk shall be those that are prescribed in the Local Government Act.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, they are prescribed by incorporation.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 30 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

CAPT. OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, the committee was of the view that the clause be re-drafted as follows: “That where a decision of the division urban council is inconsistent with or contravenes the Constitution or any other law, the metropolitan development plan policies or where the decision is not in public interest, the authority shall have powers to veto the decision.” The justification was to enable the authority to veto a decision that is not in public interest. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, may I be clarified on why we put the “Constitution and any law?” Because once a decision is contrary to the Constitution, it is null and void to the extent of the inconsistency. That is a Constitutional provision. Really, this is redundant in my view.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do you want to delete? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we should just delete 33(1); it is redundant. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying the amendment is unnecessary?  

MR KATUNTU: It is not necessary; it is already provided for under the law. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question on the proposed amendment by the committee on clause 33.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 33

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 33 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have laws which govern public finance. Why should a minister start prescribing other methods? We have the Public Finance and Accountability Act; we have the PPDA. So, this one is redundant. I would propose that they follow Government accounting records.   

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but he says, “The Minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance...” So, these regulations must be done in consultation with the Minister of Finance. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the responsibility of having financial regulations or making financial and accounting regulations of all Government Institutions rests with the Minister of Finance. And indeed, whether you talk about local governments and the Central Government, it is already laid out. Will the Minister of -
THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying that there is a law of general application? 

MR KATUNTU: Yes, there is already a law there. This clause is redundant and it should be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you have proposed that we delete 49? I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49 deleted.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, our Constitution is very clear on borrowing. No entity can borrow without parliamentary approval. This Kampala Authority is part of the government institutions, so we should not have a separate law to enable it borrow.  It could easily over commit Uganda and we end up in problems. It is unconstitutional. So, this one is for deletion. 

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a proposal that we delete 54. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I vividly remember in the Local Government Act that even districts have powers to borrow from financial institutions with the approval of their council.   

THE CHAIRMAN: So, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which provision of the Constitution were you referring to?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why we are bringing this is that this is a Government institution. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Just read the article you are referring to. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Article 159(2); “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” The Authority is part of Government.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it isn’t. So, I put the question on clause 54.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, under Clause 72(d), which we have just passed on the 72 functions of the RCC, the moment we say under this clause that to advise the lord mayor - this is an appointed person advising an elected person on matters of - I see us giving so much power to these types of RDCs that they may interfere with the operations of -

THE CHAIRMAN: You can re-commit if you want, but there is nothing wrong.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification.  

THE CHAIRMAN: On what?

MR KATUNTU: 72(a) this RCC or RDC. You are saying that this be part of the Central Government and yet he is supposed to represent the Central Government under 72(1)(a). This authority is part of the Central Government and now you are saying this RCC is going to represent the government and even the other provisions -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if you think it is the same, then it is redundant and we can leave it as that so that we can move. But I think he represents the Central Government in this entity.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification. We have Uganda Revenue Authority and UNRA. Is there an RCC in those authorities?

THE CHAIRMAN: But we are talking about a territory.

Clause 73

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 73 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I don’t agree with the provision on clause 79(1)(d) which is talking about powers of the minister. 1(d) is to appoint and remove members of the Metropolitan Authority and yet we have provided that the Metropolitan Authority member would be elected. The councillors are elected and the mayor will be elected from among members of the Council of the Metropolitan Authority. So, I thought -(Interruption)

MR YIGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to invite my colleague to the Interpretation clause. That is where the meaning of Metropolitan Authority is actually defined and it doesn’t refer to the elected councillors and the mayor.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I need clarification from the minister. 79(1)(a) states, “To vary or rescind any decisions of the authority, which is in contravention of the law”. Well if it is in contravention of the law, it is null and void. Government policy or public interest - you see, public interest is not defined by this Act, so, it is in the - we are just giving the minister more powers to say that is not within public interest.

For example, if –

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you want to cancel “public interest”? Okay, agreed. I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, following my notice to leave the boundaries of Kampala Capital City along the boundaries of the current Kampala City or district as we know it today, I have been able to retrieve and present to Members Statutory Instrument No.17 of 1968, which clearly defines the boundaries of Kampala City as they are today. This instrument to the best of my knowledge has not been amended. 

I, therefore, pray for your indulgence, Mr Chairman. I have repeated the same instrument in the second schedule, which I have re-typed on a piece of paper as my amendment. It is a technical document which has been drawn by surveyors and cartographers. I do not think I have to belabour to read it, but the summary of it all is that this amendment seeks to retain the boundaries of the current Kampala City within Kampala District boundaries as we know it today. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to move. 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, I speak as the Shadow Minister for Local Government. The committee went around at the expense of the public to inspect the proposed new boundaries of Kampala City. Consultations were also held with the communities therein. The minister should explain his abrupt u-turn after abandoning the great work which the committee undertook. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the original Bill, which expanded Kampala to include parts of Wakiso - a Wakiso which is part of Buganda region by the Constitution - to include some parts of Mukono, was unconstitutional because in this Constitution, Entebbe is deemed to have agreed to be part of the Buganda region and Kampala is not part of the Buganda region, and when you take Article 5 of the Constitution, it provides as follows: “(1) Uganda is one Sovereign State and a Republic. (2) Subject to Article 178 of this Constitution, Uganda shall consist of: (a) regions administered by regional governments when districts have agreed to form regions as provided in the Constitution; (b) Kampala; and (c) the districts of Uganda…” and when you look at the districts, Kampala is not part of them. It is a different brick and, therefore, bringing somebody who agreed to be in the Buganda region to Kampala, would be forcing them to break the agreement they made by the Constitution and, therefore, you are making it part of the capital when it is part of the region. That is why I think the minister, rightly so, has reviewed this position to dissociate himself from bringing Entebbe to Kampala. And you cannot amend the Constitution by an ordinary Bill. If you want to amend the Constitution, you must bring a Constitutional Amendment Bill to do so.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much for your wise guidance. Before a document like this comes to the House, it passes through many hands, including that of the Solicitor-General and the Attorney-General, and it goes through Cabinet and -[HON. MEMBER: “Through the shadow minister.”]- It would never have arrived here if the shadow minister was there. –(Laughter)- But that is a story for another day. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: We cannot question the minister because Cabinet is a different body. We do not know what is done there. We assume that this matter passed through Cabinet. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I respect your ruling and it is constitutional, and I guess the minister has taken note, but I wonder - because no one has got to carry this land away whether in Kampala or Wakiso, and it will always be in the same place - why can’t we, for planning purposes, expand the boundaries of Kampala beyond this. I stay in Namasuba, but the authorities’ work will stop near the muzikiti, and beyond there, the roads are bad, and I am tired of stressing Minister Nasasira to upgrade the road every year. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is covered.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you are in the Buganda region. (Laughter) So, I put the question that the second schedule, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The second schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The third schedule, agreed to.

The fourth schedule, agreed to.

The fifth schedule

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, on the fifth schedule, the committee had earlier on observed that the physical planning directorate had been left out and the committee was of the view that the fifth schedule be amended to add (1)(j) to read as follows: “Directorate of Physical Planning.” This is to provide for the directorate of physical planning since physical planning is very important for the authority. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are making this law in a dangerous way. If we try to tell people the directorates to make, there may be need to have another directorate and this will really call for amendments of the law or you may need to remove one. I don’t think we should really prescribe the directorates. In my view, you can say that there will be a directorate to assist in the functioning of the authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: But we are making the law now and we think that is necessary; this law is not being made by the authority, but by us. Why can’t we do whatever we think is necessary to put it there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But Mr Chairman, if that is the case, then look at treasury services. Treasury services deal with revenue collection and you have revenue collection as a department. In fact, this is under treasury services. This should be a sub-section of treasury services. Internal audit is okay; legal affairs is fine; education and social services could move together with gender and community services - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think if you read clause 83, it provides as follows: “The minister may, by statutory instrument and with the approval of Cabinet; amend the first, third, fourth, fifth and sixth schedules to this Act.” So, the function is given to him and; therefore; if he now thinks that it is necessary, then there is nothing wrong.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, if that is the case, I want to propose that revenue collection be part of treasury services. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want to add it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, it is already covered under treasury services - imagine treasury services with revenue – they are just blotting the whole institution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh! You think the two are the same?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes!

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, this is a win-win situation. Okay, what is your proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am proposing that we merge treasury services with revenue collection.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one do you want? Do you want us to go for revenue collection or treasury services?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, treasury services.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying that we let treasury services cover revenue collection. Can we give in for a win-win situation? I now put the question to the proposals as advanced by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fifth Schedule, as amended, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Fifth Schedule, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fifth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Sixth Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Sixth Schedule stand the Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Sixth Schedule, agreed to.


The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to advance a definition, which says Kampala City Authority is equal to a district. The justification –

THE CHAIRMAN: No. So, I put the question that clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRMAN: No. So, I put the question that clause 4 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on clause 6, I propose that we delete the following paragraphs: (g), (h), and (i). The reason is that these are civil servants – clause 6 is on page 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we delete what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We delete paragraphs (g), (h) and (i). This can be part of the technical arm of the council. They cannot be part of –

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, now that we have known who will have what powers through the Bill, I would like to suggest that we retain the professional bodies because if they tell them to send one representative, they will, but we can delete paragraph (i) totally since the minister has powers under the Bill. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what should we delete?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Let us delete paragraph (i).

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment as moved by Hon. Odonga Otto –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what about paragraph (g) that talks about NEMA? This is an authority, which was represented on the membership of the Physical Planning Authority.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us start with paragraph (i) before we move to others. Okay, I put the question to have paragraph (i) deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause (i) deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us continue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that we also delete clause 6(g) on one councillor representing NEMA. This is already a Government authority with public servants and it is covered under the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. There is no reason for them to again be represented here. They are supposed to provide technical advice, which they are doing through the physical planning unit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying that NEMA has a mechanism of enforcing its policies?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I put the question to have clause 6(g) deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6(g) deleted.

                  Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.


THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on clause 13, the first part is covered, but part two has a problem. The moment we state that the councillors will get elected to the council via the Local Governments Act, you cannot talk of modifications. We should say that the Local Government Act actually applies to the election of councillors because these are units that are already known under that Act, which belongs to Kampala District. There should be no modifications.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the Kampala Metropolitan Authority is not a local government. That is very clear under the Constitution. For purposes of elections, because this Bill does not cover all electoral aspects within the authority, we are trying to create a leeway for the Electoral Commission to borrow general electoral provisions that apply to the Local Government Act, to also apply to the election of councillors to the authority. This will not only apply to the authority; it will also apply to many laws that are cross-cutting.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am comfortable with the proposal on clause 13 on the election of councillors. But I appear to see an omission; we have not provided for a procedure of the removal of a councillor. Can we propose that the procedure for the removal of a councillor in the Local Government Act shall apply to the councillor removal under the Kampala City Council Authority?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

              Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, the reason Members are very enthusiastic to get the Bill out of the way and pass it quickly is because of the rampant floods in Bwaise and Kawempe, which come to the city centre.

MR NASASIRA: Sorry, Mr Chairman. There are a few problems that I discussed with the ministers and my colleague, the minister of state, on clause 21(5). One, I do not think there is a legal definition of the central business district, to start with. So, we will have problems with that and (f) that talks about sewers should be talking about drainage because sewers are the responsibility of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation. 

I thought we would be safer if we left it that the Central Government shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of the roads in –(Interjections)– of all the roads of Kampala City? I think it maybe more workable that way. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 21, amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.31
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.31
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.33
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2009

5.33
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. Yes.

5.33
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I intend to recommit clause 31. Whereas we provided the ground for removal of mayor or deputy mayor of a division, we did not spell out the procedures of doing so for removal of lord mayor and deputy lord mayor under clause 12. So, I wanted to propose that we import the same procedure for removal of lord mayor and deputy lord mayor to apply to the mayor and deputy of a division so that the process is clear.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want to recommit-

DR EPETAIT: I want to recommit clause 31.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you read clause 27, sub-clause 6, it is very clear on the removal. They have imported it from sub-sections (1) to (5) of Section 12. So, I think we are covered. I went to school.

THE SPEAKER: Can you read it?	

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 27(6), it says, “Subsection (1) to (20) of Section 12 shall apply to the removal of the mayor or deputy mayor of a division urban council except..”

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, I went to school. (Laughter)

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, I wanted to -

THE SPEAKER: No, do you want to recommit?

MR OTEKAT: 6(h)

THE SPEAKER: It is your Bill.

5.36
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu West, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I would like to recommit clause 21 of the Bill, particularly sub-clauses 6 and 7 which read that, “The Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of all roads and streets other than those mentioned in sub-section (6)...” which should even be (5) basically because it is the authority which has responsibility to work on roads not the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. So, I want us to delete that word “Metropolitan”. (Interjections) It was not done.

MR MWESIGE: Yes, we amended clause 21(5) to state that the Central Government will be responsible for all roads in Kampala. So, really, sub-section 6 is a consequential amendment by drafting and we are not going to redraft it again.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, this also covers sub-section 7. If it is a consequential amendment, we may assume that we made the amendment when we did not and we have to go back to the same problem.

5.37
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to move that we recommit clause 6, particularly to look at the councillors from the professional bodies because we have removed the government institutions and we have only provided for –

THE SPEAKER: Which clause are you dealing with? First of all mention it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: 6(h) where we are saying Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council. That is a council under Ministry of Health. The appropriate body should be Uganda Medical Association because we are providing for Uganda Institution of Professional Engineers, Uganda Society of Architects and Uganda Law Society. A similar institution in health would be Uganda Medical Association not the council because the council is under Ministry of Health; it is a Government department. So, I wanted us to recommit this clause to make that necessary change.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to delete (3) of (h)?

DR BARYOMUNSI: To replace it with Uganda Medical Association instead of the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council because the council is a unit under Ministry of Health -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you want to make Uganda Medical Association.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes. That is the body that brings together the doctors.

5.39
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I would also beg to recommit 58(3)(b) with respect to the qualifications of the members of the city public accounts committee and the minimum qualification provided there is a person of a minimum of A’level. I would beg that the authority should have certified public accountants. We have enough persons in this city to be able to take this responsibility instead of going for A’level leavers. I beg to recommit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I also want to support him because these are not members -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I now put the question -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, before we do -

THE SPEAKER: No, you will explain when we recommit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But I also want to put a recommittal -

THE SPEAKER: Unless you have an independent -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, another one. Mr Speaker we are saying under clause 82(d), “In consultation with the minister responsible for finance, regulating the procurement disposal procedures of the authority;”
The moment we have agreed that the PPDA is the law and the regulation, why should the minister again go and try to bend rules to suit the authority like you did. So, I am saying that I want to recommit clause 82(d) that this should be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: clause 83 what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 82(2)(d) that this minister should not have authority to make regulations of procurement on his own. They must be following the PPDA Act.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, three motions have been moved under our rules to recommit clause 6(h) and 58(3 b and 82(2). I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2009

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 6(h).

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. Like I had said before, in the provision we are indicating the professional associations and I move that we replace the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council with the Uganda Medical Association.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since you are talking of professionals, now we must add (5) to deal with professionals since we have talked of lawyers and we want to deal with the Uganda Institute of Certified Public Accountants to basically bring in the professional part in the financial area and accountability.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you did not make that motion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.
       
MR REMIGIO ACHIA: The members of this committee are supposed to be appointed from outside the councillors and they are not civil servants.  So, we would want them to be certified public accountants –(Interjections)- 58(3)(b) where it says, “A public accounts committee consisting of a chairperson and four other members appointed by the authority on the recommendation of the lord mayor and with the approval of the Minister,” and 3(b) says, “Should have a minimum qualification of an Advanced Level Certificate.” I am proposing that the minimum should be a person of a degree or who is a certified public accountant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 58 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed, to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 82

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 82 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to delete 82(d) because on procurement we already have the PPDA Act and its regulation will follow. The moment we do this, we shall go like CHOGM. So, delete 82(2)(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a motion to delete 82(2)(d). I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has reconsidered clauses 6, 58 and 82 and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the committee on the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2009

5.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 
“THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2010”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. The Bill is passed (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just wanted at this moment to thank our Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira, for taking a bolder step than his deputy –(Laughter)- and having accepted to take over all the roads in Kampala. I just want to thank him for that. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, hon. Member. Now, the next item should be the CHOGM Report. If we do not debate this issue, then it must be the first item tomorrow.

At the same time, I have already indicated to you that we have an obligation under Article 78 to deal with the special categories representation in this House. It is necessary to deal with this matter if Eng. Badru Kiggundu has to accept nominations for those categories.

So, I really do not know what has been done and whether this will be a private motion by an individual backbencher or it is Government. There are no indications to me when this is going to be done.

5.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, we discussed that matter and disposed it. The Attorney-General is going to move the resolution on Tuesday and I will explain why Tuesday; this is because we need two thirds of all Members of Parliament, which is a minimum, to pass it. Therefore, it is essential to ensure that we mobilise –

THE SPEAKER: Where do you get that?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I beg your pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Refer us to the constitutional provision.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Well, the Attorney-General - is the Attorney-General here? The Attorney-General did inform us that we need two thirds majority –

THE SPEAKER: What is the provision of the Constitution?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I beg your pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Can you refer us to the articles of the Constitution that requires us to do that?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Well, he said that the –(Laughter)– please wait.

THE SPEAKER: Because, we are not amending the Constitution, but just effecting the Constitution.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: According to hon. Ruhindi, he told us that the Act – there is an Act under which you are moving it. We need two-thirds, but if he is wrong, then that is another matter. But under Article 119 of the Constitution, they are the people who advise us. So, who am I to disagree with him?

THE SPEAKER: Article 119? You said Article 119?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I said according to Article 119, the Attorney-General is the one who is our chief advisor and therefore –(Laughter)- when the Attorney-General says so, who am I? (Laughter) May the Almighty God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, I think that tomorrow we shall deal with this business. There will be a statement on the two people who were reported missing by the honourable member for Mukono North, and then we deal with the CHOGM report 

As I indicated before, I think it would be better to deal with specific cases rather than the general debate of the report. So, please get prepared for the debate on CHOGM tomorrow. House adjourned to 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 November 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 


