Tuesday 7th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the following questions for the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development:  
Article 157 of the Constitution provides that “Parliament shall make provisions for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund”.  Since the inception of the 6th Parliament, the House has been approving funds under a programme for Contingencies Fund in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

Would the Minister inform the House: when the appropriate law to regulate the operations of the Fund shall be put in place to effect the requirement of the Constitution?

How, in the absence of the law, he has regulated the appropriation of the Fund during the past financial years?

How he used the previous funds appropriated by Parliament and provide a detailed breakdown for it?

Which mechanism he has put in place to utilise the Fund in this financial year (2000/2001)?  
Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

In answer to question one, Volume V, Chapter 150 of the Laws of Uganda, 1964 is in place and is a valid law.  Section 157 of the Constitution of 1995 has not repealed Volume V, Chapter 150 of the Laws of Uganda, 1964.

Question two says, “How, in the absence of the law, has the Ministry regulated appropriation of the Fund during the past financial years?” 
The law is in place, Laws of Uganda 1964, Volume V, Chapter 150.

In question three, he asked how we used the previous funds appropriated by Parliament and a detailed breakdown should be provided for it. In 1996, three hundred million shillings was released to the Ministry of Agriculture to fight locust invasion in Western Uganda. This was to supplement the disaster locust organisation contribution. When the locusts invaded Western Uganda, this House passed a resolution to reactivate the contingency fund. In 1998, shs. 237 million was charged against the contingencies fund account to combat anti-terrorism activities by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  

Question four is on the mechanism that has been put in place to use the fund in this financial year. The Laws of Uganda, 1964, Volume V, Chapter 150, subsection 3 allows the Secretary to the Treasury to administer the funds.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for his brief answers. The supplementary question I am raising is with regard to the provision of 30 billion shillings, which was referred to in the financial year 2000/20001 and was meant to be a contingency fund.  If in the last three financial years the total amount of money used under contingency fund is less than one billion shillings, why should the Ministry responsible for Finance over budget under contingency fund?  

For the last two financial years provisions have been up to 5 billion shillings. And in the current financial year, there is still a provision. Can the Minister explain to the House as to why such an amount is being provided for under this particular provision? I thank you.

MR. GABRIEL OPIO: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member is confusing the supplementaries, which are under another Article of the Constitution, with the question he raised here. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like the hon. Member to really be properly assisted. You refer to that provision in the Constitution, where you say his supplementary question falls, why can’t you be slightly more elaborate on that?  

MR. GABRIEL OPIO: Mr. Speaker, the question that the Member raised was very specific, and it was on the establishment of a contingency fund as referred to in the Constitution. And I said that there is already a contingency fund as per the Law of 1964, and that the Constitution saved it. So, we do not have to create one, unless we want to improve on the existing law. But the question he has raised now is on the supplementaries which we have during the budgetary estimates. 

We always put aside some money that we plan to use once the line Ministries have identified the actual way of spending that money. That is why I am saying that what we have been getting under contingency in the budget is that amount of money that the Ministry of Finance puts aside, waiting for clarification from the line Ministries. And that amount does not fall under what the Member asked originally.

MAJ. OTOA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the hon. Member asked particularly question three, he wanted some detailed breakdown, and the Minister only gave us two. I would have thought there would also be cumulative contingencies for all these four years. That is what we would have interest in. We would want to know the cumulative effect of this and how it has been used.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind you that supplementary questions must relate to the original question.

DR. AKENY: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In answer to question three the Minister told us that Shs.300 million was given to Agriculture for locust control, and then in 1998 Shs.230 million was given for anti-terrorism activities.  Unfortunately he did not state what the balance of the contingency in that year was used for.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you look at the ministerial statement on the Budgets for 1998/99, 1999/2000, there is clearly a provision under the contingency fund. This relates to supplementary questions asked by my Colleagues, hon. Otoa and hon. Akeny, that there was a specific provision for contingency. If you spent under one billion, what would you do with the balance? Is it declared?  What happens? Could we have the schedule? I thank you.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to start by answering hon. Otoa’s question. He wanted me to give the details asked for in question three. The details were in my answer. We have had only two. In 1996 we had Shs.300 million to fight locusts, which had invaded western Uganda. The second one was in 1998, which was Shs.237 million, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs charged it against the contingencies fund account to combat anti-terrorism activities. So, these are the amounts that we have had within the four years we have been here.

The other question was for me to state whether there is a balance and who manages it. I gave that in my answer to question four. The Laws of Uganda, 1964, Volume 5, Chapter 150, Section 3, Sub-section 3 allows the Secretary to the Treasury to administer the fund. As to whether some money has been spent and some is remaining, that is another issue. That was not really what the question asked for.

I would like the hon. Member to differentiate between contingencies and contingency fund. Contingencies are the funds we refer to in our budgets. When we talk about the contingency fund, it will be specific, it will be stated here under the Laws of Uganda, 1964, Volume 5, Chapter 150, Section 3, Sub-section 3,and it will be administered by the Secretary to Treasury.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Lukyamuzi is standing in for the hon. Member for Kakuuto. Can you proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of hon. Pinto, I would like to pose the following questions to the hon. Minister of Finance:  
It is reported that the Inland Port of the Uganda Revenue Authority is currently being managed by Heritage Company, an entity of the Movement Secretariat, specifically established for the purposes of collecting revenue for the Uganda Revenue Authority.  

Could the Minister of Finance inform the House the status of this Company especially on: 
details of its registration; the type of contract it holds with Uganda Revenue Authority; whether it will be audited by the Auditor General since it handles public revenue; and any other pertinent information necessary for the better collection and accountability of public revenues.  
Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Company is registered under the Companies Act, Cap.85 as a limited liability company. It was registered on 22nd December 1999 by the registrar of companies.

Before I go to the second question I would like to say that Uganda Revenue Authority was allocated part of Transocean limited, where all the vehicles that were carrying goods either in transit or to be offloaded in Kampala were being kept. Uganda Revenue Authority has only decided to remain with the core activity, which is basically collecting revenue. The Uganda Revenue Authority has decided to provide this opportunity for the private sector to do the job of managing the other non-core activities. 

It was when Transocean was not being managed properly that Cabinet decided that the park, where we have vehicles in transit and those off-loading goods, belongs to Uganda Revenue Authority. The rest of Transocean is under the Privatisation Unit and it will be privatised soon. So, it is this park that the Uganda Revenue Authority has found it necessary to give a private organisation the job of managing the vehicles there. 

URA has not gone out to advertise. As they prepare for eventual advertising, they have opted to go in for care taking. Heritage Foundation, through its subsidiary, Heritage Terminal, is care-taking that portion of Uganda Revenue Authority. And care taking is a managerial decision. Therefore, they are right on that one. So, that is the brief history about what Heritage Foundation under its subsidiary, Heritage Terminal, is doing in that park. It was part of Transocean, but it is part of Uganda Revenue Authority.

The second question was on the type of contract it is care-taking. It is care taking on a three-month temporary basis. Every three months Uganda Revenue Authority, through its board, decides whether it should continue with the care taking arrangement until a final decision is made on the long-term use of that portion formerly owned by Transocean.  

“Are the accounts subject to audit by the Auditor General?” The answer is yes. All the revenues are banked and intact on the URA account, which is subject to audit and is currently audited by the Auditor General. As a management arrangement, they get 68 percent of the fee that is charged for every vehicle parked there. And the charge on every vehicle is 5,000 shillings. That is what I want the House to know about this arrangement.  I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am amazed by the answers given by the hon. Minister of Finance to my question. And until he answers what I am going to say just now, I continue smelling a rat. There are many companies in this country that are capable of caretaking that responsibility, how come among all those companies it is only Heritage that undertook it without competition?  

Secondly, is it by coincidence that the caretaker is also part of a political body known as the Movement Secretariat?  

Lastly, after getting knowledge that the company is associated to the Movement Secretariat - because you have not denied that - the people I represent would be interested in knowing whether it is also related to Danze, prominently associated to the Movement Secretariat.

MS. BIBIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister who supervises Uganda Revenue Authority’s work, how can he be satisfied and have the courage to come before this House to give this explanation. I know that the hon. Minister is a member of the Movement. If Heritage company is acting on behalf of the Movement, to which we all subscribe, how come the Minister did not ensure that the company was endorsed, first of all by NEC and secondly by the national conference, in order for it to transact business on behalf of the Movement? 

Secondly, Government is in the process of doing business on behalf of the people. How come the Minister allowed a Government parastatal to go into business with an arm of Government? The Secretariat is the political arm of Government, and if Heritage belongs to the Secretariat, can we know how it was formed and who it belongs to? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AISU OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The supplementary question I have deals with good governance.  The Select Committee on Privatisation made a recommendation to this House about that inland port. We made a recommendation to the effect that Uganda Revenue Authority should not continue business with that port and that a management contract should be given to a competent firm to manage the inland port. 

I have been in this House and in this country for some time. I have not heard or seen any advertisement in the newspapers for firms to bid for the management of this inland port. I would like to know from the Minister whether there was competitive bidding for this inland port. The question of doing business with Government, of course, has already been mentioned. Why are some enterprises being privatised while others are being run by Government entities again? It leaves a lot to the imagination. We need clarification from the Minister over this. Thank you.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his answer, the Minister stopped short of giving the details of the registration. Could you tell us which people were registered as directors in this company? That was not mentioned. In connection with that, is it true that Heritage Company is a Movement Secretariat company? And is it also true, as stated in the question, that it was specifically established for the purpose of running this very business?  

Secondly, the Minister said Heritage Foundation is care- taking that part of the business, which is not core to URA, but at the same time the Minister tells us that the business is due for privatisation. Is this privatisation still in progress in view of this caretaking by a seemingly very powerful company? 

The Minster said that those decisions were management decisions. In other words, the Minister is saying that the Government or his Ministry has nothing to do with it, because it is a management decision, and yet we know that URA is under the surveillance and control of the Minister of Finance. Is the Minister satisfied that this decision of giving business to a company, which has just been established, is a correct decision? There are so many Ugandan companies that have been established for a long time and would have definitely been interested.  Was this caretaking business also advertised so that other companies would have also answered? 

My concern is that the company was just established in 1999, and he went ahead, immediately, to enter into a caretaking business agreement with URA. Is the Minister satisfied that it was correct for a very new company to be given such business with a parastatal under his Ministry?

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The need for the establishment of an inland port has been accepted and acknowledged by the Government. I would appreciate, if the Minister could give us some information on the Government policy regarding the establishment of inland ports in this country. I know investors are already coming to this country seeking facilitation for the establishment of these facilities. Could the Minister inform the hon. Members what the Government policy with regard to their rationalisation is, and whether we can look forward to the establishment of these inland ports at the most rational and convenient places for our country.  Thank you.

MR.  OPIO: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member for Lubaga, hon. Lukyamuzi, wants to know whether there is a relationship between Heritage Foundation and Danze. I would like to say that according to the law, although I am not a lawyer, I see no association between Heritage Foundation and Danze. Danze is a different company from Heritage Foundation. So, in law there is no relationship, in reality -(An hon. Member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let him answer. If there is something else I will give you an opportunity. Otherwise, he will not be able to finish.

MR. OPIO: What we know is that Danze was a company associated with the Movement Secretariat and the Heritage Foundation is a company related to the Movement Secretariat. Heritage Foundation however, has its articles and memorandum of association. Therefore, it is a different body performing the functions under which it was established.  

On the question of how Heritage Foundation is the only company that was chosen, I would like to repeat that a long-term decision by URA is being contemplated, meanwhile URA discovered that they needed an organisation that could do the caretaking. In the wisdom of the management and the board they found out that Heritage Foundation could do the job and they asked Heritage Foundation to operate on a three months’ basis. If the URA finds out that Heritage Foundation is not performing, definitely they will stop the arrangement with Heritage Foundation –(Interruption) 

MS. BABIHUGA: Is it in order for the hon. Minister to keep on misguiding this House about the competence of Heritage Foundation, without clarifying how Heritage was sourced or how it was so privileged to be found credible by URA? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, surely you should be fair to the Minister. You asked a supplementary question, the Minister has not yet got to it, and I think your supplementary question was along those lines. Let him answer the rest and then he will come to you.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to state that when the management of URA decides on the way forward, the business for the management of that area will be advertised and every business organisation will be free to apply for those activities there. At the moment, as I stated, it is a caretaking arrangement and it is only on a short-term basis of three months.  

Hon. Winnie Babihuga also asked whether NEC and the national conference of the Movement endorsed this. I would like to state that, unless advised otherwise, I do not think that such activities undertaken by the Secretariat need to be approved by NEC and the national conference. So, unless there is an article in the law that says that they should be referred to, I beg to submit that the management of the Movement Secretariat was within their right. They were within their right to establish a company to look for businesses to achieve what they wanted in the articles and memorandum of association.  

The other question was whether it was advertised, and I have answered that. Management is only on a temporary basis. Advertisement will take place when the decision on the way forward is made.  

Hon. Omongole said that his report recommended that the area be turned into an inland port and be given to a competitive firm. Definitely this is what is going to happen in the long run. This is just a caretaking phase.  When the time comes for advertising this business, definitely the competence of the firm will be taken into account when awarding the business.

The other issue hon. Omongole brought up was that some companies are being privatised and yet others are being run by Government. Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between the Movement Secretariat and the Government. You cannot say that Heritage Foundation, which is an organ of the Movement Secretariat, is a Government parastatal. That is not true!   

Hon. Ongom raised the issue on whether this was privatised. I have already said that it was not privatised because we are in phase one, which is care taking while URA establishes the way forward for that portion of the former Trans-Ocean. I think I also answered the other question. If I did not maybe you will remind me.  

Hon. Kyemba wanted to find out what the Government policy is on inland ports. Government has decided that URA moves out of the non-core activities. So, the running of inland ports or internal depots is now the work of the private sector. Hon. Members, I would like to inform you that the URA has advertised what they call transit parks in Masaka, Luwero, and other areas. So, either the councils or individual companies can apply, compete, and run these transit parks. That is why URA has also advertised eleven internal container depots, which are now being run by the private sector in this country. Organisations are free to apply to run either transit parks or internal container depots. 

An area that is very crucial here, and I know hon. Kyemba is interested in this, is the inland port within Jinja and within Kampala. Within Kampala, the opportunities are open. Organisations that are interested in this work can go to the Uganda Investment Authority to establish the modalities of running these areas. So, the policy is in place, investors should just provide their investment plans and then Uganda Investment Authority board of directors will make the decision. Thank you.  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister intentionally avoided answering two of my questions. The first question was a straightforward one. I said that, in his answer he had given details on registration of the company but left out a vital one as to who the registered directors of this company were. He did not answer that.  

Secondly, I said that the Minister kept telling us that the decision for this care taking was a management decision by URA. Since Heritage Foundation was just a newly founded company and URA is under the general supervision of the Ministry of Finance, did the Ministry not find it odd that a company that had just been founded was given such a vital business? This is a company with no history whatsoever! And in view of the fact that Uganda is crying about corruption, could they not suspect this or is this another official way of entering into this corruption business?  

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am really worried about the management of affairs in this country. I would like the hon. Minister to dispel the understanding that I get from his explanation, that he is not doing his work at his desk because of the factors that have come out of his whole explanation. I would like the hon. Minister to tell me why he does not insist that URA gets out of this ad hocism, favouring an amateur company to handle critical business and yet getting Government’s hands into the public funds. Why can’t he regularise the affairs of that inland port so that it is divested and put on market for competitive bidding? Why is the hon. Minister sitting on this deliberately and hiding under this ad hocism of a temporary arrangement? How can you have one year of a care taking, temporary arrangement? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is common knowledge that Danze is owned by the Movement. The question that I put strongly to the Minister was whether Heritage Company is an entity of the Movement. The Minister did not succeed in denying that.  If we borrowed the algebra jargon, H standing for Heritage and D standing for Danze, and M standing for Movement, then this means that H = M, D = M. Therefore, it goes without saying that H and D have a similar mother. Does the Minister deny that? - (Laughter)
            
MR. OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In answer to hon. Ongom’s question, the directors are hon. Eriya Kategaya, Kintu Musoke, George Abola, Margaret Oguli and Margaret Zziwa. 

The second question was whether URA is under general management of the Ministry. Yes. Although it is operating under a Statute, URA is under Ministry of Finance. And I would like to say that as far as Ministry of Finance is concerned, we shall get the final decision on this arrangement as quickly as possible. So, we are not encouraging this caretaking arrangement. That is the position of the Ministry of Finance. We would like to move as fast as we can to get out of this temporary arrangement.  

Hon. Babihuga assumes that we have a problem in managing the affairs of URA with regard to Heritage Foundation caretaking. I would like to state that we are not having any problem. We are not being hindered from doing our jobs on our desks. We are working as Ministers and Ministers of State, and we are carrying out our responsibilities according to the Constitution of Uganda. We are doing the best we can, given the circumstances.   

Hon. Lukyamuzi would like me to go through his equation and say that it is QED (Quite easily proved). Now, if that is his equation and he has said it is true, then we shall just study it and see whether what he has said is true. I cannot now say that his equation is right or wrong. But what I would like to state is that Heritage Foundation is a legal body, established under the Companies Act, Cap. 85. I have stated its directors, and the memorandums and articles of association are here for anybody to peruse through. I will lay them on Table. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we adjourned consideration of the Universities and Other Institutions Bill, we had gone as far as clause 21. Unfortunately, we cannot proceed now because we do not have the required quorum. I will therefore suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes and see whether we can raise quorum to proceed with this business.

(Proceedings were suspended at 3.23 p.m. for 15 minutes)

(On resumption at 3.55 p. m, the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

Clause 21

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to move an amendment to clause 21 to delete the word “prior” appearing in the fist line, because it is redundant. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that we substitute the word “shall” for the word “may”, also appearing in the first line of the clause. This is because it is the duty of the National Council to make rules that govern it.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move that in clause 21 (a) we insert the words “the National Council” before the word “employee” at the beginning of the second line. This is for the sake of clarity. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to delete paragraph (b) and re-number the subsequent paragraphs because it is misplaced.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to

Clause 22

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 22 be substituted as follows:  

“22(1) The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, on the recommendation of the National Council and by Resolution of Parliament, establish a Public University.   

(2) The National Council shall, within thirty days of the publication of the Statutory Instrument in the Gazette, register the Public University established under subsection (1).” 

We feel that Parliament should be involved in the establishment of the university. 

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Government agrees that Parliament should play a role in the establishment of public universities. So I agree to the amendment, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I seek clarification with regard to the chairman’s proposed subsection 2, which reads as follows: 
“The National Council shall, within thirty days of the publication of the Statutory Instrument in the Gazette, register the Public University established under subsection (1).”  

What is so magical about thirty days? Wouldn’t thirty days be too short to enable the work to be completed? I seek clarification. 

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee thought that if we did not give a timeframe for the registration of the university, there would be too much dilly dallying, as there is sometimes. We are not very rigid on the thirty days, but we feel that there should be a timeframe. If the Member has got something that he thinks is more reasonable than the 30 days, we shall listen to him. We are not too rigid on that. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, based on the clarification given by the chairperson, I would like to move an amendment to make it 60 days within which the university should be registered, instead of 30 days. This timeframe will take into account areas where there could be delays in the bureaucratic arrangement. So, if the chairperson would accept, I beg to move that for flexibility we amend this to 60 days.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment is seconded, according to his neighbour. Is there anyone who would like to contribute to this amendment?

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I believe that the purpose of registering a university is a follow up of a very serious momentum to an institution that will benefit the people of our nation, particularly the students. I also think that 30 days gives enough time for this to be done. If we say 60 days, we may as well say 90 days and then the whole purpose of urgency is lost. I oppose that Motion. 

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Chairman, I support hon. Okumu’s proposal of 60 days. Sometimes the technicalities involved in registering a university may not be that simple. You may go to the Ministry of Education and find out that some technicalities are supposed to be put right before you register. If you are given only 30 days, you may not be able to accomplish what you would want to within the timeframe. So, 60 days is ample time. 

DR. MUTESASIRA: I would like to throw some light on the process. When you read 22 (1) you will see that most of the groundwork will have actually been done, and the Minister will have signed the Statutory Instrument. What the National Council for Higher Education will have to do, is actually to give a registration certificate to this university. Most of the work will have been done.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to

Clause 23

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 23(2) I beg to move that we insert the word “the” between the words “by” and “University” appearing in the second line. And I beg to also substitute the word “Chairperson” at the beginning of the last line, with the words “Vice Chancellor”. This is because the Vice Chancellor and the University Secretary do the day-to-day running of the university.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 23(4) I beg to substitute the figure (1), appearing in the first line, with the figure (3). The Committee thought it was a graphical error.

 (Question put and agreed to)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to

Clause 24

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 24 (2)(b) I beg to substitute the word “persons” appearing towards the end of the second line with the phrase “all persons including persons with disability”. We think people with disability should also be catered for in this.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not see the need for the amendment. I think it is redundant. This is not because I have anything against people with disabilities, I am actually a disabled person, but the word ‘persons’ really includes everybody. There is nothing in the original text that suggests that people with disabilities should not be catered for. So, when you say ‘persons’, without any exceptions, that really includes those who have some disabilities. So, I think the amendment is tautological and unnecessary. I think we should stick to the original text.

MR. KATURAMU: I support the amendment, Mr. Chairman. There is a very good justification for bringing in this emphasis. This is mainly because there has been a general assumption that people with disabilities are included in all programmes. If you consider the speed of implementing affirmative action, you will find that so much is left out in attending to the needs and problems affecting people with disabilities. Therefore, in the wisdom of the Committee on Social services, they put emphasis on persons with disabilities. I, therefore, support the amendment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, would you like to say something before I put the question?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We wanted that clause to include people with disabilities after reading the whole clause. It says:“dissemination of knowledge and giving opportunity of acquiring higher education…”  

People with disabilities have got special needs. They need Braille, hearing aids and others, so if you do not include them then you are not giving them an opportunity to acquire higher education.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move another amendment to clause 24. I beg to insert a new paragraph, (c), to read as follows: “the provision of accessible physical facilities to the users of the Public University.”  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This clause refers to functions. Why should this provision be under functions, because that is really a normal provision of physical facilities to enable normal operations of the university?  That is the clarification I am seeking.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, unless my understanding of English is different, but provision of facilities is a function.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to

Clause 25
DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in the marginal note, we substitute “a” for the word “the”, because there is more than one public university.
(Question put and agreed to)
Clause 25, as amended, agreed to

Clause 26

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to amend clause 26 (1) by substituting the word “a” appearing in the first line, with the word “the”. This is because there is only one visitor, who is the President.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to

Clause 27

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 27 as follows: 
The chairperson of the University Council and the members of the University Council should be placed as b and c respectively, and the Vice Chancellor and Deputy Vice Chancellors should follow. This is to take into consideration seniority in the universities.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to amend clause 27 by making sub-clauses (2) and (3) a substantive clause 28. In fact, we are moving what was 27(2) to be 28(1) and 27(3) becomes 28(2). The new clause 28 will read as follows:   
“(1) Admission to a Public University shall be open to all citizens of Uganda who are qualified for admission without discrimination by the admission committee.

(2) It shall be lawful for the Public University to admit to the university any person qualified for admission who is not a citizen of Uganda.”

And the Committee wishes to add 28(3) to read as follows:  
“The Admission Committee of a Public University shall take into consideration affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups on the basis of gender, disability, disadvantaged schools or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of re-dressing imbalances against them.”

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, my problem is with the new sub-clause (3). I agree with it up to “disadvantaged schools”, but when you say “or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of re-dressing imbalances against them”, this is beyond the mandate of Education. It is taken care of in Article 193(1) (c) and 193(4) of the Constitution, where we are talking about equalisation grants. 

I have no problem with sub-clauses (1) and (2), but when it comes to (3), I beg to move that we drop the phrase starting with “or any other” up to the end because it is way beyond the mandate of Education. There is no way Education can correct imbalances created by history, tradition and customs for other purposes of re-dressing these imbalances! The contribution is possible when I take into account disadvantaged schools only. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are opposing this amendment from were it says “or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances against them”. Is that what you are not happy with?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I am not happy with that, and if it could be dropped, I would have no problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Committee has made a re-arrangement, which seems to be acceptable to the Minister so far, but let us now go paragraph by paragraph.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I seek clarification both from the Minister and the Chairperson.  Some public universities may use other terminology where we have used ‘admission committee’. Won’t this be restrictive? Could we not find something that would be generally applicable?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I think this is an issue of language. Admission committee means an organ of the university that handles admissions. It could be called a board or whatever you would like. Before you substitute the words ‘admission committee’, you should look at the dictionary. Admission means allowing someone and a committee means a person or group of persons who do the job of admitting. I do not find any problem, what we are really looking for is the function. 

In this context we are talking about the admission committee. The word ‘admission’ is straight forward, and so is the word ‘committee’. A committee could consist of one man or a group of people carrying out the function of admitting people in the university. The terminology could change from place to place, we agree, but I think the meaning is there.

MR. ONGOM: In view of this doubt raised by hon. Okumu Ringa, maybe it would help if the Committee and the Minister just left out the expression “admission committee” and called it by the university. Even though they are admitted by a committee or anything else, it is still the university. Why do we not say “…discrimination by the University” so that it generally covers all situations?  If I am allowed I will move an amendment to improve on that, so that we delete “admission committee” and replace it with “university”.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member should not only read the last sentence, but he should read the whole sub-clause. It is clear that we are admitting to a public university, not a tertiary institution or a school. In a university there must be an organ which handles admission. You cannot say that admission to a public university shall be open to all citizens who are qualified for admission without discrimination by the university. The university has already been referred to in the opening line, unless he wants to propose another amendment.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I would like to thank hon. Okumu Ringa and hon. Ongom for their contributions. I beg to move that we drop the words “by the admission committee” and stop at “discrimination”.  I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I support it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the amendment being proposed is in the new clause 28 (1). With the proposed amendment it would read as follows:
“Admission to a Public University shall be open to all citizens of Uganda who are qualified for admission without discrimination.”  

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee had wanted to emphasise that in a public university there is an admission committee. It is not really the whole university that does the job. The committee does the job on behalf of the university.  

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment has now been formally moved. Hon. Ongom has spoken to it. Whose amendment was it? Was it the Minister's?

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Chairman, I dropped my amendment in favour of the Minister's amendment. 

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just wondering why the admission should be open to citizens only when now we are becoming international and privatising. Does this mean that students who come from other places will be denied admission?

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a second sub-clause.
Hon. Ongom, you support the Minister's amendment, and I think hon. Okumu is about to do the same. Supposing it read as follows:
"Admission to a Public University shall be open to all citizens of Uganda without discrimination who are qualified for admission". 

Could you refine it please?  While you are doing that, can we go to the next one? We shall skip this. You sort it out. It is really a very simple matter. The principle is accepted. Have you come up with something?

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Yes, Mr. Chairman. It reads:
“Admission shall be to all citizens of Uganda who qualify for admission without discrimination.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I have already said that those of you who have ideas on that amendment should put your heads together. Let us go to the next one. I will now put the question on sub-clause 2. It reads as follows:
“It shall be lawful for the Public University to admit to the University any person qualified for admission who is not a citizen of Uganda.”  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister moved an amendment to sub-clause (3). Is that correct? You moved that we stop at the word “schools” and delete the rest of the paragraph. That was the Minister's amendment. So it will read as follows: 
“The Admission Committee of a Public University shall take into consideration affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups on the basis of gender, disability, disadvantaged schools.” 
That is the Minister's amendment and he has spoken to it. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas it is important for a public university, or even a private university to take into account marginalised groups on the basis of gender and disability, it would be difficult to take into account disadvantaged schools in academic terms. We are not admitting schools. We are admitting individuals from those schools. So, I seek clarification as to what we mean by disadvantaged schools. You cannot consider disadvantaged schools during admission but you can consider candidates from those schools. How will this be done if it is supposed to be applied in terms of awarding concessionary marks? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, I hope you have read sub-clause (3). I am sure you have done so. It says, “…affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups on the basis of…” 
It is not referring to marginalised groups of schools. It is referring to marginalised groups of the students who are from those schools. Does that help you a bit?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you for your explanation, but all the same considering these disadvantaged groups is still a question mark. That is why I would like to seek clarification from the Minister. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am quite surprised by the clarification sought by hon. Okumu Ringa. Schools differ in terms of the physical facilities they have, the teaching personnel, library provisions and laboratory provisions, and yet they take the same exam.  The attempt being made in this provision is actually a very progressive attempt. We want to begin to say that within the perimeters of education, for example, can you figure out disadvantaged institutions in those terms I have been mentioning and find some way of granting candidates who come from those institutions affirmative action?   

Schools are a difficult affair, but provisions for working out regulations in the detailed criteria will be specified, but this provision is the entry point into working out details of these criteria. I was asked to clarify, I hope I have clarified.

DR. NYEKO PEN’MOGI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Under the marginalised groups you mentioned I thought we should also include the elderly. You talked about gender and disabilities, but I think the elderly are very important at this stage. We have the mature entry scheme, and these days we also hear a lot about people in their 50s and 60s going to P.1.  We need to – (Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Pen'Mogi, are you moving an amendment?  We are debating the Minister’s amendment and you have not moved any amendment as far as I know. Now, I am going to put the question to the Minister’s amendment.

DR. AKENY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am one of the members of the Committee. We discussed this issue at length and that is why we produced this report. So, I oppose the Minister’s amendment on this ground. When we look at history, some areas like Karamoja, Lango, et cetera did not have adequate ‘A’ Level schools to avail them an opportunity to send more students to universities. Also, there are some ethnic groups which could not have got the opportunity to get educated as compared to other ethnic groups. So, that is why we added disadvantaged schools created by history.  

Some societies are now awakening up to the fact that education is the pillar for development. So, in case more public universities are established, they would think of going for higher education. So, I oppose the Minister’s amendment.

MR.  KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr. Chairman, I am not opposing the Minister’s amendment, but I would like to add something to his amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you have another amendment?

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Yes. I do not know whether it is grammatically correct, but I think it is not correct to end a sentence without using the word ‘and’ or ‘or’ after listing a number of things. So, I would like to move an amendment to this effect:
“The Admission Committee of a Public University shall take into consideration affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups on the basis of gender, disability and disadvantaged schools”.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The draftsman would be able to take care of that, but is there any objection to that amendment? It is really a grammatical error. Let us leave it to the draftsman. Let us go on to the Minister’s amendment. I hope we are aware of what the Minister’s amendment was.  

MR. ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to add one or two words to support the Minister’s amendment. When you talk about history, tradition, custom or the elderly as requested by hon. Akeny, incidentally you will discover that most of these disadvantaged schools will fall in the same – (Interjection)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you move your amendment?  

MR. ONZIMA: I am not moving an amendment, I am only saying that most of these disadvantaged schools are located in the same areas that have been affected by history, tradition, and custom. So, I do not think we should go by the Minister’s amendment.  I thank you.

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I wish to oppose the Minister’s amendment and go by the amendment proposed by the Committee because of the reasons already outlined in that amendment. I do so because any lacuna in law can be exploited to the disadvantage of any group that has not been provided for. So, I would rather we went by the Committee’s amendment and passed it as proposed.  Thank you.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, this amendment was derived from Article 32 of the Constitution based on affirmative action. The only addition the Committee made was including the disadvantaged schools. This was an extract from our debate on affirmative action. We looked at the Constitution and we thought we would get an extract from the Constitution and just add disadvantaged schools.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have changed my mind. I will support the Minister on condition that he tells the House how this provision will be administered.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You make the law and there is machinery for implementation.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I need to go back to Article 193 of the Constitution, which refers to grants to local governments. One of the grants provided for is the equalisation grant, in accordance with clause 4 of this Article. Money from the equalisation grant is to be given to local governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions to the least developed districts. And it is based on the degree to which a local government unit is lagging behind a national average standard for a particular service. 

I also take into account the provisions of Article 32 on affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. All I am saying here is that the Education sector can implement affirmative action as far as disadvantaged schools are concerned, because 32(1) is a general provision for affirmative action.  

How would we put all this into operation in the Education sector? We would do this by dealing with gender, disability and also disadvantaged schools. If you continue with that list, you will be making a general provision to go into sectors that are not in education’s jurisdiction. 

As I said, those criteria will be worked out at the implementation stage and the regulations will spell out how you classify a disadvantaged school. This provision should not relate to those areas, because that is an issue for Article 193(4). You relate to marginalised areas and others whereas I am being specific in my jurisdiction, the educational institutions. So, I urge Members to really support this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, the fourth amendment at the new clause 28 reads as follows:
“The admission committee of a Public University shall take into consideration for admission, persons with special talents in sports, music, cultural and other social activities for their enhancement.” 
And I have re-drafted clause (1).

THE CHAIRMAN: No. You have just moved another amendment, that is clause 28(4), and we shall pronounce ourselves on that first. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now let us go back to sub-clause (1), which we had stood over. Have you come up with something?

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I have re-drafted the new clause 28(1) to read as follows: “Admission to a public university shall be open to all qualified citizens of Uganda without discrimination”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to

Clause 28.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 28 be substituted as follows: 
“(1) The National Council may, after consultation with the University Council and the Senate of a Public University, by Statutory Order – 
    (a) establish any college or institution as a constituent college of that public university
 
    (b) declare any public tertiary institution as a constituent college of that public university. 

(2) Where the National Council establishes or declares a college or institution to be a constituent college of a University – 
    (a) the Chancellor of that university shall appoint a principal on the recommendation of the University Council from three candidates recommended by the Senate of the university.

    (b) the Chancellor shall appoint a deputy principal on the recommendation of the University Senate with the approval of the University Council. 

    (c) Subject to sub-section (4), the appointments board of the University shall appoint members of the academic and administrative staff and other employees of the college in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  

    (d) The governing council of the former public tertiary institution shall function and have such responsibilities as is provided by Statutes of the University relating to constituent colleges of that university. 

(3) For the avoidance of doubt, a public tertiary institution declared to be a constituent college under paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) shall cease to be a body corporate and all rights, assets and liabilities of the governing council of that institution shall vest in the University Council to which it is a constituent college to the same extent and for the same estate or interest as they were previously vested in the governing council and shall be held and enjoyed in trust for the benefit of that Constituent College.  

(4) Where the National Council declares a public tertiary institution to be a constituent college of a university, the National Council shall make provision for – 

    (a) the transfer of the staff and employees of the institution whose services are required, to the university or another public tertiary institution; 

    (b) the retirement benefits of the staff and employees of the institution whose services are terminated because of the declaration of the constituent college.

(5) All continuing students of an institution declared to be a constituent college of a university shall transfer to the constituent college for their studies without any further assurance and all subsequent recruitment of students to, and the conduct of courses of study in the college shall be made in accordance with procedures and standards set by the university. 

(6) For any other matter relating to constituent colleges, which is not provided for under this Act, general regulations made by the National Council in that behalf shall apply together with any statutes made by the relevant university relating to its constituent colleges.”

More details on the status of constituent colleges and the appointing authority are required to avoid the conflicts between constituent colleges and the relevant universities. That is our justification.

THE CHAIRMAN: We will now go one by one. I will now put the question to sub-clause (1). 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I had a problem with sub-clause 1.  I thought you were going to deal with (a) and (b) differently, but that is okay. 

I have a problem with clause 28 (2). I would like to move that we add the word “tertiary” before “institution” in the operation paragraph of (2). So, it would read as follows:
“Where the National Council establishes or declares a college or a tertiary institution to be a constituent college of university”. This is to make it consistent.

DR. MUTESASIRA: I have no objection, but that means we have to be consistent throughout.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to the addition of “tertiary”, and in sub-clause (1) we have mentioned a public tertiary institution, so we should mention a public tertiary institution for consistency.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is really okay. I will now put the question to hon. Okumu Ringa’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to sub-clause (3), which is on page 11?

(Question put and agreed to)

Sub-clause (4), agreed to

Sub-clause (5), agreed to

Sub-clause (6), agreed to

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya) Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that this afternoon, the Committee of the whole House continued considering the Bill entitled “Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999” and adopted clauses 22 to 28 with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have received some requests from some Sessional Committee chairpersons indicating that they would like to undertake tours upcountry. While it is very good for Sessional Committees to do so, at this point in time we can ill afford those tours.  Consequently, I have declined to authorise two Sessional Committees, Public Service and Works, to undertake the proposed trips. 

I have also learnt that another Sessional Committee is proposing to do the same, although they have not written to inform me or to seek permission. I would like to inform all the chairpersons and all the Members that such tours shall not take place until we have dispose of the important business before the House. So, if there is anybody planning or even trying to seek such permission, he or she is notified that such permission will not be entertained.
The House is adjourned until 2.00 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8th November 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
