Wednesday 8th November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: I do not seem to see the hon. Member for Soroti Municipality. Does anybody know his whereabouts?  Or is there any volunteer to ask the questions on his behalf?   

MR. ERESU ELYANYU JOHN (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): Mr. Speaker, I will stand in for hon. Mukula, who for some reason is not yet here, but he will be here very soon.

The question reads as follows: On 15th March 2000, Parliament passed a resolution to disarm the Karimojong warriors and prevent them from attacking neighbouring districts. The resolution further urged Government to provide avenues to enable the Karimojong engage in self-sustaining development projects.  
Could the Hon. Minister inform the House: 
(i) What steps Government has taken to implement the Resolution? 

(ii) Whether the requisite funding has been secured to implement the resolution? If so, how much has been budgeted in this financial year? 

(iii) How many lives have been lost in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts as a result of internal wrangles amongst the warriors, or in the search of animals and property, ever since 15th March 2000 to-date?  

Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Steven Kavuma): I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of this House. I would also like to thank the volunteer for asking the question brought forward by hon. Mike Mukula.  

As you may all realise, this question is multi-sectoral, in that it involves a number of Ministries. These Ministries have activities to carry out in order to ensure successful and smooth implementation of the resolution passed by this august House. With instructions from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister I will therefore give Government’s position on the question.

You will all recall that on 15th March 2000, this august House passed a resolution requiring Government to take certain action in response to the atrocities committed by the Karimojong warriors in Karamoja and in the neighbouring districts. Hon. Members will also recall that on 4th May 2000, I did read to this House the initial progress report towards the implementation of the said resolution. 

Government has fully executed the immediate phase. That phase included the deployment of an adequate forces, provision of necessary equipment and logistics, the driving of the Karimojong warriors out of the neighbouring districts, ensuring that fresh incursions are put to an end and the recovery of the rustled animals.

General Situation.  
The UPDF managed to move the Karimojong out of the neighbouring districts. Since then, however, there have been inter-ethnic clashes within the region itself. The UPDF and all the other forces operating in Karamoja have all along played a pivotal role in combating these most unfortunate clashes.  

I would like to inform this House, and the nation at large, that since the completion of the first phase, all our forces have embarked on a systematic method of dealing with the lawless Karimojong who are terrorising the law abiding Karimojong within Karamoja. This was part of the implementation of this House’s resolution. And I want to assure Members of this House that the UPDF and those other forces will continue doing that noble task. 

On phase II, hon. Members will recall that we did undertake to embark on the implementation of phase II of the resolution. I wish to report that Government has taken serious steps towards the full implementation of phase II of the resolution. These steps include: 
    • Internal consultations within the Karamoja region, to sensitise the population, with a view to attaining peaceful surrender of the guns to Government, by those who wish to do so.  
    • External consultations, with a view to mobilising regional consensus on the matter of disarmament, in order to ensure sustainable peace in the region. This will pave way for the effective implementation of development programmes. 

We have continued to have inter-ministerial consultations to concretise Government position, and efforts are underway in this rather complicated exercise. 

I wish to report that the main activity now is putting final touches on the mobilisation of the necessary financial resources to fund the entire programme. And this is in its final stages. 

I also wish to report that UPDF made a very comprehensive plan for the exercise. We are carrying out consultations with the relevant authorities, to ensure smooth implementation of the same. 

I also wish to report that the following have so far been achieved:
Government has launched an FM radio station in Moroto to facilitate easy dissemination of information regarding the disarmament programme and general development in the Karamoja area. It will also sensitise the population in other vital areas of development and total disarmament of the Karimojong warriors.

Government has also provided seeds and other planting materials to the population, with a view to making the population in Karamoja realise that they can diversify their livelihood and their economic activities. This is in preference to depending on unlawfully acquired weapons. 

I also would like to report that Government has already mobilised enough manpower to undertake the exercise to its logical conclusion.

Permit me now to give some insight on the planned activities. The following activities have been planned to take place up to about May 2001, obviously given the availability of the necessary resources, which, as I said, Government is in the final stages of mobilising.

There will be intensification of communication through radio programmes, and other forms of communication, on sensitisation and preparation of the Karimojong for the disarming of the lawless Karimojong holding illegal guns.  Government shall continue to mobilise through meetings at district, county and sub-county levels, involving leadership in the entire Karamoja region.  

Government will open up major trunk roads and the necessary security roads in the region to facilitate smooth execution of the disarmament exercise and sustenance of peace and stability in the region. Once accomplished, this will greatly improve on the mobility of the forces that are charged with the responsibility of ensuring that there is peace and stability in the region on a sustainable basis.  

Government will continue with its efforts to finalise the mobilisation of all the required logistics and the further deployment of all the necessary personnel to undertake the exercise of disarmament to its conclusion. In doing so, one of the things that is going to be attended to will be the setting up of a mechanism for expeditious administration of justice at levels that are near the population where these atrocities are being committed, and where crimes may be committed during the disarmament exercise.   

Government will continue to train vigilantes or local forces who will play a very vital role in ensuring that peace and stability in the region will be a matter for all seasons, even when the disarmament exercise is completed and some forces have been withdrawn.

Government will continue to intensify regional, national and cross-border consultations and further interaction with authorities in the neighbouring states and regional bodies. This is to ensure that the mobilisation and disarmament exercise does not meet problems that may emanate from activities that may be carried out outside Uganda.

I must emphasise that Government will continue and conclude consultations with all the leaders from Karamoja. All leaders will be involved, right from the national level, and here I have in mind our Colleagues, Members of Parliament from Karamoja and from the neighbouring districts. And I must commend them on behalf of Government for the very positive way they have looked at this programme. I must commend the efforts they have put in so far and the willingness they have shown in continuing to move with Government to get rid of this unfortunate phenomenon within Karamoja.  

In one of the questions, the Member asked what the required funds were and whether they have been mobilised.  I already said that Government is in the final stages of mobilising the necessary funds. And for the benefit of this House, the estimated cost is around shs.11 billion.  

Allow me to say that Government has already moved impressively in the direction of full compliance with the resolution of this august House. It was intended to achieve, among other things, total disarmament of the Karimojong warriors, who are terrorising citizens of Uganda in the Karamoja region. I did also say that what is left now is the funding aspect, of which Government has already identified ways and means of providing for it. The rest is really mobilisation and release of the funds.

“How many lives have been lost in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts as a result of internal wrangles amongst the warriors, or in the search of animals and property, ever since 15th March 2000 to date?”  

It is sad to note that we have lost a number of lives in Karamoja at the hands of these Karimojong warriors. It is with regret that I give the following report. According to the information available to me, by the end of October, close to 300 people had lost their lives in this unfortunate phenomenon. Government is determined to move, and is moving quickly to put an end to this nuisance, which has proved to be expensive in terms of personnel and property in the region. 

I would like to call upon these lawless warriors in the region to embrace what many people in the region have already embraced, namely the willingness to surrender their guns voluntarily. I am aware that among the Karimojong, and among the warriors themselves, a group of youth are determined to resist this exercise, they say even if it is with a little bit of military muscle. 

I want to send a very clear message to the youth who entertain such ideas - not all of them believe in this - to abandon that attitude. That attitude will not pay. They will regret the amount of suffering that will be caused not only to themselves, but also to all Ugandans in that region, if they persist in resisting voluntary disarmament. At the end of the day, Government will not spare any effort, but will use all coercive means in its power to end this problem.

As I end, allow me, on behalf of Government, to thank the women, the elderly, the elite and the leaders in that region. They have demonstrated a commitment to see this problem end in their region. Some of these groups are now being targeted by the youth I talked about, just because of that. I would like to commend these groups that are allying with the progressive forces, led by Government, to end this sad state of affairs in the Karamoja region.  
I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before you seek clarifications, you have heard the Minister say that the question he has just answered is multi-sectoral. It involves other areas not specifically within his jurisdiction. I recognise that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister would like to supplement what the hon. Minister of State for Defence has already said. I will give him an opportunity to do so then you will be able to seek clarifications.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi Apolo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do endorse what the Minister of State for Defence has said, and he rightly said that this matter is multi-faceted. 

Let me add to the dimensions he has covered, for example, the issue of water, which is extremely important. This is why we held several inter-ministerial meetings to ensure that the dams were ready. And you must be aware that dams like Kailong and kulo-dwong are ready, and once you settle the question of water, you also minimise the excessive transiting. So that matter is at hand.  

With regard to education, there is the issue of establishing mobile schools. These schools are very relevant to the type of problems happening in that area. I think there is also multi-grade teaching, where you might teach various groups when they are in small numbers. You must also be aware that Her Excellency the Vice President went to Karamoja and camped there, and as a result, people are now eating beans that they planted. They called it the Kazibwe harvest. And I want to pay tribute to her Excellency the Vice President for this contribution.

This issue is also international. When there is gun trafficking, we have to interface closely with our neighbours so that the matter is handled at an international level. 

We also require a major road to secure the place. The matter is inter-ministerial. It is multi-faceted. We would also like to ask you to give us some advice on handling this very difficult problem, which of course has its roots in colonialism. During the colonial period, certain mistakes were made, but we cannot blame all the problems on the colonialists. We must own up. I thank you.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the answer we have received from the hon. Minister of Defence and the Prime Minister, it seems there are two sides to the problems of Karamoja. There are the immediate problems, like disarmament, and then the long-term problems like education, water and food. 

The Minister's answer was extremely puzzling. There was a resolution passed here in March to disarm the Karimojong. This exercise was supposed to have started by July, but there has been procrastination, and as a result the Karimojong who had guns started raiding furiously. I do not know how many times the Bokora have been invaded, and I think more than 300 Bokora or at least close to 1000 have been killed in this process. 

I do not know who the hon. Minister of Defence expects to carry out this exercise. One of the shocking things he said in his answer was that Government has asked the Karimojong to surrender their arms, that is “those who wish”. Those are exactly the words he used! Is that how Government implements its resolutions! “Those who wish - (Interruption)

MR. OTIM OMARA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I am just two days old here, having just returned from Karamoja. The Karimojong are just waiting for communication from Government as to when the disarmament exercise will commence. No information has been given to the Karimojong to return the guns, so they are waiting. In fact, they are just about to start burning grass for pasture in the neighbouring districts, and this will threaten even the beans and sorghum you were talking about. The Kazibwe beans and sorghum will be burnt in the gardens. Thank you.

DR. MALLINGA: The hon. Minister mentioned the radio when he said those words. I would like him to clarify how radio is going to stop those warriors. Information has been available to the Karimojong for as long as I remember. I listen to Karimojong programmes often. I have never heard, even once, that Government has tried to use that media to stop cattle rustling in Karamoja.  

Even if this is an inter-ministerial problem and there has had to be interaction between the Ministries, I think I can summarise the Minister of Defence’s statement as ‘I do not know and I do not care’. I think that is what he told us today. So, in a follow up, could the Minister tell us how many arms have been collected from the Karimojong since July? That is when the exercise was supposed to start.  

On the question of dams, the hon. Prime Minister did not really tell us how many dams have been erected in Karamoja. It is wrong to put the blame on the colonialists. How many years have we been independent and nothing -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are debating this matter under the pretext of seeking clarification. If you have nothing else to seek clarification on, I suggest you resume your sit.

DR. MALLINGA: I will summarise now, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know from the hon. Prime Minister what commitment there is to education and water dams. I would also like to know whether the Kazibwe beans will continue in Karamoja or whether this was just a short one-time thing and that is the end. Perhaps these beans are supposed to reproduce themselves annually, or are we going to follow up this problem?

From the hon. Minister for Defence, I would really like a concrete answer. The people of Karamoja are waiting. Can you tell us when the exercise is going to start? Procrastination has just made the situation worse.  Everybody is going to raid for the last time. So, can we have commitment from the Ministry of Defence that this is going to be done?  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OTAGE: I appreciate the programme the Government has undertaken since the last incursion of Karimojong into the neighbouring districts. What perturbs me at the moment is what has been presented both by the Minister of State for Defence and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as a medium-term plan and a long-term plan. As of this afternoon, there is hardly a short–term plan! I want the Minister to assure the districts that neighbour Karamoja that when the next dry season sets in there will be no disturbance from the Karimojong like last year. That is the answer the constituents would like to hear from Government. The other issues can come in due course.  

Secondly, these incursions have been affecting a number of districts. Why has the consultation been restricted to Karamoja only and not to the neighbouring districts?  This is dialogue! This is communication! We need the involvement of the communities in those districts.  

Thirdly, why have the councils not been used to settle this particular problem? I would like to know from the Minister.  Thank you.

MR. TAIRE IDHWEGE: Whereas, I am concerned about the plight of the Karimojong, I am also concerned about lives of the people who work in Karamoja, having worked there myself. In the good times back then, there used to be a Karamoja allowance or a hardship allowance. I wonder whether it is still there, because people have lost their lives in Karamoja. Thank you. 

MR. OTIM OMARA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join my Colleagues in expressing my own sentiments about the manner in which the Ministry and Government generally, is handling this matter of Karamoja. As I mentioned earlier, I am just two days old, having just returned from Karamoja. The dry season is approaching in Karamoja, and this is usually the period that the Karimojong start moving west and south in search of water and pasture. 

It is true kulo-dwong dam has been dug, and another one called Kailong has also been dug. Both dams are in Kotido District, they happen to be in Labwor County although the beneficiaries are pastrolists from Jie. The workmanship for the two dams, however, has not been very satisfactory. The banks of these dams were torn off by water and they have since been waiting for the contractors to come and rebuild the dams, but nothing has been done up to now.  

My main concern is about the disarmament and the arming of LDUs in Labwor County. The Minister recalls that sometime this year, in May -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am inclined to think that you are getting involved in debating the issue. Just ask the Minister to specifically clarify certain issues.

MR. OTIM OMARA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I know from the Minister why the arming of the LDUs in Labwor county, which had been given a go ahead by Government, has delayed whereas other LDUs in districts neighbouring Karamoja have since been armed?  Thank you.

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to know from the Minister when disarmament will start, since the dry season is about to start in Karamoja and they are about to move with their cattle to Moroto County, which always suffers. What measures does he have on the ground to discourage the warriors from moving with their guns to the neighbouring districts when the dry season starts? I thank you.

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During a quick working visit by His Excellency the President to Moroto District, in particular Matanyi hospital, he pronounced that the MPs could mobilise A’Level leavers to be trained at the Law Development Centre so as to dispense justice as fast as possible. Could I get clarification as to whether His Excellency’s pronouncement still stands?  

Secondly, in the Minister’s response to these questions, he did mention that leaders are kept in mind. I have been around all this time, but I do not remember being consulted at any time.  

Thirdly, there is an allegation that sensitisation on disarmament is going on in the region. I am in touch with what is going on in the region. The people of Dodoth, whom I represent here, are asking when this will take place.  Upon my visit to the –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us be fair. Let us not take the whole afternoon asking all these questions. We have some other business. Let us have your last question. 

MR. ILUKORI: Mr. Speaker, during my visit to the Republic of Kenya I did consult with colleagues, who are also pastrolists, on the other side. They have built trunk roads near the border, in line with this idea of disarmament. How many roads have we attempted to construct in the Karamoja region in preparation for this exercise? And when shall we be consulted, so that we work together in this particular venture? Thank you very much.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister with respect to the recruitment of the local personnel from the various areas of Teso and Karamoja to serve in the disarmament exercise. These are young boys were recruited as LDUs. They work under very trying conditions. Some of them get wounded or even killed. When will the law come in place to protect these people?  

Whereas we have already recruited volunteers to go and help in the disarmament in future, right now there are people who are working in buffer zones between the Teso and Karamoja regions. They repel the invaders who come to raid. There is no law in place to protect these people, in event of any casualty they may sustain. Is Government planning to put up a law to regulate that?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am under the impression that you have jumped the gun. You are now dealing with question number two. That is my impression. I do not think you should open debate on that. Let us get the Minister to respond to some of these questions.

MR. KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. With your permission, I will start with hon. Eresu’s question. I urge my Friend, hon. Eresu, to hold on until I address the second question. I have to answer these questions according to how they appear on our order paper. That is the short answer I would like to give him. 

Hon. Mallinga wondered who we expect to carry out this exercise of disarming the warriors in Karamoja. In reply to that I would like to say that Government has put up a team involving all the concerned Ministries. Government has mobilised the necessary personnel from the armed wing of Government to compliment the political team. Where military muscle is necessary they will carry out this exercise.  

Hon. Mallinga also wondered when the exercise will begin, and this has been asked alot. As I did indicate earlier, this exercise has actually started. It is being implemented in phases. Some phases are ongoing and others are yet to start. Kindly, as leaders, please help carry this message home. I know some of the handicaps we have. At times it is difficult to communicate with the population. But if they thought that everything is going to be implemented on day one, that is not the approach Government has chosen. We have a well-phased plan to achieve disarmament in its totality in the interest of this country, and that programme is on going. It has already started. So, Government is not defaulting on its undertakings and promises to the people in the region.  

Hon. Mallinga wondered how radio could be useful in this kind of exercise. The Ugandan society has now moved very fast in embracing the culture of listening to messages from radio. We realised that the only radio station that was reaching Karamoja had very limited airtime and was not sufficient to augment the efforts of Government in complying with the resolution of this Parliament.  Government therefore decided to open an FM radio station for Karamoja, to address this question. The purpose of this station is to reach as many people as possible. We are not stopping at opening the station. We are also facilitating the listeners by providing radios so that they can follow what is happening.  

Nobody should have any doubt about the wisdom of using the radio as a media of communication within the population. Those who have some experience with Karamoja will know that if you want to have a meeting, without radio you would have to drive so many miles from the headquarters of the district to go and inform the local people to mobilise for a meeting the next day. And you can even drive back without having done any job. With all the expenses involved, in terms of logistics and in terms of the security risk our officers working in Karamoja take, you come back the following day to depend on the people who might have disseminated the information, so that you can get people to address. This is the gap we want to bridge. If there was a radio in every kraal, or at least in a kraal that could serve others with information, it would become easier to carry this message home, and it would be less expensive. That is the logic that Government saw in using radio as a means of communication and a vital tool in the implementation of this disarmament programme.  

It is not true, and I regret if I gave that impression to hon. Mallinga that Government, in approaching this problem, has adopted the attitude of ‘I do not know, I do not care’. Government is serious! This is why we have put in place the programmes I have talked about. I did not think I would be able to come here with the entire programme and read it out to this House in the short time that we have to respond to these questions for oral answer. There is also the issue of how wise it is to give the details of the programme when the people you intend to affect are listening. They would devise ways and means of defeating or frustrating the programmes. I would like hon. Mallinga to join other Ugandans and have confidence in the Government and in the programmes we are putting in place to deal with this very complex matter.  

Hon. Mallinga was also unhappy about the words “those who wish”. I would like to further emphasise the way we are approaching the matter. First, we are giving the warriors an opportunity to voluntarily surrender the guns, and I must say there is a sizeable number of them who have expressed that wish. Those do not have to be dealt with harshly through military action. That is why I used the term ‘those who wish’. I think I also gave a very strong warning to those, especially the youth, who have vowed to resist this exercise of disarming the lawless Karimojong.  My appeal to those who want to surrender their guns voluntarily is not a replacement of whatever forces Government may marshal up and deploy against those who may wish to give problems to the law abiding citizens in this region. We are giving them an opportunity. We hope they will take it up. For those who do not take it up, the coercive arm of Government will deal with them. Definitely the long arm of the law will get them.  

Hon. Otage wondered why we were not involving the neighbouring districts in our interaction. I said earlier that we would soon continue with this. I do not see why the hon. Member from Dodoth also forgot. Maybe it is because quite a number of weeks have elapsed since we had a meeting to address this problem. We have not abandoned the policy of working with the leaders in Karamoja and leaders from the neighbouring districts. Government thought it prudent to do this when we have finalised with important aspects like mobilisation of resources. And as I did indicate, this is an issue that is now in its final stages. Very soon, maybe sooner than what you may think, we shall invite leaders from Karamoja and the neighbouring districts to come and join hands. This is why I thanked them for the co-operation and the spirit they have shown in willing to co-operate with the Government in this exercise. So, it is a question of time. Because of the hardship prevailing in Karamoja, I know that the weeks may have seemed very long, but we are moving towards that direction.   

During the process of consultation, and actually the execution of the entire programme, leaders at the local level, right from the district, county, the sub-county and the kraals will be part and parcel of the implementation. They are all going to be involved. Arrangements are already under way. Plans are in place to ensure that the entire exercise is handled in collaboration with all the leadership from Government, the national level and down to the local government level. 

I will leave the issue of Karamoja allowance to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. I will proceed to hon. Otim Omara’s question. He asked how the Ministry was proceeding to handle this matter and then he went on to talk about the dams. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister had said something as far as the dams were concerned, and of course, as hon. Otim knows, dams are not primarily a matter for the Ministry of Defence.  

On arming the LDUs in Labwor, I would like to share the concern the hon. Member expressed. I also know that we are working on this issue. I think, either yesterday or the day before, I received communication from the leadership in Karamoja about this issue. I want to assure hon. Otim that this is going to be part of the implementation of the overall disarmament programme. And I want him to help me inform all those concerned that this matter will be attended to in good time.  

On the issue of A’level leavers helping in the administration of justice, I did mention, although I did not give details, that Government has a plan to set up a mechanism that will facilitate the expeditious administration of justice. That could very well be one of the steps to be taken under that arrangement. 

I have already answered the other question on whether you were ever consulted. It is my hope that you and other leaders remember that we have had a mukutano. I have had interactions with the chairman of your group. We were supposed to have a meeting sometime, but it so happened that there were some other more demanding activities in the region and it was postponed. But as I said, I am coming back to that. We have not abandoned consultations. They will come up very soon.  

I can undertake to provide the details on roads shortly after some consultations with my Colleague, the Minister of Works. As a matter of policy, however, part of this programme is to open up roads that are thought to be vital in effectively implementing the resolution of Parliament. We also want to ensure that at the end of the exercise there will be sufficient capacity within the region to enable easy and quick mobility of whatever forces that will be left with the job of ensuring that there is peace and stability along our borders and in the region.  

Those were the questions that were asked of me, Mr. Speaker, and I thank you very much. I am prepared to go to my next question.  

THE SPEAKER: Is there any volunteer to ask the next question? We have specific time allocated to this subject. We do not have the whole day. You must bear that in mind. So, when you are asking your questions, be specific. Bear in mind that there is specific time allotted for this issue, which we have even already exceeded.  

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Mbale): I will pose the question, Mr. Speaker. 
The Local Defence Unit personnel throughout the country are a pathetic site and seem not to be catered for by the state, yet their supplementary support to the Police is very vital. 

Could the Minister inform the House:  
    (i) Which Ministry is responsible for the LDUs?
  
    (ii) How much money has been disbursed for the past three years, on a district to district basis, to cater for their remuneration?  Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Steven Kavuma): I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. In answer to this question, I beg to report to this august House that Government set up a committee involving the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Local Government, the Department of Security in the President’s office, and the Ministry of Defence. The committee is to look into the question of streamlining the position of the Local Defence Forces. 

I am happy to report that recently this committee conclusively dealt with the matter. The committee has now proposed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs takes necessary further steps to cause a Bill governing the Local Defence Forces to be presented to Cabinet and to this august House for enactment into law.  That process, I am also reliably informed, is ongoing with appropriate speed.  I think this will partly address the question put by hon. Aisu. 

With regard to Local Defence Forces assisting the UPDF in its operations, Government ensures provision of all necessary operational logistics. Government will invoke the existing legal framework, although much of this is now being reviewed. Under the NRA Statute, we have legal provisions that cover persons who have been asked to come and work alongside the UPDF. So, when we enlist members of the Local Defence Forces to work alongside the UPDF, they are governed by that law. For those who work with the Police, the Police Act also has a provision in which these persons are deployed as SPCs (Special Police Constables). So, they are covered.  

The problem is that not all the Local Defence Forces, by whatever names they are called, fall into those categories. There is therefore a need to enact a Bill into law to comprehensively address the issue of these auxiliary forces. As I have already said, plans are underway to present that Bill to this august House.  

With regard to which Ministry is responsible, by necessary implication, unless Parliament thinks otherwise, the view is that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come with this law. Therefore, the Ministry of Internal Affairs will be responsible for this force.  

I will give you information about funds that have been disbursed by Government to cater for documented Local Defence Forces involved in operations alongside the UPDF. The following is the information, year by year:

In the financial year 1995/96, a sum of 12.7 billion shillings was disbursed. In 1996/97, a sum of six billion shillings was disbursed. In 1997/98, a figure close to three billion was released. In 1998/99, 3.6 billion shillings was released. In 1999/2000, 3.1 billion shillings was released.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have clarifications from three people, one each.

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: I would like the Minister to clarify on the fate of the monies that go to a group formerly called zanzasi vigilantes, later turned into an LDU unit. In the process of all this, this group was disbanded and money continued to go through the third division in Mbale, purportedly for payment of non-existent vigilante forces. Thank you.

MR. ONAPITO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question relates to the LDUs in Katakwi. While the people greatly appreciate the role of the LDUs at the border between Katakwi and Karamoja, there have been persistent calls for an increase. Given that the dry season is approaching, there is fear that the numbers are still too thin to contain potential infiltration by rustlers. So, could the Minister tell us whether the Ministry is considering increasing the number of the LDUs in Katakwi?  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his response on the work of LDUs.  LDUs in Nebbi District have done tremendous work to support the efforts of the regular army. Our concern has been that at times when the LDUs are incorporated in the army to go and perform certain tasks, we are not sure whether they are given service numbers. If anything happened to them, could the family trace them? Could the Minister tell the House whether or not these LDUs are given service numbers and whether they have files with the respective responsible Ministries? I thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. LDUs, SPCs and home guards in operational areas operate alongside the UPDF Officers and men, but while SPCs and LDUs are paid, the home guards do not get any payment, and yet they do the same thing. Could the Minister clarify how he is dealing with this issue, because many reports have come from operational areas about home guards?

MR. KAVUMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad with the question raised by hon. Wambi. I would appreciate a little more information so that I can follow up this information in more concrete terms. I undertake to liase with him so that I get the necessary information to follow up the matter.  

Hon. Onapito expressed the concern that the number of forces that are supposed to contain the lawless Karimojong when they cross into Katakwi during the dry season may not be enough. For every area that borders Karamoja, Government will ensure that we have sufficient personnel and logistics to contain the menace that may threaten the people in the districts neighbouring Karamoja. 

I would like to thank the LDUs in Nebbi for the very good job they are doing, and as the Member of Parliament has said, they should keep the spirit up. I want to assure the hon. Member that when we take on the LDUs, as I indicated earlier, we have provisions in the NRA Statute that govern their relationship with the UPDF. Definitely, we keep records so that it can be easy to trace anybody, should the need arise.  

Hon. Byaruhanga said that SPCs and LDUs are paid, but home guards are not paid. When UPDF takes on anybody, irrespective of whether they are called LDUs, vigilantes, home guards, they become subject to our law and they receive the treatment that they should receive. I believe the Police also treats them the same. 

I think the important thing behind the question is to ensure that a comprehensive Bill addressing the status and regulation of the LDUs and all the auxiliary forces comes to this House. And as I did say, we are already working on that, and a Bill will soon be presented to this august House.  

I want to thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity, and I thank all the Members who have very patriotically approached the matters that have been raised in these two important questions.

MR. KIBALE WAMBI: Mr. Speaker, about a month ago, from the very Chair you are seated in, you wisely ruled that no Members of Parliament shall come into this House dressed in attire similar to bedroom curtains, kitchen curtains and bathroom curtains. Is it in order for about three or four Members of Parliament to appear here in this House dressed in similar material that you ruled out of order? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Who are they?

MR. KIBALE WAMBI: Hon. Ongom, Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, and one of them has disappeared.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Ongom is not properly attired, but hon. Elly Tumwine is properly attired. 

I will ask the Clerk to ascertain whether we have quorum in order to transact the next business. If there are people outside, please let them come in. We are taking a count in order to ascertain whether we have quorum. If we fail to raise quorum, we shall take to role call.    

We have a quorum, but before we proceed I would like to caution you. It has become apparent that during the last few days we have been sitting and easily realising quorum, but 10 minutes thereafter, people stream out.  That is not really being responsible! You are not simply here to realise quorum and walk away. You are supposed to participate in the discussion and pass the law. So, we shall keep an eye on that, but there is no way I can enforce it. I can only request you to ensure that we have quorum when we are passing the law.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

Clause 29.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr. Mutesasira): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 29 (2) we substitute the word “five” appearing in the second line with the word “four”. This is because the term of office for the Chancellor should be less than that of the Vice Chancellor, to ensure continuity in case a new Chancellor is appointed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to

Clause 30

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to propose that clause 30(1) be amended as follows:
“There shall be a Vice Chancellor, who shall be responsible for the academic, administrative and financial affairs of the University.” This is a consequential amendment after the definition of the Vice Chancellor.  

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification on clause 30 (2) and (3), which read as follows: 
“(2) The Vice Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the University Council from among three candidates recommended by the Senate. 

(3) A search committee composed of two members from the University Council and three members from the University Senate shall identify suitable candidates for the post of Vice Chancellor and forward them to the Senate to nominate three candidates for recommendation to the University Council.”  

I just want to know why we are not consistent in (2) and (3). I was just looking at the sequence, and I would like clarification from the chairperson.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is the problem with the expression “a search committee”? 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: No, Sir. The sequence is a search committee composed of two members from the University Council and three members from the University Senate.  These five constitute the search committee and they recommend three candidates to the Senate. The Senate recommends to Council and Council recommends to the Chancellor.  That is the sequence, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you satisfied, hon. Okumu Ringa?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I am not satisfied, Mr. Chairman, because the sequence could have been the search committee first and then appointment. But if the Minister feels that it is an appropriate sequence, then I have no objection. Logically, however, it should have been that way.

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to

Clause 31

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 31(1), I beg to move that we delete the words “council of the” appearing at the end of the third line. This is because they are redundant. We also beg to substitute the word “three” appearing at the beginning of the second line with the word “two”. Two Vice Chancellors are thought to be enough.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I have an objection to the phraseology. We are not talking about two Vice Chancellors. We are talking about two Deputy Vice Chancellors. In the report of the chairperson he is referring to two vice Chancellors and yet the Bill mentions Deputy Vice Chancellors. So, if the chairperson concedes, I would like to move an amendment to change this to Deputy Vice Chancellors not Vice Chancellors.  I beg to move.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, that was a typographical error. It was missed out, so I do not think it should come in as an amendment. It is the Committee's amendment, but we concede that there was a typographical error.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is a typographical error. It can be attended to. I will put the question to the Committee’s amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we would like to substitute clause 31(3) to read as follows: 
“(3) The First Deputy Vice Chancellor shall- 
    (a) assist the Vice Chancellor in the performance of his or her functions and in that regard be responsible for the academic affairs of the University.  

    (b) in the absence of the Vice Chancellor perform the functions of Vice Chancellor; 

    (c) perform such other functions that may be delegated to him or her by the Vice Chancellor or assigned by the University Council.”

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: I beg to add a new clause 31(4), to read as follows:
“(4) The Second Deputy Vice Chancellor shall-
    (a) assist the Vice Chancellor in the performance of his or her functions and in that regard shall oversee the financial affairs of the University

    (b) be responsible for the planning and development of the University

    (c) perform such other functions that may be delegated to him or her by the Vice Chancellor or assigned by the University Council.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to

Clause 32, agreed to

Clause 33

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to propose that clause 33(3) be amended by substituting the expression “be responsible for” with the expression “assist the First Deputy Vice Chancellor in.”

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 33(3). The current amendment proposed by the chairperson reads as follows: 
“The Academic Registrar shall assist the First Deputy Vice Chancellor in the administration and organisation of all academic matters including examinations, and undergraduate and postgraduate studies and research.”  

This leaves out an important function of the Academic Registrar, which is admissions. So, if I am permitted I would like to move an amendment to that clause so that the clause reads as follows:
“The Academic Registrar shall assist the First Deputy Vice Chancellor in the administration and organisation of all academic matters including admissions of undergraduate and postgraduate studies, examinations, research and publications.”

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you adding? What are publications? 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I have added “admissions”, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I want you to read it out at dictation speed so that we can get it. Do you have it written down?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It reads as follows:
“The Academic Registrar shall assist the First Deputy Vice Chancellor in the administration and organisation of all academic matters including admissions of undergraduate and postgraduate students, examinations, research and publications.”  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr. chairman, this is an improvement on your amendment, according to hon. Okumu Ringa. Hon. Okumu Ringa, you can speak to your amendment.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The amendment proposed by the chairperson to the original draft leaves out an important function of the Academic Registrar or the officer responsible for admissions. In some universities they are called directors of admissions, but they are responsible for admissions, whatever name they are given. In this case both the amendment of the chairperson and the original draft left out the important aspect of admissions. It is against this background that I am appealing to the chairperson and the Minister to concede to this aspect, so that the function of admissions is specifically stated within the law. In my view this is a fairly simple issue to internalise. I beg to move.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I have received hon. Okumu Ringa’s amendment, but I wish he took time to read even the original 33 (2) and 33 (3), which read as follows:
“(2) The Academic Registrar shall be responsible to the Vice Chancellor. 
(3) The Academic Registrar shall be responsible for the administration and organisation of all academic matters including examinations, and undergraduate and postgraduate studies and research.”

I think they are all covered in his proposed amendments.  When we talk about all academic matters, and when we look at the functions of the university, I think publications are covered in the functions. So, I would like to request hon. Okumu Ringa to reconsider.

DR. MWEBESA NTEGAMAHE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to agree with hon. Okumu Ringa. If the chairperson talks about stating all academic matters, then why did he have to emphasise examinations, undergraduate and postgraduate studies and research? That is why we are also pushing in this issue of admissions, because it is a very important sector in the university. And presently we have had problems with admissions. People are entering the university without qualifications. You cannot underrate this issue of admissions. So, I support and request the chairman to accept this amendment. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I wish I had my way, but I am not supposed to debate. In law there is what we call the rule of interpretation called the generic rule. Once you say ‘all academic matters’ and you say ‘including this’, when you are interpreting, these particulars must relate to the general. So, if I had my way, it would not be a big deal. 

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Chairman, that would seem the right way, but having said “all” he then specifies and leaves out admissions. Why doesn’t he add admissions just for the avoidance of doubt?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I do not think this matter should detain us for long. The general role is being supplemented by the particular because of the perceived importance of the particular. I appeal to the chairperson to concede to this amendment so that we can move on.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WAMBI KIBALE: I would like to seek general clarification on the debate and amendments being moved to this Bill. We see over 100 amendments from the Committee, and then Members are also bringing in more amendments. Is it possible for all of us to keep track of what is going on, like it used to be sometime when an amendment is to be moved? Is it possible for amendments moved by Members to be written and circulated with justification, so that when we come to that amendment it is easily handled by all of us? I hope this is possible so that there is nothing like a dialogue between a Member moving an amendment and the chairman. Sometimes the exchange also includes the Minister. Some of us do not follow because we only have the Committee’s amendments and the original Bill. And when a Member is moving an amendment he only has -(Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wambi, I think you know that after scrutinising a Bill, a Committee comes here with prepared amendments. That does not mean that hon. Members, who have internalised the Bill as we go along during the Committee Stage, cannot come up with amendments. And according to our Rules of Procedure, the Chairman can require the Mover to put his amendment in writing and give it to him and then he can read it out. The Mover does not have to circulate his amendment. That is what is provided for in our Rules of Procedure. I do not think that the Mover of the amendment should go somewhere, write it down, type it, then circulate, and we wait for all that. 

Unless it is a very complicated amendment, when Members are moving we can try to scrutinise and refine it, and then we move on with business as usual. That is the procedure. But that is not to say that if you do not understand the amendment being moved you should not seek clarification.  

MR. WAMBI KIBALE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted clarification on easing the job and avoiding the situation we are witnessing. That would be the easiest thing for us to do.

THE CHAIRMAN: Easing it how? You mean before someone moves an amendment, like hon. Okumu Ringa is doing, he should go and write it down and circulate it while we wait!

MR. WAMBI KIBALE: Thank you. At the time when the hon. Member is trying to move an amendment, he should have read through it previously, and it should not be immediate. He could have looked at it and circulated it.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure says that the following motions may be moved without notice, and (h) says: “Any motion made when the House is in Committee.”  
So, it is not necessary for hon. Okumu Ringa to write out his motion and circulate it before it can be moved.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to clause 33 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 34

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In clause 34(1) we should add the words “on such terms and conditions as the University Council may determine” to the last sentence. This is so that it should be consistent with clause 35(1) and clause 36(1). I think it was just an omission by the draftsmen.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we have the chairperson comment? 

DR. MUTESASIRA: I have heard what he has said and I agree.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to

Clause 35, agreed to

Clause 36

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to amend clause 36 by adding a new subsection (3) to read as follows: “The Dean of Students shall be responsible to the Vice Chancellor” 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to

Clause 37

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 37(1) by substituting paragraph (e) as follows: “a representative of a sector relevant to the University depending on its objectives and mission, appointed by the relevant body in that sector.” 
Some universities are so specialised. It could be a University of agriculture, computer science, or any other discipline. So, we wanted the relevant sector in that field of the university to be the appointing body.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in the same clause, 37(1), paragraph (m) instead of the word “five”, appearing at the beginning of the paragraph, we would like to put “three”. We thought three was adequate for ministerial appointments, instead of five, as compared to other appointments from other sectors.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in paragraph (p) of the same clause, I beg to insert the word “higher” before the word “education”. 

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to substitute paragraph (q) of the same clause with the following: “representatives of the affiliated and constituent colleges or schools, if any, namely – 
    (i) the chairperson of the governing council; 
    (ii) the chairperson of the academic board; 
    (iii) a representative of the staff, and 
    (iv) a representative of the students.”  

The Committee thought that the people to represent the constituent colleges or schools should be named in that order.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I propose an amendment to clause 37(1)(n), which currently reads as follows: 
“three members appointed by the University Council from the public” 

The word “appointed” should be deleted and replaced with “elected”. 

Normally the University Council elects the number of people as provided for by law. And this will be consistent with clause 37(3), which mentions “all elected and appointed members”. So, I beg to move because this is how it is done.  

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We would not be worried about the amendment, but maybe hon. Okumu Ringa could explain to us how the University Council would elect members from the public.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are a number of people who would have been appointed by their various constituencies to be on the University Council. The provision would then be given to the University Council, already constituted, to pick from among these people of different professions and expertise whose names have already been submitted to the University Council. The University Council elects these three people. In other words, there is a voting. Names have been forwarded to the Council and the individual members vote and elect the needed number formally, and the Minister or the appointing authority will actually approve this.  This is how the process works.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, the structure of this section indicates that when an individual is designating a person, we use the term ‘appoint’. And where a group is collectively designating a member we use the term ‘elect’. It is part of the structure of this provision. That is why I support hon. Okumu-Ringa’s amendment for consistency. This structure is not from hon. Okumu-Ringa. This structure is from us. We should have been consistent.

DR. MUTESASIRA: I am not trying to oppose hon. Okumu-Ringa’s amendment, but I would like some clarification from Okumu-Ringa and the Minister. When you look at (f) they say one member of the district council elected by the district council. This is a member of the Council. He is present and they are going to vote on him, going into his merits and demerits. You come to the senior member of the administrative staff elected by the senior administrative staff. You then come to three members, who are not going to be around, and then you are going to elect them! First of all, you are not going to advertise to say we want to appoint members to the University Council. The Council will sit, and during its normal operations, they will say they would want to appoint some people from outside to come and join the council. These people will not be informed to come and appear before the council. They will not come and explain what they do or their background and justifications so that the council votes on them after they have talked. 

Although the Minister has talked about consistency in elections, the election in the other section is from people from amongst those who are electing, the Council, the Senate, and the District Councils.  I would therefore, think that the people who drafted this section used ‘appointing’ because the University Council is an entity. I think we should be careful when we are changing ‘appointing’ to ‘electing’.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Actually, the word “appointed” here is not the operative word, because the Council does not appoint. There is an appointing authority, who is the Minister or the Chancellor. So, this is a misplaced word. In actual fact, the Council gets nominations from various groups. These nominations are forwarded to the Council when it first meets, and then it votes on these to select the three.  Those who go through are forwarded to the Minister for appointment.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, which word should we use? I will put the question to hon. Okumu-Ringa’s amendment, namely substituting “elected” for “appointed” appearing in paragraph (n), page 28. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Before we pronounce ourselves on the entire clause, look at sub-clause (2). It mentions members appointed under paragraph (m) and (n).  I think that should be consequential.

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to

MS. TIPERU NUSURA: Mr. Chairman, I beg for your indulgence on clause 37, which we have already pronounced ourselves on.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have already pronounced ourselves. What you can do, at a later stage, is move your reconsideration. I think your advisor is whispering something to you. You can keep consulting him.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 38 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 39, agreed to

Clause 40, agreed to

Clause 41

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to clause 41(2) by substituting the word “seven” appearing in the last line with the expression “one third of all the”. So, the clause would read as follows: 
“The Chairperson may at any time call a meeting of the University Council and shall call a meeting if requested in writing by at least one third of all the members of the University Council”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to

Clause 42, agreed to

Clause 43

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend clause 43 by inserting a new paragraph (d) after (c) to read as follows:
“(c) Representatives of the affiliated and constituent colleges or schools if any, namely – 
    (i) the Principal 
    (ii) the Chairperson of the academic board; and 
    (iii) a representative of the academic staff.” 

This is so that the constituent colleges and schools, which had been left out, are represented.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wait a minute, have I understood you right? When I look at your report on page 15, it reads:
“Clause 43 is amended by inserting a new paragraph (d) after (c) as follows – 
(c) representatives of the affiliated...” Is that all right? Maybe I have not understood you.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, it should be a new (d).

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall treat it as a typing error. I now put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to

Clause 44, agreed to

Clause 45, agreed to

Clause 46, agreed to

Clause 47

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 47 by adding a new paragraph (f) to read as follows:“(f) a representative of the teaching staff.” 
This is because members of the teaching staff had not been considered to be members of the board.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to

Clause 48, agreed to

Clause 49

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to correct the grammatical error in clause 49(4). Substitute the word, “advise” appearing towards the end of the second line, with the word “advice”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 49 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 50, agreed to

Clause 51, agreed to

Clause 52

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to amend clause 52(1) by substituting the expression “determined by the academic staff” with the expression “proposed by the Senate and approved by the University Council”. This is because the council is the governing body and should determine the procedure.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 52 as amended, agreed to

Clause 53, agreed to

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 54 by substituting the words “staff tribunal” appearing in paragraph (c) and (d), with the words “Appointments Board”.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to

Clause 55

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to amend clause 55 by substituting sub-clause (1) and (2) as follows:
“(1) There shall be a University Staff Tribunal consisting of – 
    (a) a person who is qualified to be a High Court Judge, appointed by the Chancellor, who shall be the Chairperson;
 
    (b) a person representing the University Council elected from among themselves; 

    (c) a person representing the Senate elected from among themselves; 

    (d) a person nominated by the Ministry of Public Service and appointed by the Vice Chancellor;

    (e) two persons nominated by the Academic Staff Association of the University, one of whom shall be a woman; 

    (f) two persons from the senior members of the administration staff elected from among themselves.”

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, the staff tribunal in clause 55 should be consequentially amended. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether that was in the same context as this one.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, whenever there is a disagreement in disciplinary cases, the Bill had proposed that they be referred straight to the staff tribunal.  However, the Committee thought that before it is referred to the staff tribunal, the appointments’ board should be given a chance as the appointing authority, to handle some of these matters. If a member is not satisfied with the decision of the appointments’ board, then clause 55 comes into play, where we establish the staff tribunal. Clause 54 allows the appointments’ board to play its role, but if they are not satisfied and there is an appeal, that is when the matter goes to the staff tribunal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 55 as amended, agreed to

Clause 56

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 56(1) by substituting the expression “Industrial Relations Court or the High Court” with the words “University Tribunal”. The appointments’ board will deal with the disciplinary actions and the tribunal will be for appeals.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 56 as, amended, agreed to

Clause 57, agreed to

Clause 58, agreed to

Clause 59

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 59(1) by substituting the expression “with the prior approval of the Minister” with the expression “subject to subsection (3)”.  We thought of this so that the Minister is given powers to set the maximum that can be borrowed under sub-clause (3), and we thought this was enough control. Also, sometimes the Ministers can be busy and so they take time to communicate the decisions back.

 (Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the Minister with regard to clause 59 (2), which reads as follows:"The University Council may borrow temporarily, by way of overdraft or otherwise, sums of money to be paid within a short period for any urgent requirements in the discharge of its functions".  

The phraseology is good. It gives leeway to the university to borrow though a timeframe is not given.  But my concern is why the Minister does not give some long-term concession to these universities to borrow so that they develop infrastructure and other resource capacities. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: That is provided for in sub-clause (3), Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to clause 59 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 60

DR. MUTESASIRA: We would just like to correct the dates, by substituting 31st with 30th.  June has 30 days not 31.

THE CHAIRMAN: That can be corrected by the draftsman. I now put the question that clause 60 stand part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 61

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 61 (3) by substituting the word “Minister”, appearing in the third line, with the word “Parliament”. It is Parliament that approves estimates.

 (Question put and agreed to)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to

Clause 62, agreed to

Clause 63

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 63(5) by substituting it as follows: “(5) The University Council shall, within one month from receipt of the audited accounts and the Auditor General's report on them, deliver copies to the National Council and the Minister who shall deliver copies to Cabinet and Parliament.”

 (Question put and agreed to)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to

Clause 64, agreed to

Clause 65

DR. MUTESASIRA: I wish to amend clause 65 by substituting the expression “head documents office, of the university”, appearing in the second line, with the expression “university secretary's office”. We wanted to state the exact location, and also the person in charge of the university’s administration.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to the amendment 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification as to why we do not use the registered office of the university. If the university is a body corporate, why don’t we use an appropriate terminology like 'registered office of the university' and that is where the University Secretary will be. If you use the word 'University Secretary', he can be in some other place.  So, this is the clarification I seek. If it is supported, then I shall move an amendment to read: “any document may be served on the university by leaving it at the registered office of the university”

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, the amendment proposed here is an improvement on the original draft so that, as they say, the proper place is identified. When you say “registered office of the university”, we have to ask registered with whom and registered where? I think you are not improving on the situation by saying, “registered office”. We have created a statutory office and that is the office of the University Secretary. This should be much easier to locate as compared to the approach hon. Okumu Ringa is proposing.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am not convinced by that argument, because the university is described in this Bill as a body corporate. 

THE CHIARMAN: Yes, but it is created by law not by the registrar of companies.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Well, if it is created by law, then we should also be specific in law. That is my argument.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, when you talk about a registered office, it must have gone through the process of registration, which is done through the Registrar General's department. But when you set up something by law, you describe the office bearers and you do not need to say it is registered.

DR. MUTESASIRA: To help my Friend, hon. Okumu Ringa, I will give an example of Namasagali University. The registered office is in Kampala here, but we want these documents to be delivered to the University Secretary because this office has been created and is found in Namasagali. The registered office can be in Kampala. For the University of London running a branch here, the registered office can be in London, but if you want the University Secretary of the University of London, Kampala, you take them where the University Secretary is.  That is what we wanted to specify.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, you sought clarification, you did not move an amendment, so I will now put the question to the Committee’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 65, as amended, agreed to

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 66 by deleting the expression “of the University” appearing in the middle of the third line, and adding the words “and Parliament” at the end of the section.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to

Clause 67, agreed to

Clause 68, agreed to

Clause 69, agreed to

Clause 70

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to make the following amendments to clause 70: Add the words, “to a Public University” to the side note. 
    (i) Make the existing provisions sub-section (1) and add the following new sub-sections -  
“(2) An affiliated College, School or Tertiary institution shall remain a Tertiary institution under this Act and as such, for all intents and purposes shall – 
    (a) retain its status, administration and organisational structure as they were before affiliation; and 
    (b) be independent of the University to which it is affiliated and only depend on the University to the extent agreed upon;  
in conformity with this Act, regulations made thereunder and Statutes made and guidelines issued by the University relating to institutions affiliated to it.  

(3) A College, School or Tertiary institution affiliated to a University shall, as may be agreed in relation to awards, conduct courses leading to awards of certificates, diplomas or degrees of that University under standards provided under this Act and Statutes made and guidelines issued by the University and shall, in connection with the relevant awards, jointly conduct examinations leading to those awards.” 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to

 Clause 71, agreed to

Clause 72

MR.KATURAMU: I beg to move an amendment to clause 72 on the repeals and savings of Acts.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, but let us first hear from the chairperson.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, after submitting this report, we had several consultations regarding the amendment of the Committee. Therefore, I wish to withdraw the amendment regarding Uganda Management Institute. I also wish that you could allow us to stay discussion on that section until we have made thorough consultations with the Ministry and people with disabilities. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I understand why Brother Hood was up in arms. Well, we shall stand this one over.

Clause 73, agreed to

Clause 74

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to amend clause 74 by inserting a new sub-clause (4) as follows:  “The Minister may, on the recommendation of the National Council, and with the approval of Parliament by resolution, upgrade a Tertiary institution to a Public University.” “Approval of Parliament by resolution” is a consequential amendment. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, this amendment is consistent with the provision where Parliament participates in the setting up of a public university. So, I support the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 74, as amended, agreed to

Clause 75

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, we wish to amend clause 75(a) by inserting the words “and research” between the words “learning” and “as” appearing at the end of the second line of the paragraph. And also, in the middle of page 50 of the Bill, that section should be Part XIII and not Part XII.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 75, as amended, agreed to

Clause 76

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 76(1) by substituting the expression “Board of Governors” with the expression “Governing Council”. 

In clause 76(2), we beg to move the following amendments:
    • Delete paragraphs (b) (f) and (k). 
    • Between the words “of” and “industry”, insert the word “agriculture”. 
    • At the end of paragraphs (i) and (n) of the same clause, add the expression “one of whom shall be a woman”. 
    • Substitute the word “three” appearing in paragraph (d) with word “two”.  

This is to streamline the representation on the governing council and also reduce the number. I will come to the other amendments later.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like some clarification. When we delete (b) (f) and (k) and we have industry and agriculture, I think this is not sufficient. Have we taken care of commerce in this representation? That is the clarification I seek from the chairperson.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa is worried that while industry is mentioned, commerce is not mentioned. He is seeking clarification.  He is not moving an amendment.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Well, clause 76(2)(d) reads as follows:
“three persons having made personal contributions to the development of industry, technology, education or commerce in Uganda, one of whom shall be a woman.”  
I do not know what is missing, because commerce is represented here.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I am satisfied, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. MUTESASIRA: In clause 76 I beg to move that we insert a new sub clause (3) as follows and re-number subsequent sub clauses:  
“(3) The principal shall be the secretary to the Governing council.” 

I also beg to move that we substitute the existing sub-clauses (3) and (4) as follows:  
“(4) The Chairperson of the Governing Council shall be appointed by the Minister from three names forwarded by the Council from among themselves.” The Minister should be the appointing authority. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to

Clause 77, agreed to

Clause 78, agreed to

Clause 79, agreed to

Clause 80

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the amendments to clause 80 are typing errors. They can be taken care of, if hon. Wambi Kibale does not object.

Clause 80, agreed to

Clause 81

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 81(2) by substituting the word “ten”, appearing towards the end of the fourth line, with the expression “half of all the”. Even if there is a change in representation, it can still stand without going into numerical figures. That is the essence of the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 81, as amended, agreed to

Clause 82

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 82(2) by inserting the expression “as well as the accounting officer” between the words “officer” and “of” appearing in the second line. This is so that the principal becomes the accounting officer of the college.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to

Clause 83

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 83, we beg to delete sub-clauses (2) and (4) because they are consequential amendments to what we have handled before. We also beg to insert new sub-clauses (2) and (3) to read as follows: 
“(2) There shall be a Registrar who shall be secretary to the Academic board and its committees

(3) There shall be a bursar for each Public Tertiary institution who shall be responsible to the Principal.”

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, but I did not hear him mention the first amendment as indicated in the report. So, I do not know what is happening.

THE CHAIRMAN: So did I. I did not hear you mention the first amendment as indicated in the report.

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, you had indicated that the drafting experts shall correct grammatical errors. That is why I skipped them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Minister, you will agree that these are grammatical errors. I now put the question that clause 83 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 84

DR. MUTESASIRA: Mr. Chairman, I wish to amend clause 84 by inserting the words “and the academic staff” after the word “Officer” in the second line. Also, after the words “Appointments Committee” at the end, add the words “through the Governing Council.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to

Clause 85, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999” and passed clauses 29 to 85 of the Bill, except clause 72, which has been stood over. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I adjourn the House I would like to remind you that tomorrow there will be a half day workshop at the International Conference Centre. You have already been issued with notices, but this is just a reminder. The subject of the workshop is ‘the status of privatisation and way forward’. I think this is a favourite subject for most of you. I have no doubt that many hon. Members will be there to contribute, particularly towards the way forward in this exercise.  The House is adjourned until 2 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
