Thursday 2nd November, 2000

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sure many of you are aware of the parliamentary studies programme, phase 2, which is going on. I have been requested to remind you that the subject dealing with Parliament and the media will be dealt with starting tomorrow. The venue will not be the one that you have been used to, namely Grand Hotel, but it will be Equatorial Hotel. That is tomorrow starting at 9.00 a.m. You are therefore requested to be punctual for that meeting.  

We do not have any other business, except the two Bills, namely the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, and the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999. You know the stages we have reached. I am, therefore, going to ask my helpers to ascertain whether we have a quorum so that we can move to the next stage.  

(The quorum was ascertained)

THE SPEAKER: I am afraid we are short of quorum by seven, so I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes. The bells will sound and you will mobilise.

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am now satisfied that there is quorum, so we can proceed to transact business.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 1997.

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 2, agreed to

Clause 3, agreed to

Clause 4, agreed to

Clause 5, agreed to

Clause 6, agreed to

Clause 7, agreed to

Clause 8, agreed to

Clause 9

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify to me, using the powers that we are about to give him in this section, as to what happened in Zambia. Uganda opted not to sign for a free trade area, and we were not given any briefing as to the reasons behind that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, I do not know whether that is a legislative matter. It sounds like –(Interjection)

MR. KARUHANGA: We are giving him power to exercise that, and I want to know.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Minister, if you can respond.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM TRADE & INDUSTRY (Prof. Rugumayo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I had informed the House earlier, Uganda has complied with the tariff regime by 80 per cent and what remains is 20 per cent. We withheld full compliance because we wanted to find out the effect on our revenue and our industries. This matter is soon to be studied by the Ministry of Finance with funds from COMESA secretariat, and it should not take long. Perhaps, in a couple of months the study should be completed and then we shall sign the COMESA free trade agreement. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, are you comfortable?

MR. KARUHANGA: I am rather apprehensive because the statement that the Minister issued, which came out of Zambia, was to the effect that we shall wait for one year. He is now saying that this might take a few months, and I was wondering why such studies did not take place before the signing was arranged. I heard President Moi condemn those countries which have opted out of this. He said it was a back stabbing exercise to COMESA. It is not very clear that the Minister has given us a comprehensive statement.

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Chairman, COMESA is a process. Not all countries or member states can join COMESA on the same day. That is why it is a phased process. Nine joined on 31st, six are between 60 and 80 percent compliance, and the rest are yet to start. There is no business of opting out on our part. We have not opted out and we do not tend to opt out. We have actually been great exponents of this very important regional body. So, as I stated, the study will take about two months and once that is done, then we can sign. Signing does not require another ceremony. It is just a simple procedure. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 9 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the Minister with regards to clause 11 (1), which is directly related to article 190, referring to subsequent amendments to the treaty. There is a provision in article 190 that the treaty could be amended. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is as to why we have not provided the mechanism through which such an amendment could be effected. If it cannot be provided for in this Bill, could the Minster come up with an appropriate provision where, if an amendment is to be effected, then a mechanism for effecting the same is provided for and the people concerned would be involved in the process?

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for asking that question. The procedure for amending the treaty is clearly stipulated in article 190 of this very treaty. The purpose of this Bill, as we all know, is to give legal effect to the implementation of the treaty in Uganda. If there is any need for amendment, and this amendment can come from various stakeholders, private, Parliamentarians, Government, we will seek the advise of the Attorney General.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12, agreed to

Clause 13, agreed to

Clause 14, agreed to

The Schedule, agreed to

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE & INDUSTRY (Prof. Rugumayo): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE & INDUSTRY (Prof. Rugumayo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled "The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 1997" and passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE & INDUSTRY Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 1997

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE & INDUSTRY (Prof. Rugumayo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 1997” be read a Third Time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 1997” be read a Third Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1999

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you will recall that when we broke off last time when considering the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill, we had almost concluded dealing with clause 2. Hon. Okumu Ringa had wanted a definition relating to two expressions to be included. One was ‘constituent college’ and the other one was ‘affiliated colleges’. He was asked to do a bit of homework and come up with a definitive proposal through an amendment to be included in clause 2. I do not know whether he is ready.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When we adjourned I did consult with the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University and other leading authorities on education. We have come up with an interpretation for affiliated college and constituent college, which the Minister responsible for this Bill has also noted, and I think he will be agreeable to it. The acting chairperson of the Committee has now worked on a refined version of the interpretation. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you say you have worked it out with the chairperson?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I could read what I have as the refined version.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we have reached the stage where you have to move your amendment. It is an amendment. Move it formerly, justify it, and I will ask the Minister and the chairperson what they think about it, and we shall proceed from there.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In general terms, I beg to move that an interpretation for ‘affiliated college' be provided for under clause 2 of the Bill. Affiliated college is generally defined as an independent institution, but which refers to the university for the approval and validation of its academic programmes, courses, awards including student entry qualifications, admissions and examination rules, which have been agreed between the two entities. We found this to be very long, so I would like to propose an interpretation, which we have drafted and is with the chairperson. I do not have it here, if he could read it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, it is your amendment, you get it from the chairperson and move it. That is the way we proceed. Other than that, you can withdraw your amendment and the chairman proceeds.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your guidance. I beg to move that an interpretation for ‘affiliated college’ be provided. It should be defined as follows: 
“Affiliated tertiary institution or college means a tertiary institution or college established pursuant to section 70 of this Act.” 

The justification for this amendment is to have it consistent with whatever has been provided for in this Act. In this Bill we have referred severally to affiliated colleges, since this is going to be a process of promoting education in this country, where a university, private or public, can have affiliated colleges to promote the interest of education in several ways. All the districts may wish to have colleges, which could be affiliated to either a private or a public university. So, it is against this background that this interpretation necessary. 

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr. Chairman, I do not object to the amendment in principle, but the section we are referring to does not mention a college. So, I would like to amend his amendment a little by dropping the word “college” and retaining “tertiary institution established pursuant to section 70 of this Act”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, does that make sense to you? It is neater.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I accept the amendment. We are only deleting the word “college” and we are retaining the general text. It therefore would read: 
“Affiliated tertiary institution means a tertiary institution established pursuant to section 70 of this Act.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. chairperson, I suppose you have no objection.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a constituent college be defined, and I would like to propose the following definition:  
“A constituent college means an independent college established pursuant to section 28 of this Act”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to

Clause 3

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 3 be amended as follows:  
(i) Substitute the expression “set standards, qualifications for”, appearing at the end of the second line and beginning of the third line, with the expression “equate qualification of”.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: I beg to insert the words “while at the same time respecting the autonomy and academic freedom of the institutions” between the words “education” and “and” appearing towards the end of the fourth line.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to substitute the word “controlling”, appearing in paragraph (a), with the word “guiding”.  I beg to move.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: After serious consideration, Mr. Chairman, I find that the word “guiding” is preferable to “controlling”.  I have no objection to the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to delete paragraph (b) and re-number paragraph (c) as (b).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I beg to move an amendment to the main body of clause 3. The first sentence reads, “the objects of this Act are to establish and develop a system governing…” There is a missing word between “system” and “governing”. So, we add the article “for” to complete it. So it will read, “A system for governing institutions of higher education”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, does that really add or subtract anything?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: It does, in terms of construction.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know whether a system for governing is different. Hon. Minister, it is your Bill.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I think that this is a matter that the draughtsmen can sort out. In case they find that ‘for’ is absolutely necessary, they can add it.

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment by the hon. Okumu Ringa is to the effect that we insert the word ‘for’ between the words “system” and “governing”. So, it would read, “the objects of this Act are to establish and develop a system for governing institutions of higher learning.” I now put the question.  

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 3, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to amend clause 4(1) by substituting the word “national” for the word “nation”, which appears in the second line. The justification is that it was a typographical error.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in sub-clause (4) we insert the word “national” before the word “council” appearing twice in the second line.  Council is not defined but national council is defined, which therefore makes the provision more specific.

PROF.MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, how can I object to specificity?  I support the amendment -  (Laughter).

(Question on put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to clause 4(4). I beg to add the word “executed” in the first line, so that it will read, “every document purporting to be an instrument executed or issued…” so that it is consistent with what is appearing in other clauses.

THE CHAIRMAN: Take me along with you. You are saying every document purporting to be –(Interjection)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: An instrument issued, but before the word “issued” we add the words “executed or”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: After the word “instrument” you want the word “executed”?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Executed or issued. And my justification here would be that it would be consistent with the rest of the clauses. Instruments are executed or issued. This amendment, for example, would really make it consistent with clause 23(3).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, clause 23(3) is on page 21.  It says: “Any document purporting to be a document executed or issued under the seal of a University authenticated as aforesaid, shall be received in evidence and shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be duly executed.”  

I do not know whether the same meaning can be derived from this one you are proposing, but we can look at it.  Let us read the full clause with the amendment as proposed by hon. Okumu Ringa: “Every document purporting to be an instrument executed or issued by the Council and sealed with the seal of the Council, authenticated in the manner provided under subsection (3), shall be received in evidence and be deemed to be such instrument without further proof unless the contrary is proved.”  

It is still admissibility of the document as evidenced, therefore, hon. Okumu Ringa is suggesting that we should be consistent.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to consistency, so the expression “executed or” should be added.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to

Clause 5

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 5 be amended as follows:  In 5(b), delete the words “and knowledge” appearing in the last line. It is an appropriate function handled by the universities and tertiary institutions. That is the justification. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to delete the words “and the President” from clause 5(c).

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 5 (f), we delete the word “supervise”. ‘Supervise’ may mean getting involved in the administration of the institute, which is not necessary.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to substitute 5(h) as follows: 
“To ensure minimum standards for courses of study and the equating of degrees, diplomas and certificates awarded by the different public and private institutions of higher education.”  

This is for clarity and removing standardisation, and also to set standards, which could mean taking the same exams, whereas the requirement is to have minimum standards for courses and the equating of awards.  I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in 5(j), we delete the words “and the standardisation and equation” appearing at the beginning of the third line. This is consequential from 5(h). 

At 5(k), we beg to insert the words “and accessible” before the words “adequate” and “physical”.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the amendment but I wanted to raise an item under the same amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we pronounce ourselves on that amendment which you support. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Under clause 5(j), I would like to propose an amendment to the second last line on the word “Uganda”, so that we give it corporate nationality. If you may allow me to read, it says:
“(j) to determine the equivalence of all types of academic and professional qualifications of degrees, diplomas and certificates obtained elsewhere with those awarded by Uganda…”  

I would like to add the words “and Ugandan” to give it corporate nationality. We are talking about institutions belonging to Uganda, so we should add the words “and Ugandan”, if this could be supported. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What hon. Okumu Ringa proposes to amend presently reads as follows: 
“to determine the equivalence of all types of academic and professional qualifications of degrees, diplomas and certificates obtained elsewhere with those awarded by Uganda institutions of Higher Education for recognition in Uganda”. 
Uganda institutions are specific; there are institutions of higher learning. They are there!

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I sorry but I do not accept the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. WANGUBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like us to delete “degrees, diplomas and certificates” so that it reads as follows: 
“…to determine the equivalence of all types of academic and professional qualifications obtained elsewhere with those awarded by Uganda institutions of Higher Education for recognition in Uganda”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I hope you are aware that these words keep recurring in the Bill when it comes to the institution recognising performance after undergoing a course of study. Diplomas, degrees and certificates recur in here. Are you going to deal with them en masse or in various ways? Anyway, it is your amendment. What is your justification?

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Chairman, they are recurring just as you have said, so by including them it would make the whole thing long and clumsy, whereas the other one would be short and precise. It would give the meaning straight away.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I suppose you have got what he is talking about? Please proceed.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I have understood, Mr. Chairman. We are looking for brevity, but I think the original draft also aims at clarity. The category of degree, diploma and certificate is well known in these circles. I am sorry but I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will put the question.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that under clause 5, we insert (p) after (d) so that it becomes (e), and renumber accordingly. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to the original clause 5(g), which reads: 
“in co-operation with the relevant Government departments, private sector or the different, institutions of Higher Education, to evaluate the overall national manpower requirement and recommend solutions to the requirements”.  

I would like to propose that we delete the last three words, “to the requirements”, so that it reads as follows:
“in co-operation with the relevant Government departments, private sector, or the different, institutions of Higher Education, to evaluate the overall national manpower requirement and recommend solutions”  The last three words are redundant. I beg to move.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, we are talking about evaluating overall manpower requirements and recommending solutions to the same. How can that be redundant? I am sorry, I oppose the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to

Clause 6

MR. KIVEJINJA: I beg to move that clause 6 (g) be amended by inserting the expression “minimum requirements for” between the words “of” and “admission” appearing in the first line.

PROF.MAKUBUYA: I support the idea of minimum requirements for admission, therefore, I support the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I move that we delete clause 6(h) and (i). This is because the council cannot take on those unrealistic functions.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to

Clause 7

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 7 be amended as follows: 
At the end of each (c), (d), (e) and (f) add the expression “elected from among themselves”. 

Add new paragraphs as follows: “Two students, one representing university students and one representing tertiary institutions students and one of whom shall be a female.”  
The justification for this is to streamline that representation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us be careful here. Your amendment is to the effect that at the end of each of (c), (d), (e) and (f) the expression “elected from among themselves” be added. We shall deal with that first. 

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, this amendment to the various sub-clauses makes sense, because we are providing for one representative from each of those categories. We are not indicating how he is going to be identified, so this one makes it clearer because it shows how that person will be identified. I support the amendments.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Whereas I support this amendment, if we are providing for that expression, I would like clarification as to why we have left out a provision under (i). The provision reads: “two representatives of the Uganda Trade and Industry sectors one from each”. Why did we not provide the method of -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okumu Ringa, you are talking about (i), are we there yet? You are dealing with it now but it is reflected as item (iv). We are not yet there.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I withdraw the proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I was going to say that if this proposed amendment which the Minister has accepted is carried, when we get to (i) you can say that, arising from the previous decision, you want a similar amendment reflected under (i).  Am I clear?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: You are clear, Mr. Chairman. I withdraw my request for clarification –(Mrs. Baba Diri rose_). 

THE CHAIRMAN: Just hold on, hon. Baba Diri, I am still sorting out something. We are about to pronounce ourselves on the amendment proposed by the Committee, which the Minister has accepted. The amendment is to the effect that at the end of (c), (d), (e) and (f) the expression “elected from among themselves” be added. The Minister has no objection, so we are about to pronounce ourselves. Are you seeking clarification on that, hon. Baba Diri?

MRS. BABA DIRI: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection on that. My concern is within the composition. Maybe I will raise it after we have passed this.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to the amendment

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Baba Diri, can we hear from you again before the chairman comes in with the next amendment. 

MRS. BABA DIRI: Mr. Chairman, during the debate at the Committee Stage, we agreed that at least there should be one person with disability on the national council. We said that, preferably, this person should be among the four persons selected by the Minister from the public. I am not very sure where it is in the composition, but when we reach that stage I would like to raise that issue.

THE CHAIRMAN: But before you proceed, hon. Baba Diri, may I inform you that when we get to (j) we shall give you an opportunity to raise that issue. We are yet to get there, and your neighbour, hon. Kibale Wambi, is very anxious to advise you when we get there. I can see that.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to add another new paragraph as follows: “Two students, one representing University students and one representing tertiary students, and one of whom shall be a female.” The intention of this is to streamline the representation.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that paragraph (g) should come last and then the other paragraphs be re-numbered. This is because the national council would elect and appoint the Executive Director and the persons under (g) after being in place. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, paragraph (i) is what hon. Baba Diri was talking about and actually, her amendment is relevant. I beg to move that we substitute the word “two” with the word “three” and substitute the expression “one from each” with expression, “including the agricultural sector”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this was hon. Okumu Ringa’s concern. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. chairman. I would support the amendment but with an additional amendment in terms of phraseology, because if we are –(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: That means you do not support the amendment as it is.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Technically you are right, Mr. Chairman. I do not support the amendment and I would like to move an amendment to re-phrase the amendment.

I beg to move that (i) be amended to read as follows: “three representatives, one each from Trade and Commerce, Industry and Agricultural sectors”. My amendment takes care of specific sectors so that there is no confusion with regard to –(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: If your amendment is directed to (i), there is an amendment for the word “two” to be changed to three?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes, it will now read, “three representatives, one each from Trade and Commerce, Industry and Agricultural sectors”. In other words, if you look at our current trade arrangement, we have Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, which is a body of its own taking care of trade and commerce. We also have UMA, a body taking care of industrialists, and we have the National Farmers Association, which takes care of agriculturists. So, if we adopt this phraseology, each sector will be specifically represented. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I find something rather curious here, maybe it is the drafting style, I do not know. Two representatives of the Uganda Trade and Industry sectors, one from each. How did you come up with ‘one from each’ at the end?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, the idea is to have a representative from each of these three sectors. First of all, I accept the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the Committee. I also accept the amendment proposed by hon. Okumu Ringa for the sake of clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, which one is it? Are you accepting the idea of introducing a third sector?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore you do not go with the chairperson’s amendment. We now look at hon. Okumu Ringa’s amendment. If it goes through, then the chairperson’s amendment falls by the way side. Hon. Okumu Ringa is also saying three. Let us deal with the last amendment, because the last amendment encompasses the first one and that is accepted. Hon. Okumu Ringa's amendment, correct me if I am wrong, should read as follows: 
“Three representatives, one each from Trade and Commerce, Industry and Agricultural sectors”. That is his amendment.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask the Mover what the difference is between the words ‘trade’ and ‘commerce’. I think that trade encompasses a wider range than commerce, therefore, putting them together does not help us. Therefore, I request us to use one of the two. It will be much better.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to delete the word “trade” and we adopt the words “commerce, industry and agricultural sectors”.  I beg to move.

MR MAO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Would it appeal to the hon. Okumu Ringa if instead of putting it generally he specifically mentions certain organisations like the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Uganda National Farmers Association?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he is talking about sectors. I think that is broader.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I do not support that proposal because those are institutions that could change in name over time. What we are providing for in legislation is rather broad and encompasses all sectors.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So, your amendment would read: “three representatives, one each from Commerce, Industry and Agricultural sectors”. I will now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: That means the hon. chairperson's amendment is covered.

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in paragraph (j) we substitute the word “five” with the word “four”, and substitute the word “two” with “one”. 
After the word “woman” I also beg to insert the words “and one person with disabilities”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I take it the expression “a” is a typing error. Have you seen it? 

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My issue is covered, but I think we need to delete the word “a” so that it remains as persons with disability.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am told that this is a typing error.

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether it is correct if we say, “four persons representing other sectors of higher education, at least one of whom shall be a woman appointed by the Minister”. That changes the meaning. It would appear that the person mentioned after “at least” is the only person to be appointed by the Minister, whereas the appointment seems to be for the four persons being suggested.

THE CHAIRMAN: Carry me along with your complaints so that I can call upon the people who are concerned to respond. It seems you are complaining about the drafting here. Or is it the grammar?

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Chairman, it is not the grammar but it changes the whole thing. I am sorry, but let me go by the original Bill. It says: 
“five persons representing other sectors of higher education, at least two of whom shall be women, appointed by the Minister”.  
This would imply that it is only the two women who are appointed by the Minister and not the other first ones.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let me draw your attention to something. Drafting is a very complicated and specialised area. Have you seen the commas after “education” and after “women”? I will draw your attention to those. It means all the four are appointed.  

Now we go to the chairperson’s amendment. Did you have any objection, Mr. Minister?

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I am seeking to establish whether we are talking about one person with disability or with disabilities.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is disabilities. I will put the question to the amendment as graphically corrected by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 7(4) we add “for one more term”. This is because the period for re-appointment should be specific.

(Question put and agreed to)

CAPT.  BABU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I remember we have included an item on students, and this was an appointment of five years. I would like to find out from the chairman and the hon. Minister whether we could have a provision saying that we can change them in-between, because the students will not spend five years. Some of them might be there for two years and some might be there for three years. If we are changing them, we should have a provision to take care of that. Thank you.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to clarify that elections in these institutions are carried out annually. In most cases nobody is appointed a guild president for the whole of his or her course.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, hon. Babu has not moved an amendment so I do not know how we can deal with it. He was just seeking clarification. I put the question to the chairman’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg move an amendment by adding a new sub-clause (5) after sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “Except for the ex-officio members, all members shall be approved by Parliament before taking office of the National Council member.”

The justification is that Parliament should have input like it does in all other important appointments.

THE CHAIRMAN: What about the students? Will the students also come here for approval?

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Those are normally ex-officio, they are not nominated. They are there by virtue of their positions. They are elected by other organs. They are not appointed by the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not understand that. Could someone clarify?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The proposed amendment by the chairperson complicates the process. These appointments are made after a thorough search for the individuals, and to bring it to Parliament would delay the process and make it rather cumbersome. In the case of students who are elected by their guild or by their student bodies, it would also make it difficult to receive such nominations for appointment. So, I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I think it is fair for us to give you an opportunity to say some thing.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Well, I am not convinced about the justification for bringing these appointments here. I am sorry, Sir, I oppose the amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to

Clause 8, agreed to

Clause 9.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to delete sub- clause (1) (b) in clause 9 and re-number the rest. And after the word “office” in sub-clause (2), insert the words “within one month.”

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to

Clause 10.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 10(4) be amended by substituting the expression “one third of all” for the word “eight” appearing in the third line. It is applicable even where there is a change in the composition.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVENJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that at the end of clause 10(6) we add the expression “and in case of equality of votes the chairperson shall have a casting vote.” This is to give a determining vote to an issue.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to

Clause, 11 agreed to

Clause 12

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to clause 12(1). It currently reads as follows: “The Minister may after consultation with the National Council give the National Council guidance on policy matters as may be appropriate.”  

I would like to propose an amendment as follows: “The Minister may, after consultation with stakeholders, give the National Council guidance on policy matters as may be appropriate.” 

My justification is that the National Council is one of the stakeholders on matters of higher education. What would it serve if the Minister is consulting the National Council and also giving guidance to the same National Council? So, the Minister should have the consultation with the stakeholders then give guidance to National Council. I beg to move.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I do not know what this amendment adds to the clause, because the stakeholders are already reflected in the composition of the National Council.  In clause 7 we are talking about one representative of the Vice Chancellors of public universities, one representative of the Vice Chancellors of private universities, one representative of public universities’ Senates, and one represent of private universities’ Senates. We also talk about one person from the public appointed by the National Council, four members of religious non-degree awarding institutions, and so on and so forth. And then the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Agriculture sector, and everybody whom you can think of as a stakeholder have all been reflected in the council. Who else are you going to consult as a stakeholder? I oppose the amendment!

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 12, agreed to

Clause 13, agreed to

Clause 14, agreed to

Clause 15, agreed to

Clause 16, agreed to

Clause 17, agreed to

Clause 18, agreed to

Clause 19

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification with regard to clause 19(4), which reads as follows:“The Minister shall cause copies of the annual report together with a copy of the audited accounts to be laid before Parliament at the first available opportunity after receipt of them, but not later than the next sitting of Parliament after the date on which the Minister receives the annual report and the audited accounts.”  

This phraseology seems to be confusing. I would like the Minister or the chairman to guide me as to which date, and what the sequence of receiving and forwarding is? That is the clarification I am seeking.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr. Chairman, I regret that I do not understand hon. Okumu Ringa’s problem. The clause, first of all, says that the Minister has the obligation to cause copies of the annual report together with the copy of the audited accounts to be laid before Parliament at the first available opportunity after receiving them. But he is not allowed to keep them beyond the next sitting of Parliament after the date he receives them.  So, I do not understand the problem. If you can deliver them earlier than the next sitting, so much the better, but you cannot go beyond the next sitting after you have received them. I do not know whether the draftsperson could have been clearer than this?

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

Clause 19, agreed to

Clause 20

MR. KIRUNDA KIVENJINJA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In clause 20 (1), I beg to delete the expression “or its Members and other persons” and add, at the end, the expression “for a specific purpose and period.” Outsiders should not be appointed on the committees, and members appointed should not sit on the committee permanently. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I will seek your indulgence, I have some other important meeting, which is waiting. I feel that we should have an appropriate break at this time to accommodate me as well.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya) Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya) Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 1999” up to clause 20, and has adopted them with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya) Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopt the report from the Committee of the whole House. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: We will adjourn until Tuesday afternoon at 2.00 o’clock.  

(The House rose at 4.49 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7th November, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.) 

