  Tuesday, 2 November 2010

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have honourable Members of Parliament from the Committee on ICT of Namibia and they are seated in the stranger’s gallery.

I received the sad news of the death of Hon. Kadumukasa’s sister; her name is Deborah Nabitalo. Burial will take place tomorrow in Mityana.  Let us observe a moment of silence.

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: We were dealing with the CHOGM report and we were supposed to have continued with it today and tomorrow, but Government approached me and informed me that they had important business to handle, namely, the Kampala City Bill, 2009, which should be disposed of as soon as possible to enable them know the position of the city during the coming election.

When we come to the CHOGM report, I want to advise that it is high time we started to be specific about some cases and dispose them. Those who were affected by the report will be given an opportunity to state their case such that it is considered.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree that there is urgent business in form of Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009. I thought that this should have been brought to your attention much earlier so that as Members of Parliament, we can prepare ourselves for the coming debate. We are in a habit of relegating the CHOGM report backwards in favour of other business. I find it very strange and I think caution should be given so that Parliament should not be taken for a ride.

THE SPEAKER: I entirely concur with you and I have nothing useful to add. But rules say that I should give priority to Government business. Members of the public are anxious to know the status of Kampala because my learned friend, hon. Lukwago, has indicated his intention to stand. The text which we had, the post of mayor was not elective and may have changed now and we need to know.

BILLS 
SECOND READING 

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY BILL, 2009

3.22
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009 be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR MWESIGE: The Kampala Capital City Bill was first read in Parliament in June 2009, and thereafter it was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, in accordance with the rules of this House. 
I am glad to report that we have worked with the committee to scrutinise the Bill, and made clarifications and amendments where necessary. 

I am grateful to the committee for its effort in ensuring that the Bill gets as much publicity and support from as many stakeholders as possible. I have been informed that a cross-section of the public made their presentations to the committee on this Bill. 

The object of this Bill is to establish, in accordance with Article 5 of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005, Kampala City as the capital of Uganda. It is also to provide for the administration and development of Kampala City by the Central Government.

It also provides for the delineation of the territorial boundary of Kampala Capital City in accordance with Article 5 of the Constitution. 

I would like to inform, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that Government has considered the matter of the Kampala Capital City Authority and is of the view that we shall use the current boundaries of Kampala District.

Mr Speaker, Kampala as it is today, is in a sorry state, despite its contribution to the National Domestic Product, which is estimated at 50 percent and being home to nearly 80 percent of the country’s industrial and service sector. The existing infrastructure such as roads, public health facilities, sanitation and waste disposal, are grossly inadequate relative to the growing population. You may have, of late, seen the appalling pictures of potholes carried in the newspapers; some of them have been equated to fishing lakes.


MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am at a loss. I am trying to follow the statement by the minister and apparently it is in relation to a very important Bill. Unfortunately, the Bill related to Kampala City is critical to all of us, but we do not seem to have copies. Can we be availed with the copies so that we can all follow the minister’s presentation?

THE SPEAKER: No; copies were given to you when the Bill had its first reading. The copies you expect to receive now are the copies of the report of the committee, if the report is ready. It is a long time ago and I appreciate that with that lapse of time, people must have misplaced their copies; but they were given to you. (Laughter)

MR MWESIGE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. We have all travelled to many cities of the world; we have seen the order and cleanliness; we have seen the physical planning being enforced, and as an example, the residents of Kampala would like to see an organised city. We believe that Kampala requires a strong and focused administration with sound monitoring and control mechanisms by the Central Government to ensure compliance with national and international standards.

Kampala should be managed at the level of international standards using global trends and experiences in urban planning, development and management. One should be able to direct a guest from anywhere in the world to reach destinations in Kampala such as Makindye, Kololo, Kawempe or elsewhere. Utilities such as those of the Police Fire Brigade should be able to rescue a situation without much hassle. 

As you are all aware, Kampala has been managed under the Local Governments Act as a city equivalent to a district. It has been receiving the same attention and benefits just like any other district yet its requirements are immense, considering the services it has to deliver. As a result, many of its unique problems and needs have not been addressed and attended to for a long time. 

The Kampala Capital City Bill is designed to address the unique challenges of Kampala. Through the changed institution and governance arrangements, the law is designed to achieve the following:

1.	Strengthen the administration and development of Kampala Capital City for effective service delivery.

2.	Streamline and harmonise physical planning in the neighbouring districts of Wakiso, Mpigi and Mukono to facilitate orderly urban development.

3.	To beautify Kampala Capital City.

4.	To improve the infrastructure such as roads, and the sewerage systems to an acceptable standard.

5.	To facilitate the investments and cut down the cost of doing business in the city.

6.	Reduce health and environmental hazards to the residents of the city through improved sanitation.

7.	To improve collection and management of revenue in the capital city.

8.	To strengthen maintenance of law and order by creating a metropolitan police which will specifically handle complicated urban crime.

Lastly, I want to dispel the rumours and worries from some circles that this Bill is designed to disenfranchise the people of Kampala that have been moving around since the Bill was introduced.

All the leaders, including the mayor, the city and division councillors, and the members of the capital city authority, will be elected by universal adult suffrage from constituencies demarcated by the Electoral Commission. This will ensure that the residents of Kampala are not disenfranchised. I will be moving an amendment at an appropriate stage to require that the mayor of Kampala, like the councillors who represent the city in the metropolitan authority, will also be elected by adult suffrage.

Another worry has been on land ownership. Under Article 237 of the Constitution, land is vested in the citizens of Uganda, to be owned in accordance with the four land tenure systems, namely, customary, mailo, freehold and leasehold. The Bill recognises these rights and will not deviate from them. 

The only issue that the Bill introduces is to strengthen physical planning which requires development in a metropolitan area to follow designated plans irrespective of the tenure of land. Otherwise, the people will continue to enjoy the full rights of land ownership as bestowed upon them by the Constitution.

I wish to end by appealing to the House through you, Mr Speaker, to support this motion that is intended to bring about qualitative change in the management of Kampala City. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank You, hon. Minister. Yes, chairman of the committee.

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Otekat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to present a report of the committee on Public Service and Local Government on Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009. I think Members have received copies of this report.

The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 24 June 2009. It was referred to our committee in accordance with Rule 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of our Parliament.

In the process of scrutinising the Bill, the committee discussed it and received views from the following stakeholders:

1.	The Minister of Local Government.

2.	Mr Vincent Ssekono, the former Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government and the current board chairperson of NSSF.

3.	Mr Gordon Mwesigye, former Town Clerk, KCC.

4.	Al Hajji Nasser Ntege Ssebagala, the Mayor of Kampala.

5.	Hajji Nasser Kibirige Takuba, Chairman Kawempe Division.

6.	Mr Moses Kalungi Kirumira, Chairperson Makindye Division.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this is clear and you need not read it.

MR OTEKAT: Okay. Mr Speaker, the policy principle for the Bill has already been outlined by the minister; and the issue of Kampala Capital City boundaries has also been outlined by the minister. Allow me to touch on something concerning the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority because that is very important to Parliament. It is on the second page, Section 5.0.

The Bill creates -

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, since the minister said so, these four boundaries of Kampala - I think the minister who is the owner of the Bill has told us that Kampala will remain as gazetted and not go to Wakiso and so forth. I think that should be cleared.

MR OTEKAT: On the boundaries of Kampala City, the committee complies with what the minister has just stated that the boundaries of Kampala will remain as they are. They have been designated as Kampala District and the committee has no problem with that at all. I wanted to highlight on the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority because I am sure Members will want to -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, bear with me so that I can introduce other VIPs in the gallery. We have His Excellency, the Ambassador of the European Union, Vincent De Vischer, Mr Harvey Rouse and Ms Susie Alegre, officials of the European Union. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome. (Applause)

MR OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, on page 2, we have the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority.  The Bill creates a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority and enjoins the Metropolitan Authority to promote development of a metropolitan development and structural plan, and to also handle planning issues within the metropolitan area. 

The Metropolitan Authority will have to veto plans for the lower urban councils which are inconsistent with the metropolitan development and structure plans.  

The Bill also provides that Kampala City Authority shall not be a local government. It, however, provides for the existence of lower urban councils under the Authority. These include divisions, wards, village councils and street committees within Kampala City. 

Mr Speaker, I will not dwell much on the status of Kampala City because I know Members are aware of what it is. I will not even dwell on what the Kampala Capital City Bill is addressing because the minister has dwelt on that.  I will go straight to page 5 under observations and then continue to recommendations.  

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the definition of the metropolitan area is not clear. Again the minister has of course talked about that. What is contained in the interpretation section as metropolitan area is vague and confusing. A metropolitan area from a technical point of view is an urban area. What is being implied in the definition here is more rural than urban. This may have implications when operationalising some rules and regulations of an urban setting in a rural context. 

In the view of the committee, the definition of the metropolitan area should state that, “The metropolitan area will include geographical area A, B, C et cetera,” instead of saying, “Metropolitan area together with A, B, C.”  The two are quite different in meaning. 

The Bill provides for the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor to be elected from the local college of councils. That one has been overtaken by events. But like I said, the committee has no objection with the mayor being elected under adult suffrage. 

The Bill proposed the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. However, the committee noted that the provisions in the Bill relating to the metropolitan planning were grossly inadequate and do not reflect a proper picture and management of metropolitan planning. We shall give a recommendation at the end to support that. 

The committee further observed that the proposed membership of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is inadequate. It should be beefed up by a surveyor and social scientist given the fact that physical planning is a multi-dimensional process. 

The committee also noted that the Bill is silent about technical staff of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, which the committee thinks leaves a serious vacuum for the Board to operate. 

Clause 20(3) of the Bill sets the terms of office for the Board Members of the Metropolitan Authority for three years who shall be eligible for reappointment for one more term. In view of the committee, this is too short a period for induction, preparation and implementation of the strategic plans of the Authority.   

Clause 11(g) provides that the Lord Mayor is to provide guidance to the division administrators. The committee wondered if this makes the division mayors subordinate to his Lord the Mayor since this has been a borne of contention in the current setting largely because the relationship between His Lordship the Mayor and the division chairpersons has not been clearly defined. 

The committee further observed that the Bill provides the lower urban councils like divisions, wards, villages and street committees, which is a duplication of the function of the Kampala Metropolitan Authority. All these duplications have financial implications and they are also centres of power struggle.

The committee also observed that the Metropolitan Planning Authority is given the responsibility of constructing roads and their maintenance. But, Mr Speaker, under 7 - Functions of the Authority, (g) talks of the construction of roads, and these mixed up roles will create confusion and should be avoided. 

The committee also observed that Article 78(1)(b) of the Constitution provides for one Woman Representative for every district. When The Kampala Capital City Bill becomes law, Article 290 of the Constitution will stop applying and Kampala will no longer be a district. What then happens to the Woman MP? We have asked that question so that it can be answered by all of us. 
Section 25 of the Bill provides for the Metropolitan Police which shall comprise of persons appointed under the Police Act, but paid by the Authority.  

The committee observed that enforcement of ordinances, laws and regulations, and bye-laws is a major factor in the administration of the Authority.  To entrust this function to a force that is under the rules of engagement of another agency is to deny the authority of its effectiveness. The Police officers will owe allegiance to the Inspector General of Police and not to the Executive Director of the Authority.

Section 9(5) of the Bill provides for the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Mayor to be full-time employees of the Authority. The committee has, however, observed that making the Lord Mayor and Deputy Mayor full-time employees of the Authority will create a fertile ground for conflict between the Lord Mayor, his Deputy and the Executive Director. We have made a recommendation, but again, arising from what the minister has said, the elections will be under adult suffrage and nothing will change our recommendation.  

Section 79 of the Bill provides for the powers given to the minister responsible for the capital city. The committee, however, observed that there appears to be too much power placed in the hands of the minister to vary and rescind any decision of the Authority, which is in contravention of any law. We have also made recommendations on that. 

Recommendations

1.	The committee recommends that Government should produce a visual representation of the new proposed Kampala City. The boundaries prescribed in the second schedule of the Bill require to be amplified by graphical representation for ease of understanding by all stakeholders. Even when the minister has said Kampala City will remain as the current Kampala District, at a certain moment we shall need to know what exactly that means. 

2.	The committee recommends that in order to be consistent with the nomenclature in the Bill, the lower urban councils be called urban authorities. This is to avoid the use of Local Government nomenclature which Kampala City is offing. Lower urban councils are local governments and the mix up should be avoided as much as possible.

3.	Under clause 20 of the Bill - Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, the committee recommends that the competence of urban development planning be added. This competence includes, physical planning and urban management.  The competence of urban development planning is missing and we are recommending that it should be added.

4.	The committee recommends that the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority should not restrict itself to the development of broad planning schemes. The planning of detailed neighbourhood plans should be the responsibility of the capital city authority or any other authority within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Authority.

5.	The committee also recommends that a directorate of physical planning should be established as one of the directorates of the Authority to specifically deal with physical planning, because that had been left out in the directorates of the Authority. 
6.	The delineation of Mengo Municipality is a political decision. The committee recommended that Government should clearly define its relationship with Mengo on the following in particular:

i.	Infrastructural planning of Mengo Municipality;
ii.	Policing garbage collection and disposal; and
iii.	Street lighting and payment of street lighting. 

That is, how does the government want to relate with Mengo in those areas.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the amendments that we shall bring when we reach Committee Stage. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and members of the committee.

3.47
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity and thank you, Chairperson of the committee and the minister for the presentation. The rules require that when a matter comes up for debate, if you have interests or you are an interested party, you declare your interest before proceeding with the debate. 

Mr Speaker, I would wish to go on record that I am an interested party and I will debate on that premise. I would wish to go on record that I do intend to stand for the position of mayor in Kampala and I wanted to disclose that right from the beginning.

Having said that, allow me to make the following observations. One, right from the time this Bill was tabled before this House, it raised a lot of anxiety within the political body and particularly here in Kampala. It was received with mixed feelings and the spirit of Government was really doubted as to whether it was intended to streamline the administration of the city or it was about power struggle just to take over management of the city by the Centre, NRM candidates having failed to win general elections.

I am echoing sentiments -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, what is clear and where we should not waste our time is the question of whether Central Government is taking over Kampala. This is clearly spelt out in the Constitution. It is not a policy matter, but a question of implementing the provision of the Constitution, which provide that Kampala City Council shall be under the Central Government.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, but I am also alive to the provisions of Article 1(4) which provide for people’s power to decide who should govern them and how they should be governed and I am happy – be patient, hon. Minister. Don’t you want me to go on record that I do appreciate the position taken by the minister to amend the Bill and say that now elections shall be based on the principle of adult suffrage? This is the hallmark of democracy, which we are trying to nurture in this country. Let us not rewind the clock back to the old local council system of lining up behind a candidate.

Having said that, I would also wish to appreciate the minister’s position to amend the Bill in respect to the clauses relating to the altering of boundaries. It had also raised fears in various circles particularly within the Buganda Kingdom, about the rationale and of course the constitutional implications which had been raised.

It was perfectly in order for the minister to take that position, but even with those suggested amendments, there are still a number of issues to be addressed in this Bill. One is on the question of the powers of the Lord Mayor vis-a-vis the Executive Director. I see a potential danger here. There is too much power vested in the Office of the Executive Director as opposed to the Lord Mayor. 

Yes, the Bill says that the Lord Mayor shall be the political head, but more or less, the executive powers are vested in the Office of the Executive Director. The question would be, “Who would be superior to whom?” Who is answerable to whom? Is the Lord Mayor answerable to the Executive Director or is it the Executive Director who is answerable to the Lord Mayor? These are issues that we need to address. 

Secondly, the notion Lord Mayor presupposes that there are subordinate authorities headed by a mayor or rather mayors at divisional level. Do we still have that position or the minister intends to amend it so that the division heads remain with the title of chairpersons and we retain the current status quo, or are we going to have various power centres with mayors as titles?

Also, on the question of the veto powers of the minister, I am happy with the observations of the committee that these powers are too much and that we needed to strike a balance. Yes, the minister should have a say in the management of the city, but we should look at the broader policy of devolution of powers to the local authority; the minister with the principle of ‘eyes on, hands off’, but now you can see the minister is not only having his eyes on, but even in direct control in the city, and he has overriding powers to decide which decision is to be upheld or which is to be rescinded. That is also a recipe for disaster.

Finally, on the timing of this Bill, I can see that this Bill affects the current electoral system in one way or the other. Nomination for local councils in Kampala is just the day after tomorrow and I can see people are already preparing for nominations; the Electoral Commission is already organising the elections, and then we come up with a law which is going in one way or the other to affect the electoral system and it must be assented to by the President.

There are areas, like for example, we are talking of counsellors who are going to represent statutory bodies, NEMA, doctors, and architects. It is all here and we have to have a mechanism or procedure on how they are going to be elected. They are counsellors who are ex-officios and who are going to represent ministries. There must be regulations to guide the Electoral Commission on how to conduct those elections and the Electoral Commission has always complained about laws being passed late.

The other day we were in court with the Electoral Commission. There is a law we passed here and I had to challenge the Electoral Commission in courts of law when they failed to comply with the requirement to publish the list of all places where the voters’ register was supposed to be displayed. I went to court and got a judgement of court where court said look, the Electoral Commission never complied with this law and should display the register again. The commission is saying no, the law came late and we are not ready to comply with that law. I am wondering if we passed this law today -(Interruption)


MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the Member holding the Floor concludes his presentation, I want to give him information based on my knowledge of what goes on in other cities. I have been able to meet quite a number of mayors in foreign countries and I have discovered, and I think it is true, that mayors - that is why they are called Lord Mayors - are really supposed to “lord” over things. Their leadership is ceremonial. They are not supposed to engage in the kind of functional work that Ugandans seem to think the Mayor of Kampala should do. I think this is where the system has broken down. The mayor should be ceremonial; the mayor should have distinguished work clearly defined and we should have experts and administrators to run the affairs of the city. I think this is from the international perception of what a mayor is supposed to be. 

I want to give this information in good faith so that if it could help us design a good law –(Applause)– in any case, the Attorney-General knows that FDC is likely to take over Government; so, why are you worried? (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I want this information to help those who may be prejudicial about the objectives of what is stated here. I know there are a number of things that we need to clean up, but I know that we need to give the right job description to the Mayor of Kampala. It is only that way that we are going to clean the city of Kampala. I thank you. 

MR LUKWAGO: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I thank you for that information and I take it in good faith. But the issue is that the Lord Mayor, according to this Bill and according to the law, should have political authority. He is the political head. I wonder how a political leader would just be ceremonial. The next thing you know, you will be talking about a ceremonial president. 

So, in this particular case, I think the Lord Mayor should have executive powers to effectively play the oversight roles because that is the key function of the Lord Mayor and counsel - the political leadership to play the oversight role in the council. Otherwise, I thank you for the amendments you have made, hon. minister. I talked about the Bill being brought late; so, I do not know how you are going to address this, because on Thursday morning, we are going ahead with the nominations. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.59
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for having ambushed us in the way he has done. It is regrettable because the decision about Kampala was made with the amendment to the Constitution in 2005. This Bill was brought in 2009. It is unfortunate that this debate has been brought two days before nominations are on, and it concerns matters which are so pertinent. It is a reflection on the planning arrangements of Government. That is the worst I can say about it.  It is also necessary that Kampala is handled in a specific manner. It is sad that we have got a city that is currently the way it is or which is administered in the manner that it is. This is something that should have been handled a long time ago. 

When the amendments were brought about a year ago, the spirit of the Act or the Bill then was highly pushed to the back. I am happy to note that Government appears to have taken note of the reservations or the fears of the various stakeholders and has moved the amendments, but it looks like even the chairman of the committee has been taken by surprise about those real amendments. 

I am happy that the Lord Mayor is going to be directly elected. I am happy that land ownership issues have not been mixed up with the physical planning functions, and I am also happy that Government actually sees need to have Kampala handled in a new atmosphere. 

But be that as it may, certain things now arise. One, do we have the physical planners who are going to implement this Bill? I am asking this question because not so long ago, this very House passed the Physical Planning Act and it is already an Act of Parliament. It was meant to cover the whole country, Kampala inclusive, but ever since it was passed, nobody has taken the initiative to see it implemented. We do not even know when its commencement is going to take place. What guarantee do we have then that after we pass this Bill into an Act, it will be implemented? (Interruption)

MR KAFABUSA WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The Physical Planning Act that was passed has already started working. We are implementing it. You need to go on the ground. So, we cannot come here and tell you that it is working this month. The physical planning Bills that are submitted are scrutinised according to the new Act, and the planners are being recruited according to the new Act, and that is what we are doing now. So, the Act is working. I beg to report.

MR KAWANGA:  I thank the minister for that information, but when you read the Physical Planning Act, there is a commencement date for that Act. It must be by a statutory instrument issued by the minister, to tell us the commencement date. Has that instrument been passed? So, if it has really been passed, how are we implementing that Act? But let me bring that to the notice of the minister so that he does the needful, and as far as that Act is concerned, its commencement is going to be a different date and it has to be stated. So, that aspect has to be handled if that Act has to be implemented. 

But be that as it may, even the bodies that implement it are named and they include Kampala. So, if that Act is to pass, then we may have to make an amendment which excludes Kampala from the operation of the Physical Planning Act if this one has to come into execution. 

The other issue is, if you are going to amend the Act to make the Lord Mayor elected by everybody in Kampala and yet you have got an Executive Director, how are you going to handle the conflict of interest of an elected mayor who thinks he has the mandate of the people and an appointed executive director who receives directives from the Central Government? This is something that has to be handled; otherwise we are going to run into conflict. What about the other councillors who will be elected? What will be their function if they have to hold elective offices?

The other issue is the relationship between Kampala City, whose boundaries have now been defined, and all the neighbouring districts. If Kampala has to be planned, it is necessary that even the neighbouring districts have to be planned and those plans should be able to harmonise with the ones of Kampala City. How are you going to handle that if you are operating under different statutes? Take the example of infrastructure; if we are to establish a railway system which operates from Kampala to Buloba and beyond, or even Entebbe, which should be in place by now, how are we going to handle it between the existing legislations and the one that we are now going to pass? 

Finally, I would like to talk about the question of costs. One of the disasters of Kampala is that it has defied planning because the people who live in it have not been told that they must be part of a planned city.

Whenever you talk about planning, people say that they must be compensated, which is absolutely right because certain things have to be broken down if the plans are to take place. But has Government taken into account the kind of costs that are going to be involved in implementing whatever physical plans you are going to put in place? And if you have planned for Kampala, what about the neighouring districts, because they too, have to be taken into account? I am saying this because, for those of you who have seen a few roads that are being done – you repair a murram road today or even in the outskirts of Kampala, but the following day, the people who are in the neighbourhood start constructing their own humps because they think the vehicles will now be running at a faster speed. The problem is that they make unmarked humps with nobody disciplining them. 

So, if you have to talk about physical planning, what sanctions are you going to put in place to ensure those people who do not comply with the plans are handled? This should be taken into account because it is the rich people - the important people, who do not comply with the plans. You see them building in wetlands and causing all the havoc around with impunity. What guarantee do we have that after passing this Bill into law, it will be implemented? 

I would like, however, to say that it is a happy moment for us to be able to address the question of administering Kampala in a modern way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.08
MR HASSAN KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I would like to look at this Bill in three perspectives. One, is the perspective of a functional administrative adjustment in respect of the office of His Lordship, the Mayor of Kampala, and the civil administrator – the person to deal with the administration technically.

The second aspect is that of the physical adjustment to the geographical areas of Kampala. I expected a map of the city as it is today, attached to this report. I am sure that the districts that are neighbouring Kampala are growing and are likely to merge with Kampala. So, the relationship between Kampala and those other districts in terms of mapping needed to be attached here. This means that this Bill required consultations with the people both in Kampala and the neighbouring areas.

Given the time factor vis-a-vis the elections of 2011 into which we have so far entered, and there being two categories of contenders nominated so far - the presidential candidates and the LC III, in two days’ time, nominations for LC V will be handled. So, how are the neighbouring districts going to respond to this Bill when it becomes a law? Should their elections be affected by the law that is going to come out of this Bill? How are the elections going to be harmonised with the requirements of the new law? I, therefore, submit that this Bill be withheld until after the elections. I thank you.

4.12
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to raise some concerns in one particular area. The honourable minister in his presentation tried to cover part of it, but it is unfortunate this is the one section that the chairman of the committee left out, yet it covers the purpose of this Bill.

We are debating this Bill, but we are not looking clearly at what its purpose is. Following what the hon. Minister said, I have a lot more concerns. Among the issues to be addressed by this Bill is the improvement of roads, drainage and the sewerage systems within Kampala City. But we have not thought about the fact that this problem is not unique to Kampala alone. So, if that is the principle under which we are bringing this Bill where there are potholes, somebody should take responsibility.

In the municipality that I represent, we are also drowning in potholes. The drainage system is equally collapsing. The sewerage and the sanitation situation is even worse where the Central Government has responsibility. And as you may be aware, I have on several occasions raised the matter that the Police barracks in my municipality is a big problem. Each time it rains, we get worried about cholera and dysentery spreading to the nearby schools.

If the theory is that Central Government can address this problem and it is also covering the area of roads – of recent Central Government took over a number of roads. Yes, they have done some work; but some of the roads are actually in a worse situation than they were in, before Central Government took over them. In those circumstances, where do we now transfer the responsibility? 

I am concerned that if Government has not demonstrated ability to address some of these problems in other areas, what makes us think that by taking over Kampala City, they will address these problems? The planning issue of Kampala did not begin yesterday. The problems that have developed did not begin yesterday; they are issues that have been ongoing. We now find a situation in Kampala where one cannot direct their visitors to their places of residence. This has trickled to the municipalities and other towns, which deliver similar services like Kampala within their regions. 

Are we sure that this Bill is really addressing the problems as stated or there are some other reasons behind the tabling of this Bill?

The minister raised a concern that the fire services should reach all areas. But two years ago, in Lira Municipality, we had a fire and the closest fire engine was in Gulu. The next one was in Soroti. Central Government that bears the responsibility has not addressed it. We have numerous fires in various municipalities across the country. How is this Bill going to address some of these glaring problems? 

Is there some miracle behind this Bill which is suddenly going to make certain functions work more efficiently than they have, previously? My only concern is, can we clearly state what the Bill is supposed to address and how this Bill is specifically going to address those problems? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Nicolas de Torrente, Programme Manager, Deepening Democracy Programme, and Mr Simon Osborne, Component Manager, Political Parties and Parliamentary Deepening Democracy Programme. These are our development partners; they are here to observe the business conducted in the House. You are most welcome. (Applause)

4.17
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion in as far as it is attempting to address the numerous problems in Kampala City. Kampala City needed more attention yesterday than today. A city that is the mirror of the country really needed substantial effort, which is deliberate in view of the planning and the running of the city like other world capitals. 

When you walk on the streets of Kampala; when you go to receive services rendered by the city - this is the only city which was planned for six million Ugandans, but now we are 31 million Ugandans. You look at the city; you fail to get parking and the services - look at the roads that are being constructed in Kampala. Immediately the road is constructed, National Water and Sewerage digs the road; the posts and telecommunications dig through the same road; even without any pose, you find other service providers carrying out contradictory works along the city streets.

I would like to urge Members that it is high time we had a planned city. The other day, I was in Nairobi, but apparently it seems to be a step ahead. Even the road from the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport to Nairobi, you cannot compare it with this one from Kampala to Entebbe, despite the fact that we have just recently hosted CHOGM. We missed the opportunity to have a dual carriage road and I thought, maybe it is high time we had a central planning unit and hand over the city to a competent body, and I strongly support this arrangement.

Having said that, the mere putting up of Kampala as a separate entity from the rest of the country - I think that in our planning, we do not consider the current boundaries of the city, because the city is expanding, but the minister has just conceded that the boundaries of Kampala shall remain as they are.

This is dangerous in a sense that we are coming out to plan to see how Kampala fits with the neighbouring districts like Mukono, Mpigi, Wakiso and others. If we limit the operation of the Bill to those areas of the current boundaries, it may not give full weight to the essence of the Bill —

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are dealing with something which was a command of the Constitution and when you read Article 5, you will find out what constitutes Uganda. You will find that they talk about regions, the capital, and districts. If you are to expand the capital, which is No.2 in the bricks making Uganda, you will be mixing up bricks; that is why I think he has said they will not take Entebbe as part of the capital because Entebbe is part of a region. So, trying to bring a part of a region in an area which is not part of the region, may cause a constitutional problem.

MR SEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, though I was looking at how the Bill can be harmonised, say how the planning authority can relate with other areas not specifically Kampala alone.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform hon. Ssekikubo that in the Bill, it is indicated that a metropolitan arrangement and physical planning will address the adjacent areas that neighbour Kampala. So, your fear is being addressed by a physical planning authority.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Badda. But amongst what is being envisaged is to facilitate investments and cut down the cost of doing business in the city. I really do not know how this will be actualised because when you talk of investment, we are currently having the industrial park at Namanve. I wish the Members could visit the park. How many industries have been established there? You may find more residential houses in the supposed industrial park. How shall we facilitate investments? Look at the former Coffee Marketing Board, what investment is there? Look at the industrial area in the middle of the city, the best you can find are warehouses, no industry to talk about. 

The point I am driving at is that, it is not enough to have a Bill, but it should be accompanied by active deliberate measures to achieve this. Short of this, we are making a law for political expediency, but we may not be able to realise the envisaged benefits on the ground.

Mr Speaker, lastly, I would like to comment about the powers given to the minister. Ministers have all along had powers, but how have they performed in their dockets? Look at all the ministries; look at how they have been performing under their dockets. Already, are they having success stories that KCC has been under a local government arrangement, and that is why there has been mismanagement? It is not the case. Look at the bodies that are under Central Government. To me, it will only be cosmetic to think that this Bill will be a panacea. The total running down of Kampala has been done even when the President is a resident in the city centre. Now he is out and resides at Entebbe, I think. He leaves behind a city that is already down. 

So, the essence is not to place the city under an authority or Central Government. The essence is to allow the city and its organs to function. If there is law enforcement, let us enforce it. 

This business of saying we shall enhance revenue generation in the city once there is an authority; how shall we do that when the market dues are not collected? When politics takes the better side of the physical planning and management?

Mr Speaker, I think the problem is when we emasculate the organs and institutions from performing their mandate. I thank you.

4.27
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues. I want to sincerely thank the minister for having brought the Bill, and also the committee for having wisely navigated through the controversies which were seemingly very teething at the beginning.

I am happy that this bi-partisan matter is being supported by all sides because planning of our sitting room - if I can call it so, because when you come to Uganda, your starting point is Kampala; Kampala is the image and it is, therefore, very important that it reflects what the country should be. I am also happy that the earlier language which was being used, of Kampala takeover, seems to have subsided and we are now talking about planning of a city, and I think that is very important. 

The challenge, however, is that as we grapple with the challenge of planning the already complicated Kampala, the escape route for a more affluent place of planning, lies outside what we are now calling Kampala. But I think there is a very big challenge as we deal with the Kampala Capital City Bill. Government should find more money to even finance and operationalise the Physical Planning Act in Wakiso, Entebbe and Mukono. 

For example, the Lake Victoria scenery which is largely in Mukono and Wakiso is the place to be, but these districts do not have the money. So, I want to emphasise that after making the law, we as Parliament, when it comes to appropriation, should put more money in the land sector. 

In this country, we should find courage to urbanise. The Physical Planning Act is here and we still have challenges of landuse planning and the land policy which is coming. Of course, much as we have separated the land matters from the planning function, I think as leaders we should find some courage to confront our land challenges and possibly go for some serious reforms, because I still see a very big problem if we do not take the reforms on the land matters head on. 

If you visited where the state has more say on land, you would even see it by the level of planning and organisation. But for us with multiple land tenure, and radical titles belonging to somebody, I can see we may not get a very beautiful city in the next years. If not very far from now, some constitutional amendment can be done because it is a reality that Mukono will become a city and just as Wakiso. Therefore, we should not wait for it to become a big slum like Kampala before we can again take the same remedy. I think we can be more pro-active and address the neighbourhood now.

But even with our many districts that are coming up – if you see how small the trading centres are - and that is why I am saying we must find money to operationalise the Physical Planning Act so that even those small areas are planned. It is a challenge the country must face and I think it is important that we do not fear to go into those controversies because when we fear the controversies, we are preserving the dilemmas. 

We must make a choice whether to preserve the dilemmas or make some radical changes to deal with the controversies so that we move on as a country. I think this Bill if passed into an Act should only be a lesson for the other upcoming municipalities and for the other areas of Uganda which seriously need to be planned. 

The Kampala we are talking about - the structural plan, I am informed, expired - if I can use that word for lack of a better word - 12 years ago. So, we need a structural plan for the city under this Bill.

So, it again covers the area of making sure that we have a city. Towns grow into municipalities; municipalities into cities and at times we should not labour very much to deny the word conurbation because it is just a reality we cannot run away from.

About the powers of the minister vis-à-vis the one of the elected mayor or appointed executive director, I think if we separated the roles, functionality of expertise, technocratic from the political role, we should not have a very big problem and I think I can see the committee has attempted to address that.

With that, I want to end by saying that this is a long, overdue bi-partisan matter. It is a matter for the common good and I expect all Members to support it. I thank the committee and request that we support this long overdue Bill to come into an Act. I thank you very much.

4.34
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you. I thank the minister and the chairperson of the committee for the report that has just been tabled. 

Most of us who live in Kampala and who stay in Kampala most of the time agree to the need for a new arrangement on how the city should be managed, and indeed, it is a constitutional command that this arrangement should be put in place. You can even note that even when attempts were made to beautify Kampala during CHOGM, it could not be made beautiful meaning that the problems are fundamental, particularly with regard to the management of the city.

Therefore, I stand to support the motion and to agree that we should pass this Bill so that we provide for a new way of managing Kampala.

But there is an element of stampeding us like someone had earlier on said, because some of the fundamental proposals in the Bill, which had even aroused a lot of discussion, I think are the areas which the minister is now conceding to and bringing in new changes. 

But when you read the report from the chairman of the committee as somebody noted, I think the chairman and members of the committee are also hearing the amendments from the minister just on the Floor. How I wished the minister had liaised with the committee so that they came with a common position to assist us. 

Mr Speaker, page five of the report reads, “The Bill provides for the Lord Mayor and Deputy Lord Mayor to be elected from the Electoral College of Councils and the committee observed that this will address the problem Kampala has had, where the mayor who has been universally elected has tended to be untouchable.” 

In the wisdom of the committee, if the mayor is elected by the Electoral College, that would be medicine for Kampala. But the minister is now abandoning that position and he is now saying that the mayor has to be elected through universal suffrage. How I wish you had harmonised with the committee before coming to us. The submission by the minister in a way affected some of the provisions which are in this Bill, and if the minister does not harmonise with the committee to help us expedite the process then you are likely to bog us down. 

When you look at some provisions on how the mayor can be removed – earlier on, it was envisaged that the mayor would be chosen through election by the councillors. So, given the real position, some of the provisions in the Bill have to change. I know we are time barred with regard to the nominations, but I wish there was time for the committee to sit with the minister and harmonise their positions and amend the relevant provisions in this Bill so that House is able to move faster.

The other comment I would like to make is on the observation by the committee that once this Bill is passed, in their interpretation, Kampala will not be represented by a Woman Member of Parliament. My view is that if this Parliament maintains that women Members of Parliament remain within our political and legal framework, then Kampala City should also be represented by a woman. If it requires amending the Constitution or any other existing laws, I think it should be done. This city has a population of close to three million people and we cannot leave it unrepresented when other districts are being represented, simply because it is called a city. I think it would be unfair to the population within Kampala. So, I think the necessary laws should be amended to provide for that representation by a woman Member of Parliament –(Interruption) 

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Baryomunsi for giving way. Clause 64 of the Bill, on page 56, preserves those electoral areas and the offices of those Members of Parliament. Let me read it; “For the avoidance of doubt, this Act shall not be taken to affect any enactment relating to presidential and parliamentary elections and the demarcation of constituencies by the Electoral Commission.” 

My understanding of this provision is that it is trying to preserve the current status of constituencies. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Constitution says, “Every district shall be represented by a woman member of Parliament” it does not say “every city”. So, hon. Minister, could you help us to see where it is said that every city shall be represented by a woman Member of Parliament? 

MR NDEZI: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. I think we need to make it clear that nothing in this Constitution stops the women of Kampala from being represented in this Parliament. I beg to read Article 78 to guide this august House. 78(b) provides for one woman representative for every district. Let me read part “c” because it is very important; (c) Such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine”. 

What does this mean? It implies that if this Parliament has the will and commitment to have the women of Kampala represented in this Parliament, this provision supports you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem – and it can be treated tomorrow or the other day, is that Article 78 talks about one woman representative for every district. The problem then is that Kampala is not a district, but since under Article 78 we say, “Such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers as Parliament may determine…”, then this week when we are reviewing the representation, under Article 78, we can as well say, “With one woman representing the capital” and that will solve the problem. But now, since Kampala is not a district, it does not qualify under 78(1)(b).

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope at the appropriate time I will catch your eye and make my substantive contribution. But I think the view the chair is giving may be subject to other interpretations because as you can realise, any geographical representation of women is covered under 78(1)(b). when it comes to 78(c), it is talking of groups of persons; that is why it says, “Representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities” then it goes on to say “…and other groups as Parliament may determine -”

So, my view would be -(Interjections)- what we are saying is that you are all agreeable that Kampala should have some representation. That should not be contentious. We are all agreeable to that. But let us do something that will not cause some other controversy. If it means amending the Constitution and providing for it; then let it be and then we have no controversy. My own view really – very considered opinion - is that we cannot provide for that under 78(1)(c); we cannot. But we can amend the Constitution and provide for another category of Kampala City.

THE SPEAKER: No, without amending the Constitution, you can bring up the issue of the capital city under 78(2). Can you read it for us?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause 1(b) and (c) of this article…”  Yes, then I agree. (Interjections) “…for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.” I think this could pass, but not 78 (1)(c).

THE SPEAKER: I have said 78(2); there is a way. 

MR KATUNTU: There could be some window.

THE SPEAKER: Because you can say we increase the human representative of the capital.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the point is that we all agree the capital should be presented; then the legal experts can help us with how to ensure that we comply with the law.

THE SPEAKER: I think this debate is good. It is alerting the Attorney-General when he brings his Motion to operationalise 78 to take care of the capital.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I just had a comment on the executive director. Like I commented earlier on, we may need to revisit the duties of the executive director as compared to the Lord Mayor given the new position. Also, when you look at the provision on the qualifications of the executive director, I think it is not very specific. It reads, “A person is not qualified to be appointed executive director unless he or she is of high moral character and proven integrity and has substantial experience and relevant qualifications in public management.”  I think this is vague. 

We need to qualify it and put specific qualifications otherwise, someone could have been an LC I chairman for long and maybe has a mere certificate and then we say that is substantial experience and so forth -(Interjections)- yet somewhere, for the Resident City Commissioner, we are saying you should be qualified to be a Member of Parliament; meaning that you should have at least A’Level or its equivalent. So, the thought it provides now; it means somebody who is not even fit to be a Member of Parliament can easily be appointed to be executive director and when we reach that provision, we shall move some amendments to make it more clear that this person should be qualified to some level to be able to work as executive director. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.41
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for a job well done. Through you, I join my colleagues in supporting this important Bill. I have three points, but owing to a very interesting debate we had three minutes ago, I have decided to zero on one point; I am trying my best to help the Attorney-General in drafting the resolution relating to Article 78.

I beg you to look at objective 6 of the Constitution. Let me read it. “The State shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on all Constitutional and other bodies.” There are very many marginalised women in Kampala and these are covered by the provisions of this Constitution. Therefore, they deserve to be represented in this august House.

Secondly, Article 32(1) requires the state to take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender and other criteria. Paragraph (2) of the same article prohibits this Parliament from enacting a law that does the opposite of affirmative action. I would ask that we start with it. If the proposal from the committee is accepted, it will go against Article 32. 

Under Article 32 of the Constitution, this Parliament is required to make laws appropriate for the protection of women and other marginalised groups. This Parliament has no power to do the opposite.

Thus, Mr Speaker, you have wisely ruled that this matter be considered when it comes to implementation of Article 32, 30, 78, in a resolution to be tabled by the Attorney-General. I, therefore, take this opportunity to appeal to the Attorney-General and the legislative arm of the State to ensure that that resolution coming soon provides for representation of women of Kampala District.

One more point, only to seek clarification, Mr Speaker, on page 8 of the report, recommendation No.1, the committee recommends that Government produces a visual impression of the boundaries of Kampala City. I wish and I am begging, if possible, the minister and the committee should also give us this visual impression as we debate this Bill so that we know the boundaries of the city that we are talking about.

Lastly, on page 9, the last recommendation is about delineation of Mengo Municipality as a political decision. Delineation of Mengo Municipality is understood as a political decision; but my understanding is that this Bill seeks to do the delineation itself. I am, therefore, seeking clarification from the committee chairperson whether the political decision has already been taken or it is to be taken after passing of this Bill. Thank you very much. I support the Bill.

4.55
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for their report. For the last two years, I have had the privilege of leading my colleagues on the Committee on Local Government Accounts and we have moved throughout the entire country. One thing which we have noted is that there is a big problem in the administration of the urban centres. All these administrations are riddled with inefficiency, incapacities and corruption, and all these affect service delivery in these urban centres, call them district headquarters. You may just remove the words “Kampala City” from this report and replace them with Kanungu and this whole report will pass. 

The problems of Kanungu today are the same as those of Kampala in terms of service delivery and efficient running of the town. So, when Government comes up, I think, with this sort of Bill - we had problems in some of the aspects, but I urge my colleagues to support this initiative. It might be good for the city. 

None of us would like to live in Kampala as it is today unless you have not travelled out of this town. But anybody who has ever been out of Uganda and gone to any city, really it cannot be compared with this village called Kampala. We need to sit and see how to redevelop Kampala and offer our people better services.

Mr Speaker, let me tell you. You just need to study the reports of the Auditor-General and see how Kampala has been mismanaged under the present legal regime. Obviously, if the - I do not know what is causing excitement -(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: You mentioned Kanungu. 

MR KATUNTU: Oh. Okay let me say “Iganga” for hon. Amama Mbabazi to be comfortable; but I can tell you that even if you say Kamwenge or Iganga it would equally apply. They lack competent managers and the district councils are riddled with sectarianism, corruption and inefficiency; they cannot even appoint a proper competent manager. So, it is a big tragedy. 

I think let us support this Bill, in my view, but it is giving us one lesson that the problem is not only in Kampala. It is throughout the country. Hon. Werikhe, I do not know whether you have a functional urban or physical planning unit. All these towns - you just mention them. Let all our colleagues look at the towns where they come from - Iganga, Bundibugyo - and see whether these towns are being developed on some planning system. You find a huge building and in front of it there is a pit latrine and people are saying there is a physical planning unit somewhere in some ministry. You people are not working. 

In fact, when you look at the orthodox districts, take for example Tororo, during the time of the colonialists, they had some sort of planning. You know you have a golf course area - I understand these days they are selling them. Can you imagine? The greens are now being turned into graves. You see, really, the whole thing is a tragedy and I think this Bill might seek to address this problem and personally, together with my colleagues, especially hon. Erias Lukwago who sits with me on the same committee, we know these problems. They know these problems. 

So, let us ensure the problems in this Bill are clearly defined. For example, I heard the problem of the functions of the mayor. Once you say that he is a political head that means he superintends and supervises the city as a political head and it is provided for in the Bill. So, that should not be a problem in my view. That should not be a problem. 

So, Mr Speaker, I do not want to labour very much because everybody believes that we need to do something about Kampala and about all our urban centres. So, I support this Bill, Mr Speaker.   

5.01
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is obvious that Kampala is in a very sorry state. It is almost a shame to try and equate it with other cities like Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam. I have not been to Kigali, but I hear Kigali is in a class of its own. 

But I am in a dilemma. I am in a big dilemma because I do not know how to support this Bill. I think the problems of Kampala cannot be cured by another enactment of a law. I am not one of those people who think that every problem can only be cured by legislation. The problem of Kampala can be cured because the problem is implementation and the implementers. 

Let me give you an example. I play golf and some of my colleagues also do the same; hon. John Byabagambi, hon. Jim Muhwezi and hon. Omach. Once in a while in golf, you have to go back for training. I had a colleague here with whom I went to the trainer one day - unfortunately he passed on; he was a minister. So, since he was senior, I asked him to state his problem first. He said he had a problem with a golf swing and so the trainer said, “You swing and I see.” My friend did it three times and the trainer said, “Sorry, I cannot help you. Your problem is structural.” My colleague had a big tummy and a big back -(Laughter)– so, he could not swing. (Laughter)(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Wacha, for yielding the Floor. I am seeking clarification. If what you are saying is correct, how come you say you play golf with the hon. Byabagambi? (Laughter)

MR WACHA: I do not know whether hon. Byabagambi has gone to the trainer and -(Laughter)– so, I cannot say what the trainer told him. What I am saying is that Kampala’s problem is structural - (Mr Byabagambi rose_) (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank hon. Wacha for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that as you know, I am the best swinger. My handicap is 10 and I am among the best golfers in this country. (Laughter)

MR WACHA: Yes, but I hear even Tiger Woods has to go back for training once in while. What I am saying is that the problem is bigger than just enactment of a law. It is much bigger and the problem is compounded by the fact that the minister says he is not going to do anything about the boundaries of Kampala and so the geographical area of Kampala remains the same. So, that aspect of the Bill is taken care of even as we stand now. 

Then there is the issue which he just brought up that the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor will be elective. That is what is happening now. Then you run into the problem of what roles they are going to play under the new regime. Once they are elected then there is going to be another Sebaggala and you will have the same problem he has been having with the town clerk.
 
MR LUKWAGO: The clarification I am seeking is about your submission regarding the clash between the mayor and the town clerk. I wish to know whether it is a structural or personal problem. If it is personal, then it has got nothing to do with this Bill.

MR WACHA: The issue I am trying to raise is the clash of authority. The political head will stick to the fact that he/she has been elected and then the town clerk will say he/she is the administrative head. How do you define the administrative head and the political head?

On the issue of bringing in the planning authority; Kampala is in such a mess. Houses are built on sewers and road reserves. Unless you tell me that this particular authority is going to act like Odinga Odinga did in Nairobi, then we are still wasting time because we are just replacing the housing authority with a planning authority which already exists in Kampala City Council. It is not the issue of laws which is curtailing our operations; it is the issue of implementation and lack of it. We should be sure that there will be no more interference from above.

Who interfered with the removal of boda bodas from Kampala? Does this need another law to realise that the motorcyclists are congesting the city centre? We have to rethink our need for a Bill? 

Somebody talked about land; yes, we need land, but who says that Government cannot buy land from the owners? I find a lot of difficulty in supporting this Bill.

5.10
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank the minister and the committee for the report. 

My worry is the faith of action which we are undertaking. On the face of it, it looks like the law is innocent, but the speed with which we are rushing makes it suspect. It looks like we are trying to beat the deadline for nominations. We all know that there other authorities in this country which are not performing wonderfully. We have got the National Planning Authority -

THE SPEAKER: The title of the Bill says that boundaries of Uganda are demarcated in the Second Schedule. It continues to say that Kampala, located in Buganda, shall continue to be the capital city of Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government. The territorial boundary of Kampala shall be demarcated with an Act of Parliament.

Parliament shall make provisions for administration and development of Kampala as the capital city. We delayed actually; we should have done this earlier. The question of justification does not arise.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, for the guidance, but it simply complicates the matter. We all knew that this was in the Constitution, but we did not handle it in time. So, working on it just two days to the nominations is suspect.

THE SPEAKER: This is Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009; so the delay must have been with us. It has been with us for over a year now.

MR KYANJO: The people I represent tend to think like I do. Therefore, when you tell them that the Bill has been here for many months thus making it necessary to be handled two days to nominations, they will not understand.

I want to look at the performance of other authorities, for example, the National Planning Authority. It has seen planning turned upside down without taking any action. We have got NEMA which has failed to work with us to bring some sanity in the city. This is not absence of authority but lack of faith. We have got the National Drug Authority but no one can say that fake drugs are not entering the country. 

We remember that those that were campaigning promised a trade order. Some of them had made attempts to keep away the buses. The head of state stood up and said that he could not allow his people from the villages to be dropped off at Natete. The trade order in Kampala is such that you have a shop and pay license, but you have got a group of people selling tomatoes on your veranda, and boda bodas and taxis in front of you. We are talking about bringing a law as if it will chase away the problems. If there is an upper hand that can overrule the city authorities then we are wasting time. 

It is gratifying to know that the issue of boundaries was looked into because it was going to cause a lot of controversy within the Constitution. We are looking at a short remedy of retaining the old boundaries. Part of the problem why Kampala is a menace is because individuals think that they must be on Kampala Road. If they realise properly shortly after today, they will know that it is necessary to go and put up modern structures, well planned, away from the boundaries of Kampala. Now, will you leave this to local governments? Or shall we come back and amend the law to include them? If the minister was capable of explaining this matter to us and we address this with the expansion element, then we would be able to go back and explain to the people whom I said may have difficulty in understanding the faith of action this evening. Thank you.

5.17
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for giving a very comprehensive report. I have three submissions to make. 

I think the government should not bow to political pressure from any political group within the city. I would, personally, be comfortable with an appointed mayor so that we solve this problem once and for all. Because the moment we have an elected mayor who needs votes from ordinary boda boda riders and traders in Kisekka, there is bound to be a conflict between the mayor and the Executive Director. We shall have a populist leader who will say, “Do not touch my boda boda riders” and then you have an Executive Director who has ordered that we clamp down on boda boda riders. So, we are not solving any problem. 

I want to appeal to the minister to get back to the original position; that we have an appointed mayor. For example, look at the Uganda National Roads Authority; it is doing a thorough job, together with Uganda Revenue Authority. So, why are we now giving a 50-50 solution to the problem of Kampala? 

This city is for all of us and no one should look at it with an eye that sees it as, “This is our village”, no! This is a city. And anyway, it has been gazetted. So, I really appeal to the minister to get back to the original position. In fact, in Nairobi where I was recently, they changed from an electoral college mayor to one elected through universal adult suffrage. However, they are now having problems. Originally, they gazetted smoking areas; smoking dens where people go to smoke as a matter of law. But now with an elected mayor, you will find two or three people around just because he is close to the mayor or he was a campaigner. So, we have to swallow the bitter pill and I appeal to Members that we even ignore the position where Government has pulled out and we just have a mayor who can wield power and authority, not one who will spend a lot of time politicking. (Laughter) I am sorry; I live in the suburbs of Kampala, and I am fed up.

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to thank my brother, hon. Odonga-Otto. I am informed that he is now a lawyer and has the entire Constitution on his phone. I want him to refer to Article 1 of our Constitution, which says that power belongs to the people. I want to inform you that the mayor is a political office and any political office must be elected by the people so that you respect the people’s will. And if you want to be a dictator, you can practise it elsewhere but not in Uganda. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Okot Ogong, for that information. I think we have to draw a line between where we should politick and where we need a planned city. I live 14 kilometres from where we are, but it takes me three hours every morning to reach the city. We cannot continue like this. To travel 14 kilometres in three hours! I would really feel - hon. Okot Ogong, much as power belongs to the people, we are the people. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, we all appreciate the full import of democracy and what it entails and the consequences of curtailing democracy are well known to all of us who are here. Hon. Otto is talking of the pathetic situation in the city and he is insinuating that it is caused by too much democracy. (Laughter) That by allowing people to vote, it is the reason we have potholes, garbage and everything like that in the city. Is he in order to condemn democracy in Parliament? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are saying is that hon. Otto should be sympathetic to your plan to stand as the mayor of Kampala. (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I appreciate the sentiments of people like my colleague, hon. Lukwago and the electorate who want to have a feeling that they have elected their mayor who has not been appointed by someone else. But what we could do as a compromise is this: We could have an elected mayor, but we have him sit in this Parliament, having no business interfering with the planning of authority. (Laughter) Yes, if you want to elect a leader, we can elect one. Now that the amendment is coming in the next two days, I may move that the mayor becomes an ex-officio Member of Parliament so that we leave the planning duties to those who do not need anyone’s votes. Otherwise, we are not going to keep going round and round on these issues.

MR KYANJO: The clarification I want to seek from hon. Otto is that NEMA is not elected; it is appointed. But he knows quite well that when he is going home, he can see the mess that NEMA has allowed to happen all the way. Now what are we going to do?

MR ODONGA OTTO: That is a difficult question and I would not want to attempt to answer it because I do not work in NEMA, but - (Laughter)

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Otto for yielding the Floor, but I would like to say that NEMA is facing a lot of challenges not because it is not a technical group and not because it is not elected or appointed, but it is because of the land board in the city council – yes, the land board in Mengo and politicians who are elected, are causing problems for NEMA. (Mr Kyanjo rose_) This is a fact and I stand by it. Thank you. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I want to challenge my colleague the minister. She remembers the many times I have invited her to come and we work together to demarcate the area between the mainland and the wetlands. She consistently failed. The people of NEMA came, we worked with them and what remained was the arm of the minister and they were unable to proceed because the minister was running away and yet she is elected. So, the problem goes back to those people who are not capable of putting up stringent measures.  

Mr Speaker, right from Kibuye all the way to Salaama and then you catch the other stretch through the main road to Munyonyo through Nabutiti up to close to the American Embassy and then close to the other road between Kibuli and the American Embassy, all these areas have been eaten in the face of the ministers who have got the final say on NEMA.  So, is the minister in order to stand up here and say, “We are acting perfectly?” Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Change the mode of communication.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, without digressing a lot, I want to emphasise that at the committee stage I will formally move that we have an authority; we do not need a politician to be managing Kampala.

For the sentiments of people who come from the central region like hon. Erias Lukwago, we shall have a mayor being an ex-officio Member of Parliament. It will still serve the purpose of making those people tick to vote a mayor, but we need to say no to these things once and for all. (Laughter)   For example, hon. Kyanjo asked, “What is the problem with NEMA?” Maybe NEMA is not a good example; let us use the Uganda Police when they are dispersing rioters; are they elected leaders? They are not.  And you have also, just like me, been a victim of their brutality. So, we need a situation where we say, “We do not need any chaos here”.  We need a situation where we say, “No repairing watches –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: The information I want to volunteer to the hon. Otto – by the way, thank you for yielding the Floor - is that the Uganda Police is not a statutory authority. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yeah, the only relevant thing is that the Police are not elected! “Go and disperse that rally”, there is nothing like, “My voter is the other side,” much as it is not an authority. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to Government - I was in Malawi some time back. They have what they call Capitol Hill where all the government ministries are located. So, for example, we could compulsorily acquire a huge section of Kololo and take all the ministries there with one access gateway. So, if someone is going to work in the Ministry of Finance, they do not cause traffic jam in the city.  We need to start thinking hard; the moment we can remove Finance and Lands from here and take them in one area where you can even securely protect them from Al-Shabab –(Laughter)- you will automatically decongest the city.  So, I am appealing to whichever authority will come there, to consider compulsory acquisition of certain areas in Kololo and we move all Government departments. It will go a long way in –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto. I just want to give you information about the structural arrangement of Kampala – how it was originally designed to be. Kampala was originally designed to be purely commercial and the administrative city was supposed to be Entebbe.  So, all these ministers should not have had their offices here if we were to follow that plan. And surely, these chambers plus the state lodge in Nakasero which are all causing the traffic jam, should also have been in Entebbe. But do not worry, we are coming into office. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I think we do some gender balancing. Have you finished?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, with all what I have said, I still think that buildings which are being recommended for construction must not be licensed without parking space.  Because we cannot continue to narrow the streets just to allow some one to collect the revenue for city council. So, someone should come and say, “From today if you are putting up such a structure, you must make provisions for at least three or four floors for parking underground.” So, these are some of the issues on which we are giving free advice to the coming authority. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.31
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the Bill, which I am glad is recommending Kampala to be administered by the Central Government.  I pray that since the Central Government will be the one taking over the administration of Kampala, it will be able to give it enough financing because at times shoddy work is done because there is poor facilitation.

Kampala has been receiving less than the required funds - the equivalent of what the other districts have been receiving and yet we expect a lot from it. But I do request the ministry, moreso now that the administration of Kampala is going to be under the Central Government, to appreciate physical planning. The problem we have in this country is that physical planning has not been given priority.  That is why most of the towns which are mushrooming are doing so haphazardly because the component of physical planning is not being appreciated. During the recent restructuring of districts, it was not considered at all and it did not even feature in the released guidelines.  That means that a district may or may not recruit a physical planner. But after passing the recent Bill where the whole country is a planning area, we pray that the ministry responsible will issue the guidelines directing all districts to have physical planners so that the towns are well planned. 

Recently, the Ministry of Local Government contracted a few districts to plan for them -(Interjection)- and these plans, even if they are prepared and you have all the structural plans and detailed lay outs, but without the person implementing, they will just remain on the desk. So, my prayer is, please put in some interest in physical planning so that this country can develop in an organised manner. 

Mr Speaker, with the appointment of the Executive Director, it is not very clear in the Bill whether the appointment is on contract or not.  I feel that it would be better if they are appointed on contract so that if their performance is dismal, they can be removed from office. But when you look at the ways through which this person can be removed from office, they are like pensionable civil servants. But I would request that the Executive Director is appointed on a five-year contract and assessed to see whether they have performed and then perhaps the contract is renewed basing on that. 

When you look at the creation of the urban authority – in fact, this is also related to the issue of facilitation – I pray that this authority will not be dormant and it will be given all the necessary support, because when you look at the stipulated functions of this authority, all the activities it has to do - I know Kampala now has to get a structural plan because the plan, which they have is expired and a new metropolitan structural plan of Kampala must be prepared. Coming up with a structural plan in Kampala means that there are a number of issues that must be considered; there must be urban renewal and that means that there will be a lot of demolition, and with the land problems in this country - you know very well that land does not belong to Government but to the people, and when it comes to demolition, there will be a lot of compensation. So, I hope that Government will really put in a lot of money so that this authority does not look to be dormant, because even if they come up with a structural plan and it is not implemented because of some of those challenges, Kampala will not change automatically.

You remember very well and the Minister of Works is aware of what took place when the plan of the construction of the Northern Bypass came up. There was a lot of compensation and a lot of demolitions took place, and a lot of funds were used during that time. So, we pray that this will be put into consideration because at this stage where we are, if we are to solve the problems in Kampala, there must be urban renewal, which will have to bring in –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. Actually, we need to put aside a lot of money for demolition and compensation. Wouldn’t it be wise if the government started thinking of developing a new city between Nakasongola and Masindi? Thank you. (Laughter)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, hon. Member. Actually, I was coming to that. Before I go to another point, I want to say that the Bill does not indicate whether - it is talking of the chairperson of the authority and four other members and then stipulating the professions, which are going to be considered. I would request that in this authority there should be gender balance because in most cases, they appoint and then forget that even educated women are there. So, we pray that there should be consideration of a woman in this authority so that when they are appointing, the minister is aware that some of the professionals who are physical planners, architects and engineers and are women, exist.

Like hon. Bintu said, I would also like to request the government to solve most of these problems. I think it would be wise if we think of creating a second city. We shouldn’t look at only Kampala because Kampala is already squeezed and there is no room for expansion and yet there is vacant land in Nakasongola, which can be occupied and we can get technical people to prepare proper plans to accommodate these problems.

The issue of hon. Odonga-Otto, which he was talking about and referring to Lilongwe in Malawi, would not arise because some of these Government departments will be put in one area and a person will be in position to solve his problem in one day, but a person who wants to solve a land and physical planning problem and a Works problem, will move from one place to another and this is time wasting. But if all the government departments are together, you go to Ministry of Lands and get out from there. If the thing requires you to be in Works, you will go immediately to the Works office. If it requires you to be in Education you are there, but with this structure, which is in this country where some offices are in Entebbe, some in Kampala, and scattered all over the country, really affects the local  person who comes around to solve his problem.

On the issue of the mayor, I would like to concur with hon. Odonga-Otto. I am telling you that some of these problems we face in the urban centres developed because of the titles we are holding. You find that I am fearing to do something because I fear public opinion and yet if I have the powers - at least if we want the mayor to be elected, let us create an electoral college, a small one which is made up of people who will appreciate the work of a mayor and the work of planning, other than any person who will not even understand what physical planning or urban development is all about.

So, I pray that at least the ministry thinks of creating a small college to handle this matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you think that as far as the general debate is concerned, we have done our best so that you can go and think about making the law and the kind of amendment you may bring to improve the Bill? Don’t you think we should pronounce ourselves on the Motion for second reading so that - I think we might not be able to do it today, but tomorrow we can deal with the committee stage where you can handle this clause by clause. Okay, is it agreed?

So, hon. Members, the Motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Bill, 2009” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, I think what you need is to go and scrutinise these clauses and see where you think you should amend or improve so that we do the committee stage tomorrow. Is that okay? Okay.

Now, shouldn’t we utilise this time to deal with the second - because tomorrow I also want to continue with the debate on the CHOGM report. Can we dispose of this loan matter for maternal health during this time? Isn’t that okay? Is the minister here?

MR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I am not the acting Minister of Finance, but he was seated just next to me and stepped out; so, I expect him in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Can we start hearing the report?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT  TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 85.7 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO USD 130 MILLION OR USHS 286 BILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE HEALTH SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING PROJECT


MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the Speaker and all Members of the Eighth Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, is the Minister of Finance here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are aware that the person in charge of mobilising money is the Minister of Finance and the moment the Minister of Finance is not around, it means he has withdrawn the issue of mobilisation. We have a debt problem and a debt strategy problem. Maybe the minister has said that because of unsustainable debts, “I have gone out” and you can say that the only person responsible for Finance is the Minister of Finance. So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right to – 

THE SPEAKER: Since the Leader of Government Business is here, please, tell us the position because this motion is in the name of the Ministry of Finance. What do we do?

5.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want first of all to thank the Speaker and the honourable Members of Parliament for having –(Interruption)  

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, the agenda item says “Motion for a resolution of Parliament….” Can I be told whether it has been moved? I see the minister just sitting there, doing nothing. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow SDR 85.7 million, equivalent to US$ 130 million, and equivalent to Shs 286 billion from the International Development Association of the World Bank, for financing the health systems strengthening project. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this loan was laid before Parliament and it was handed over to the Committee on National Economy. It is to borrow this amount of money which was negotiated by the Government of Uganda and it is supposed to finance the health systems strengthening project, which project will be implemented by the Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, Members will note that in Uganda, service delivery has deteriorated due to among other things problems related to health systems, namely, human resources, medicines, health supplies, logistics, health infrastructure, leadership and the management challenges. This loan is supposed, among other things, to address those challenges and for the last three years, the government expenditure on health as a percentage of the total budget has been fairly consistent, ranging from 7.5 percent in 2001 to nine percent in 2007, and 11.6 percent in 2008/09 as opposed to the 2001 Abuja Declaration targets of 15 percent. The per capita expenditure on health is about US$ 25 of which US$ 7 is against the Health Strategic Plan II which targets US$ 28 and the World Health Organisation target of US$ 40. 

This loan is meant to bridge the gap especially to do with Uganda’s maternal mortality ratio which is currently very high at 435 deaths per 1,000 live births and the maternal mortality ratio translates up to 6,000 women dying every year due to pregnancy related causes. This loan is supposed to address that challenge and bring down the mortality ratio. Likewise, the contraceptive prevalence rate for Uganda has been 23.6 percent among the lowest in the sub-region and it is aggravated by the fact that the unmet need for family planning is still at 41 percent and yet only 46 percent of the health facilities offer family planning services.

Lastly, the infant mortality rate in Uganda is as high as 76 percent per 1,000 live births and about 29 of all infant deaths occur in neonatal period - that is the first 28 days of life - with three quarters of the neonatal deaths occurring in the first week and the highest risk of death being within the first 24 hours. The leading causes have been antefix, sepsis and bleeding from the cord. 

Mr Speaker, this loan is supposed to address these infant mortality rates to bring them down to manageable levels, and the third element which is going to be addressed by this loan is the human resource element, which has been at crisis levels. Human resources are still short both in number and skill to effectively respond to the health needs of their country. The institutional capacity has been very weak and this loan is supposed to address that challenge, Mr Speaker. 

This loan has been considered by the Committee on National Economy and many stakeholders and I beg to move that the committee can expound more on the findings. I thank you. 

5.54
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to sincerely thank the Speaker and all the Members of the Eighth Parliament for having made a big push for this loan. It has been an old story right from the days of Suruma to-date, and we have been promised that this is the beginning. 

On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I now present a report on the request by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 85.7 million equivalent to Shs 286 million from the World Bank IDA for financing the health systems strengthening project. 

The minister has already given the brief to Parliament, and I have circulated some copies. I think that will help us and save us from going into the details. Largely, if you look at the components, one is maternal and newborn services; the second one is the human resources for health. The minister has talked about the objectives; so, I will straight away go to page 10 on the project component. 

Since you all have the brief to Parliament from the minister and we have circulated the copies, I will go to page 11 on component 1, which is about the improvement of maternal newborn and family planning services to take US$ 30 million. The second component on page 12 is about the improved health workforce, development and management at US$ 5 million. The biggest component, which is also related to maternal health and newborn health, is the improved infrastructure of the existing health facilities. The last one is about the improved leadership management and accountability for health service delivery at US$ 10 milion. So, clearly, you can see that the bigger amount of US$ 115 million is for infrastructure and maternal health.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we inquired about the earlier project, which this Parliament approved. We have availed copies of this booklet to all Members of Parliament. If you did not pick one from the table outside, I would request that you get a copy now. I also would like to lay a copy on the Table because we agreed with the Committee on Social Services to internalise this report in detail together. You can also see how the earlier maternal health loan was handled. 

I would also like to lay on the Table the project appraisal document with an implementation plan for the same. Again, a few copies are available. 

Finally, we have field reports and minutes to lay on the Table. The field reports were generated after our joint visits of the facilities in the different regions including Apac, Masindi and Moyo with the Committee on Social Services.

We also have –

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us your observations and the recommendations.

MR MUKITALE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. With your guidance, let me move to page 19 on observations and recommendations.

The committee observed that the achievements of the project development will be measured using the following key performance indicators: Delivery taking place in Government and private non-profit health facilities; pregnant mothers at least attending four antenatal care visits; in percentage terms, contraceptives prevalence rate; people with access to basic packages of health; and nutrition or population services and direct project beneficiaries, which will include the female percentage.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health ensures that up-to-date baseline information or data on the above indicators for the targeted health facilities in the project are in place. This is so that the measurements of the performance of the project at its end become meaningful and realistic.

The committee observed that in order to ensure value for money, at least two value-for-money audits will be commissioned by the Auditor-General during the lifespan of the project. The funding for this activity is provided for in the project. We found this very commendable.

The committee observed that in the improvement of maternal, newborn and family planning services, the project component on nutrition intervention related to maternal health and child health had been excluded from the project. This is inspite of the fact that nutrition is among the project indicators for performing, monitoring and evaluation. The committee recommends that the ministry revisits this area in future to ensure it puts in place adequate measures of incorporating nutrition interventions in future projects. 

The committee observed that the project will create a central job bureau at Ministry of Health, which will be duplication in the role currently played by the Health Service Commission.  The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry should instead strengthen the Health Service Commission to enable it to efficiently and effectively perform its function, especially that of improving human resource for health to address maternal and neonatal care.

We are concerned that the development partners seem to be increasingly making a demand that the project implementation units are appointed outside the existing ministry structures. We think this is dangerous. As Parliament, we had earlier demanded that – and Government has been following on that - the ministry uses the same human resource for project coordination. So, we observed that that concern should be addressed.

The committee also observed that Government has requested Uganda Martyrs University to develop a two-year masters’ programme in hospital management. The project will support Ministry of Health to implement this training programme as well as upgrade staff already in management positions. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should ensure that accreditation of such proposed courses is done.
	
We also did observe that most health units lacked basic equipment such as examination coaches and delivery beds in maternity wards. Those that existed are old and rusty which discourages mothers from delivering from health units. Limited space in maternity wards and almost all health wards at all levels had worsened the situation. The committee recommends that Government should clearly earmark a budget for that and give it the necessary attention it deserves in order to make big strides towards achieving Millennium Development Goal No.5 (MDG 5). 

We had to request the ministry to give us their Health Sector Strategic Plan to help us understand what plans they have for those areas which are specifically mentioned in this project. I would request that copies be given to Members. Now that we are talking about national development, as Parliament, when we are dealing with a few interventions we should know what is next and what the gaps are. We thought that it was important that we share with the Committee on Social Services and the Members of Parliament the information in the Health Sector Strategic Investment Plan. I now lay a copy on the Table.

I also want to say that we came across a contract. Whereas Moyo Hospital is very clean, was built at the same time with Apac, and have kept their equipment, in Apac we got to realise that a lot of equipment was rusty. Even from the earlier money sought from the ministry to repair Apac Hospital, by the time we were there the contractor had not yet delivered; he was supposed to have handed over in 2008. We want to request the minister to call upon that Apac contractor on that issue.

The committee observed that the state of infrastructure of health facilities was way below the expected standards. The committee observed that the level of dilapidation around and within health facilities at all levels was shocking. Most buildings needed renovation, reconstruction or extension, while some facilities were completely missing. In Masindi and Apac hospitals for instance, despite being district general hospitals the entire health infrastructure at these facilities required a complete makeover.

The committee observed that the provision of infrastructure for water supply in health facilities was either by boreholes for rural-based health facilities, or piped water for peri-urban and urban health facilities. In the case of district hospitals that we visited, water supply and plumbing systems were either defective or completely out of order.

The committee also observed that there were few available staff houses in the facilities visited and even the available ones either required renovation or were in a dilapidated state and not fit for habitation. Lack of staff accommodation had been cited as a major cause of failure to attract and retain staff at these health facilities.

The committee recommends that Government should formulate a deliberate policy to attract health practitioners, especially medical officers, to work in rural and hard-to-reach areas. The policy should have approaches to provide additional hardship allowances for medical staff posted to districts with areas that are hard-to-reach and live in, especially those that were affected by armed conflicts, very peripheral, remote and poor.

The committee further observed that most of the established vacancies in the health units were not filled up hence leading to a high patient to medical worker ratio. The most affected staffing positions were those of medical doctors, clinical officers, enrolled midwives and laboratory staff.

The committee recommends to Parliament that the Ministry of Health should expedite the process of recruitment to fill vacant posts in all health facilities in order to improve the medical worker to patient ratio, the lack of staff accommodation and poor remuneration. These are major factors in attracting and retaining medical personnel and they should be addressed as a matter of urgency.

The committee also observed that health facilities had a challenge of meeting the expense of alternative energy sources. A few health facilities that had managed to secure generators and solar panels were always confronted with problems of sustainability due to high maintenance costs involved. Unstable and total lack of power supply in some cases rendered operating theatres in hospitals and health centre IVs and a few existing specialised equipment such as x-rays and ultrasound machines redundant most of the time. The committee recommends that Government should consider subsidising utilities for health facilities. Those that do not have access to hydro electric power should be facilitated to install alternative sources of power such as solar power.

The committee also observed that health facilities lack reliable means of transport to enable them carry out evacuation of emergency cases, providing outreach services and delivery of supplies. We do recommend that at higher levels - district, regional and national referral hospitals - the Ministry of Health needs to consider a special budget to cater for maintenance of available ambulance services which have largely been neglected.

We also did observe that the financial impact of the project on Government’s health spending will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of renovated facilities, and repair and replacement of medical equipment. The committee recommends that Government should scale up its commitment to increased health budget financing if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project lifespan by ensuring that the recurrent costs due to the project are timely absorbed to the national budget.

On page 24, as I conclude, the committee noted the government efforts to address health systems bottlenecks and improve effectiveness of the health sector. Emphasis on addressing system wide constraints will ensure reproductive activities become more sustainable. 

The project aims to improve functionality of the existing health facilities, in particular, to deliver maternal and child health services which represent a major source of disease burden in our population. Investing in reproductive health care, especially family planning, will not only release the strain on the government budget for social services, but will also improve the health of mothers and children and the overall welfare of households.

As it had been earlier stated by the Minister of Health, we are concerned as to why it was US$ 130 million, but we were reliably informed that the figure was supposed to be US$ 600 million from the World Bank although the initial is US$ 130 million. So, we were given assurance - possibly Ministry of Health and Finance will tell us that more is yet to come – and that is why we did ask for the health sector investment plan. We wanted to know which of those areas are going to be beneficiaries of this Health Systems Strengthening Project (HSSP) II which was already being rolled out.

In conclusion, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the government request to borrow the much needed SDR 85.7 million, equivalent to US$ 130 million and equivalent to, at the current rate, Shs 286 billion from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Health Systems Strengthening Project.

I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the chairperson for the report of the committee.

On the surface of the motion and report, you see good intentions. You see that there is a legitimate problem the government is intending to resolve. It talks about improvement of access and utilisation of essential services and provision of basic surgical and obstetric care. On the surface, these are very good intentions. We have been talking about these over a very long time and we should have done this yesterday. Our concern though is that we are wondering whether the loan or borrowing is the solution. 

You see, it is very easy to get approval from someone who is needy. The moment you say, “I want to give you drugs” or “I want to give you health centres”, it is very tempting to jump in and say, “Of course, I need them”. For those of you who will say no to that, you will look like you are against the needy person. However, when you look beyond this, we may ask the second question: “Is the loan the answer?” Our answer is an immediate “no”.

This loan is part and parcel of the budget we have already passed. Of course, we can debate on whether we could do anything at this stage, as we did during the budget stage when we appropriated the money, to see whether we could address ourselves to the need for borrowing. This is because the components for borrowing were indicated in the budget and the justifications were therein. 

As you know, we never really got to debate in detail the sessional committee reports at that time. Now, what can we do at this stage, having passed the figures during the budget? What can we do about this loan other than to pass it? That is where we are and it is a reality. So, we are saying, is this loan a necessity or not? If you convert US$ 130 million, that comes to about Ushs 260 billion at the rate of Ushs 2,000. What is Ushs 260 billion? Do we need to borrow this money? 

Our experience with CHOGM indicates to us that we can raise that money. We raised Ushs 500 billion by supplementary –(Interjection)- You know we raised it. Internal sourcing can be a sufficient mechanism for financing these initiatives. Why am I saying this? I think there are really serious structural issues that need to be addressed in the Ministry of Health. We have had a separate –(Mr Kakooza rose_) I am just making a point and you will come in, hon. Minister.

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to remind colleagues that it is even in the Hansard that Parliament has been demanding for health strengthening systems, especially for reproductive health, and to table this loan and see to it that maternal child health is improved. When you say that it is not a necessity, we are at a loss. I thank you very much.

MR ODUMAN: Now, Mr Speaker, my point was - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think we should not lose sight of the issues. I do not think our shadow minister is saying maternal health care is not supposed to be provided. The argument is: Why should we borrow to treat our people when we could have used our locally generated funds? That would have been the first call on our budget. That is the argument. 

It is not good for us to be borrowing to treat our people and yet we have our own resources which are mostly mismanaged.

MR ODUMAN: I thank you for the information. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I thank you. I think the essence is not the element of borrowing, but I think what hon. Oduman is bringing up is a situation where we refused a loan that was from Public Service. When you look at this loan here, the essence is, yes, we want maternal health, but when you look at the minister’s explanation on page 11, for example, they are talking about maternal and newborn at US$ 30 million; human resource at US$ 5 million; infrastructure at US$ 85 million; leadership at US$ 10 million. All this comes to the US$ 130 million. Now, when you go to page 17 of the committee report and you add up the figures, there is no correlation whatsoever –(Interjection)- On page 17, Section 6.4, there is 10 million or you find that in actual fact, the loan has been got, not necessarily for maternal health, but actually for aggrandisement. 

Why don’t we get exactly what we want? If it is maternal health, it is to be US$ 30 million and then let us borrow US$ 30 million and not necessarily borrowing US$ 130 million.

MR ODUMAN: I was taking information from him. Hon. Minister why don’t you -

MR KAKOOZA: Why don’t I talk so that the Parliament is informed? When we talk of infrastructure, it has a big component of maternal health. Do you deliver from trees? (Laughter) We have equipment within the infrastructure and it is a component within this money we are talking about.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker and hon. Minister, I think you can see the immediate reaction from the hon. Member. You see, there is no contention whatsoever, whether we need to improve maternal health; there is no contention as to whether we need to beef up our infrastructure. Our indicators and levels are still very low compared to recommended standards. Yes, we must do that, but the question is, how do we do it?

In the last financial year, the Ministry of Health came here and brought up the issue of drug shortages as an example in hospitals. They said the solution to this is to triple the budget of National Medical Stores. We did exactly that. We gave money for purchase of drugs and we gave the money for purchase of trucks for delivering the drugs to the health centres.  Up to today, when you go down to the villages and you will never find medicines. 

The hon. Minister of Health, who is your senior colleague, was here in this House telling us that he needed the help and the assistance of this House to establish a kind of committee of inquiry to investigate why districts are not asking for drugs. His problem was that there was no demand expressed through LPOs from the health centres, meanwhile people are dying of malaria. We gave you money to buy drugs and we gave you money to buy trucks. How come the Ministry of Health came back for the assistance of Parliament to see how to weed the supply chain for drug delivery? So, the problem we have is bigger than what the minister is trying to solve. Even if you give the money, it will never sort out the problem. 

The approach for management of this money is a project approach. In ministries now, there is great motivation for dispensing services through a project approach. There is a reason for that, there is motivation for that. It is because projects are usually funded by donor money and within the project, there is an enhanced salary for the administrators of that project. You have additional big cars, additional allowances and additional benefits. This is the motivation for this. 

Anybody can write this project proposal and put in spicy things – maternal mortality, build more hospitals and refurbish this (Laughter). Anybody worth some little salt can write that. The motivation is basically to be able to beef up the benefits of the people who are involved. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you please wind up?

MR ODUMAN: Yes. Usually, the person who designs the project is a person within the ministry; either a director or a commissioner. When the project is approved, it is that same person who goes on to become the project manager. So, you can see the conflict that there is in ministries.

Our recommendation, from my perspective, is that you first need to deal with three things: The first one is that you must pay the health workers an adequate wage. Hon. Minister of State for Health, you have been to health centres and we have read reports. You have found that there are no drugs and when you quiz them and open the stores, there are some drugs in the stores that are being hoarded. Why? What is the motivation? –(Interjection)- I am winding up. What is the motivation for that? You will need a mechanism to deal with that and in our view you will need to motivate the health workers.

Secondly –(Interjection)- we are giving you solutions. You need to weed out the supply chain system - how things like the drugs, the supply of obstetric materials and all that, come from the headquarters, to the villages, and to the health centres. If you do not do that, then you will have missed it.

For now, the President has got concerned and he has established his own unit in his office to try and extend his surveillance because your system has failed. Why is the President doing that? If the system in the Ministry of Health was doing well, why would he be doing that? You need to resolve that bottleneck.  

Thirdly, you need to reconsider the project approach to delivering health care and other services in your ministry. There are too many projects. If you visit ministries in Government, Ministry of Health premises has the biggest number and size of cars parked in their yard. What are all those for? They are all about projects which are brought here in this form. Mainstream health care service delivery into the mainstream ministry and remove this motivation which you are giving your people who work as commissioners, directors and so on. Ministry staff are the same people who are project implementers. So, unless you move the motivation which might be –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, colleague, for giving way. I rise to give information. The Minister of Finance in her brief to Parliament said the project will be implemented under the newly created framework for the management of the donor project, the long-term institutional arrangement. These are arrangements within the government system. So, it is not going to be implemented under the project mode; it is very clear here. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, the title of the report and the brief to Parliament presented by the minister is on the proposal to borrow so much money from the World Bank for financing the health systems strengthening project. The delivery is in project mode. It might include components of building capacities of the mainstream institution, but the components here are going to be implemented in a project approach with a project implementation unit. Nobody is going to touch this money unless they are from the project, and as I said, those people are going to be from this ministry; they are going to be one and the same. The benefit to them is enhanced salaries, big cars and so on. 

As I wind up, the solution to improved health care delivery is not borrowing. We can find this money in our budget. It is shameful for us to fail to provide for health care in the pretext that we need to borrow. I would rather we oppose this loan request and find Shs 260 billion to finance this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.29
MS BETRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I also thank the Minister of Finance for bringing this loan request finally. We have been passing many loan requests concerning other things without looking at the health of women and children in this country. So, Ministry of Finance, thank you for listening to our pleas. I also thank the committee for this good report and Ministry of Health for their input. 

I have a few issues to raise in this report concerning the components of the project. While I appreciate that maternal, newborn and family planning services have been allocated Shs 30 million, I feel that this is little compared to what has been given to improving the health workforce, development, management and also –(Interruption)

MAJ (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I can see people misinterpreting this loan request. About US$ 85 million has been given for infrastructure. I want to make this clarification to Members and plead that you approve this US$ 85 million. If you look at this component of US$ 85 million, you are looking at rehabilitating infrastructure in Mubende and Moroto referral hospitals, and general hospitals in Nakaseke, Mityana, Itojo, Apac, Kiryandongo, Masindi, Anaka, Moyo, Nebbi, Kawolo, Entebbe etc. 

I want to remind Members that we are always on the highway. I had an accident in Mbarara and I almost died because there are no facilities in Mbarara. The Leader of the Opposition almost died in Kiryandongo because there are no facilities. You cannot say Government is not putting facilities in place and when we bring a loan to put up those facilities you shoot them down. Let us be honest. 

Funding of Government is threefold: One is equity from internally generated revenue; two is donations; and the third is loans. We are doing one of them today. People continuously say that we are giving less money to infrastructure. The ministry categorically said here that when a woman is having complications, do you deal with her under a tree? Look at all these hospitals spread all over the country, we need to improve them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing him to speak, but I do not know whether the information was intended for me or another person. I support this loan request. For a long time I have been advocating for a loan to improve maternal and child health in this country. I had not finished my sentence when the hon. Minister interjected; I was still building my point and he asked to give me information. 

I want to say that instead of providing only US$ 30 million to the improvement of maternal, newborn and family planning services we can look at component 3 - improved infrastructure of existing health facilities - which is US$ 85 million. When you look at the objective of this US$ 85 million, emphasis will be placed on providing minimum quality standards of health care services, especially in the areas of maternal and child health. 

Since they are already mentioning the areas of maternal and child health under this, I wonder why they talk of US$ 30 million in component 1; why can’t the two components be harmonised since improvement of infrastructure in the existing health facilities will be for improvement of maternal and newborn. For me, it is like you are separating these two important services yet they serve the same purpose.

When you look at component 4 - improved leadership management and accountability for health service delivery – it has US$ 10 million. I feel this is on the high side considering that we need more services – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your concern is reallocation. You support the principle of borrowing, but I think what you need is for us to revise the figures as allocated.

MS RWAKIMARI: Mr Speaker, because we do not have time to internalise the – 

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, I am suggesting that we narrow our debate to the issues. I think the loan request is supported, but there are certain details which we have to look into. I do not think there is anybody who would say outrightly that they are objecting. To help you - I thought it would attract very few interested in contributions - I am just postponing the debate. 

My worry is: When are we going to deal with CHOGM? The committee stage for the Bill we handled will have its second reading tomorrow. This one cannot be finished today. We are going to do it tomorrow. Can we curtail? What I can say is that I am going to limit the debate on this issue so that you go and comprehend it and then narrow the issues you raised, rather than raising issues that ought not to be raised, and that should not be checked on. 

What I have realised is that our sessional committees think their work stops when we pass the budget. I have always been appealing to you not to stop at the budget stage; continue monitoring the activities of your ministries. The issues which you have raised could be checked on if the relevant committees were working and going to see what is happening. So, please, in future, the work of sessional committees should not end at budget time. You should plan and visit so that we can check on misuse or something else, which is being raised now.

I am closing this debate, but I am not putting the question. I am just giving you time to go and summarise so that tomorrow I allow about six or eight contributions. It would be unfair for me to put the question when only two contributions have come. At this juncture, I am closing the debate, but we shall continue with it tomorrow. I will give only an hour for this subject and I know the committee stage will also take one hour so that we can embark on the CHOGM report; otherwise, I see unfairness coming in.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would love to be guided on how we can plan our time because Thursday we understand is the nomination day for LC V councillors and there is –

THE SPEAKER: None of us is a candidate for LC V.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we had enough experience in town when the presidents were being nominated and I believe that Thursday and Friday are going to be very congested days. I am wondering whether you can give time for those of us who are going to support our members in Kampala and outside who will be nominated from Thursday onwards. I am just trying to seek guidance from you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What I suggest is this, let us decide how much time we are going to give to the continuing debate on this subject. Is it 30 minutes or an hour? It is not finished. There are many people who are interested in making their contributions. At least tomorrow we can take about six contributions and then we put the question. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I insist because we have been negotiating for this loan for the last two and a half years and it is expiring on the 12th of this month -(Interjections)- and there is a process -

THE SPEAKER: We are going to deal with it.

MR KAKOOZA: There is a process of going to the Solicitor-General, making memorandums of understanding. Today is 2nd and when you look at the remaining days –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we are going to deal with this loan tomorrow. Maybe to assure you that this is going to be so, we shall start with this before we proceed to the committee stage. We shall not take more than an hour on this subject then we shall close it. 

Please go and narrow down the issues we raised. Some of the issues which I have heard need not be raised when we are considering whether to borrow or not to borrow. So, tomorrow we shall take not more than an hour to dispose of this subject and then we continue with the CHOGM report. 

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. House adjourned to tomorrow, 2.30 p.m. prompt. I would like to ask the Leader of Government Business that even if you have a Cabinet meeting tomorrow, please be here by 2.30 p.m. House adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 November 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 

