Tuesday, 9 November 2010

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I hope you had an enjoyable weekend. In the gallery, this afternoon, we have teachers and parents on the Management Committee of Bukeeka Church of Uganda Primary School. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. 

I want to remind members of the Appointments Committee that tomorrow we shall sit at 10.00 a.m. to consider an important appointment made by His Excellency the President that requires our consideration. So, please try to be on time so that you can go away after that meeting.

I think each of you has a copy of the Order Paper and from it you can realise how much work we have to handle before the d-day of 25th and 26th November. I think we should try to complete as much work as possible before that day. After that day, I may decide to give you a Christmas recess. 

In consideration of that, I would appeal to you to diligently attend to the business of the House. I don’t know whether you would allow having sittings on Mondays. Well, consider it and see what we can do. -[Members: “Mornings”]- To sit in the mornings of Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday? Okay, that is a good consideration. 

I know the Prime Minister is likely to say, Cabinet - but I think Cabinet should also sacrifice some of its business because we do a lot of sacrifice for the Cabinet.

3.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, there are many urgent matters, which we have to discuss in Cabinet; so, it is essential that we have Cabinet meetings. After all, we meet once a week and we generate business from Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us see how we move, but we have a lot to accomplish before the end of the year.

3.08
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just information for the House, which I think touches the integrity of Members and also Parliament. If you see today in one of the newspapers, some two journalists were arrested over CHOGM. They went to the PS, Ministry of Works, and they were seeking some money.

My committee has been meeting and handling so many accounting officers and two weeks ago, we handled National Water and Sewerage Corporation. As soon as we finished handling our business, some people rushed to the managing director and demanded that the chairman needs to soften his stand and that he needed to do something. 

There were various groups of people. There were those who, according to what I am informed, are a category called brokers. I am told they are in town here. They follow parliamentary business and as soon as business ends, they go smartly dressed as brokers on behalf of some honourable Members of Parliament. Others are journalists who claim that if you don’t do this, we shall publish and tarnish your image. 

So, what we did was to quietly move together with the Parliamentary Police and we agreed that the d-day should be yesterday. These people were called when we had alerted our Parliamentary Police and sent them to National Water to wait for them. They photocopied all the money, got a recorder, which was put in the office of the MD and these people were then called to come and get what they wanted to get. So, two of them rushed in and the interactions were all recorded; they picked the money and at the exit, they were nabbed. They slept at CPS yesterday.

One of them is a sports journalist of The Monitor newspaper and the other one is from Radio One. Today, we paraded them before the media and I thought that it would not be fair for honourable members to read from the media what has transpired in Parliament; they should know what really took place here. (Applause) This is because it touches on the integrity of Parliament and the integrity of Members. I would really like to appeal to the heads of media houses to help us work together as a nation. (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I wanted to give in relation to conmen is not only related to parliamentary business. In the precincts of Parliament here, we have had a number of conmen masquerading as constituents from various constituencies. Today, he can be from the constituency of hon. Dr Epetait; the following day he claims to be from hon. Amuriat - any constituency in Teso. So, I think this is not a matter that is limited to Teso alone. 

So far we have made some two arrests here and those conmen have had to spend some free accommodation in CPS. I wanted to caution Members that we have to be very vigilant with the kind of visitors that we sometimes get. They can claim to be from your constituency and really sweet talk you when in actual fact the person may not be from your constituency and is just trying to hoodwink you to cough something. I thought I should bring this to your attention.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is basically what I wanted the House to know. My appeal to the media houses is to tighten, especially on people who claim to be doing these kinds of businesses, and I suspect this has been going on for a long time and must come to an end. There is a difference between individuals approaching Members of Parliament and those attacking the image and institution of Parliament the way it has been portrayed. 

What hon. Epetait gave as information, I regard that category as secondary because very many of them come to us. There is one who came to me and said that he had lost a person and he needed transport to go home. So, I asked him to sit and wait for me. When I said that I also wanted to go and mourn and visit the residents, he took off because he knew I would not be able to see anybody dead at home. So, Mr Speaker, this is why I thought I should inform the House of what transpires in Parliament and I want to thank -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Reagan Okumu. You have talked about the integrity of Members of Parliament and I would like you to clarify how you would categorise the Members of Parliament who consciously and openly pick up money for the purpose of doing Parliamentary work. Would that Member of Parliament be a lesser criminal than the journalists who were arrested? Thank you. 

MR OKUMU: I think what hon. Cecilia Ogwal holds is that we are not saying that all Members of Parliament are clean, but if we find that there is a Member of Parliament who is engaged in such practice, he should also be brought to order. This really should not be limited to the journalists and we are not condemning all journalists. It is just a few individuals. So, these individuals are there and we should be open about them - whether they are our colleagues, we should be able to expose them. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the information. Hon. Members, I have been requested to shelve item 3 up to tomorrow. That is when we shall consider this motion by the learned Attorney-General operationalising Article 78. So, I request all those who are interested in this motion to be here on time so that we consider it tomorrow. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I thought we should put this on record. I would like to thank and congratulate the Chief Whip on the government side for the good job done. Today, I was very impressed that for the first time, we have had big representation from the UPDF. I do not know what miracle you used –(Laughter)- but I imagined that it must be because of item No.3 and dear colleagues from the UPDF, I really think you need to hold your responsibilities at heart because many times we bump onto some colleagues and we fail to identify who they are because of the dismal performance. Hon. Migereko, I think you have my flowers. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I would like to inform hon. Dr. Epatait that actually, the UPDF is always represented only that today, they came in uniform. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, hon. Bright Rwamirama, for your information which has thrown the whole House into laughter because the truth speaks for itself. The Hansards are there and the attendance book is there. I think let us not dwell so much on it, but the fact of the matter is that our colleagues in the UPDF still leave a lot to be desired in terms of participation in the House. 

MR  MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Dr Epetait for that commendation. It is true that when all of us Members of Parliament come to Kampala, we have various assignments to attend to and attending to parliamentary debates is one of the things that we always try to do. Members of the UPDF have been attending parliamentary sessions except, just like hon. Bright Rwamirama brightly pointed out, today they are in uniform and tomorrow and the other day they will be here, but they may not be in uniform. I thank you. 

3.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been looking at the Order Paper and particularly the notice of business to follow and there is one item on which I really need to make an appeal to the committee. This item is causing one of our Members pain to the extent that he has even been denied travel to some countries. 

Also, the people of Kasilo demand that we do pronounce ourselves on the matter irrespective of what direction it will take. This is the issue about the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. I think the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should save us and our colleague should not continue with that pain in him after he introduced this Bill. 

Last week, hon. Bahati showed me several SMS messages from the people who are suffering in our society because of that Bill; a number of them. So, I think this House must pronounce itself irrespective of what decision will come out other than letting our friends who brought the matter suffer while we do nothing. Let us pass it the way it should be passed; I know there has been pressure from different angles. So, I wish we could have it brought forward and the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs moves very fast and brings this Bill here. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM)

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE VICE-PRESIDENT’S OFFICE (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Vice-President of this country is one of those mentioned in the report and Prof. Bukenya did write to you that he would be travelling out of the country on official work; and I also did contact you to inform you that if Parliament needed a statement from him, I could present it before the House. Therefore, I am here to present his statement and I did consult with you, Mr Speaker, that I could do so. With your permission, I would like to present his Excellency the Vice-President’s statement. 

THE PRIME MINISTER: Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, my colleague is irregular. In fact, he should have requested me to make that presentation. I request you to ignore it. 

THE SPEAKER: Bear with me, hon. Members. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Samuel Moon, a research officer from the Centre for Aid and Public Expenditure. You are most welcome –(Applause)  

3.24
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi) Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the position taken. The report on CHOGM touches on so many people. So, if we are to proceed by handling one person at a time, I do not know how many months we shall need to complete this debate. 

In fact I was very surprised when the honourable Minister for State in the Vice President’s Office rose up to represent H.E. the Vice President in this kind of scenario as if he was part of – I do not know whether he also chaired some of the CHOGM sub-committee meetings. Certainly, he could not even respond to questions on cross-examination from this House.

We need to change our approach. If we decide to go person by person – in any case Members of Parliament have been overwhelmed by the big volumes of additional responses from very many people whose names are mentioned in the CHOGM report. If we take that approach, Mr Speaker, I think we shall require not less than five months by which time the report may have been overtaken by events.  We need to take on the report now wholesome as it is and allow Members to debate it across the board without having to go person by person.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, it is true our committee on Public Accounts handled this report on our behalf before tabling it here. But this report was challenged on the basis that certain opportunities were not given. So, having been challenged, the one who challenges it has to substantiate why they are challenging it and we cannot refuse to hear such people. 

That is the problem we have. We are debating the report and in doing that if somebody has got a justification, they can challenge it by making a statement. So, there is no way I can stop such persons from making such statements. We have to allow such persons to make statements to enable you decide whether what is in the report is true or not. That is what I said and I do not think we can change it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to your attention that although we have colleagues who are Members of Parliament and mentioned in this report, we also have those who are not mentioned in this very report. If you believe that is the best way to go, we should open this debate to even those people outside this House to come and make their presentations because as Members of Parliament you are not an exception to the law. You are the same in the eyes of the people and that is why we should apply laws equitably. 

So, Mr Speaker, if that is the way, it would be the best approach. But bear in mind that Hon. Hope Mwesigye was allowed to make a statement to the House because she claimed she never appeared before the committee. That is why she was given that special offer with Members being allowed to respond to her statement. That was a special case; that is the one we should deal with.

THE SPEAKER: How do you expect your report to be challenged if there is a justification? You think that a committee’s report should not be challenged? As I told you, that committee is only a functionary committee of the House. That committee only helps the House to understand an issue and that is why we have various committees doing work on behalf of this House.  However, it must be noted that committee reports are not final. That should be known; committees’ reports are not final save for reports from the Appointments’ Committee – yeah! Because we initially agreed in the Sixth Parliament on how that committee should operate. Otherwise, other committees’ reports are not final because they are subject to consideration by this House. Such reports can be adopted 100 percent; they can be adjusted and that is the procedure.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the first place, the Vice President of this country appeared before the committee, but now we are saying that he can be given another chance. The truth is that we have a document that we believe was got from him - can you, Mr Speaker, in your wisdom, pronounce yourself on that? My prayer is that they read it before we continue with the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you see the problem is that much as he is a minister and he was trying to present the statement of the Vice President, it happened that the Leader of Government Business was in the House; you know that also affects the work of the Vice President. If he says no, who am I to interfere –(Laughter)- but that does not mean that the Vice President is not entitled to make a statement. He can do it. 

The Vice President wrote to me – I think he had an official journey to Korea and is expected to return to the country tomorrow. So, should we continue with the report while he is not here? I think what the Prime Minister was saying is that his minister should not represent the Vice President when he is not here; he will be accorded an opportunity to say what he has about this report.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The proceedings now have created a dilemma for us given what you have just said that who are you to give a contrary view when the Leader of Government Business –

THE SPEAKER: He was dealing with his minister and I do not want to interfere with his executive functions –(Laughter)– that is what I was saying.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, it is on the same issue upon which I rose because the Leader of Government Business stated that the procedure then was irregular, but he did not tell this House how and why it is that irregular. If he had given the reasons, the House would have been enabled to evaluate the information and evidence, given the circumstances, before we see how to proceed.

So, may I seek a clarification from the Leader of Government Business, why in his view it is irregular for the Minister of State in the Vice President’s office to present a statement from the office.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, the Minister of State should have consulted me before making that statement. Secondly, we have a list of people who are going to defend themselves on the Floor of Parliament and I know by the end - the time they finish that, H.E. the Vice President will be back. So, it is preferable that H.E. the Vice President, like any other person, should be around to respond to questions because I am sure there maybe technicalities that the minister of state may not be able to answer and so he might inadvertently injure H.E. the Vice President. (Laughter)

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, with due respect to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before I called you about the instruction I got from the Vice President, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister called me on telephone – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you just leave it. Hon. Members, can we proceed debating the report? 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is one procedure -

THE SPEAKER: Order.

DR EPETAIT: We did observe that there are a number of persons who have been mentioned in the report, some of whom are Members of Parliament, but then we also agree that some of the people who have been touched on are not privileged to be in the House. If we have to open up and say let all those who have been touched on have the privilege to give supplementary response to the report, how are we going to proceed? Will they be in this House? How shall we open up?

THE SPEAKER: Can you continue with the debate on the report.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that is the right way to move. To me, I look at this report like we look at a policy statement. The minister and technocrats appear before the committee and when the committee brings the report here, the ministers again respond to the recommendations.

So, let us proceed with having the people affected responding to these issues, but let us dispose off, I think one by one. There were issues when hon. Mwesigye responded last time and there were questions that hon. Oduman here raised. I think let her respond to those issues and then we go to the next person and proceed. Otherwise, we are just wasting time. 

There were issues about how you procured this company from Malaysia; there were issues about the Shimoni grounds and where that money went. So, you respond to those things then we shall be able to form an opinion whether your evidence that you laid here is justifiable for us to exonerate you or we take the one of the committee. Can you respond?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think what he is saying is that after you had made the statement, there were queries made? Do you have responses to make on them so that we proceed with other Members who want to make contributions? But be brief if you can.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am ready to proceed, but I wish to state that the burden of proof, whether or not the allegations made against me were true or false, lies with the one that alleged. I am trying to inform hon. Okupa that the committee ought to have laid evidence on Table to prove the allegations that they made against me.

That having been said, hon. Oduman said that I stole Shs 617 million for the decorations; that I did procure the consortium of decorators and that I did procure the Malaysians, the experts that came to help us.

First of all, I would like to inform the House that the Malayas that came to help us during CHOGM -

HON. MEMBERS: Malayas?

MRS MWESIGYE: They are called Malayas -(Laughter)- the Malayas came under the Inter-Governmental Technical Cooperation. So, Government of Uganda -(Interjections)- you can add some of our vocabulary as well. Government of Uganda did not procure at all the experts from Malaysia. They came under the Inter-Governmental Technical Cooperation that is between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Malaysia. When hon. Oduman was alleging that I procured the experts, it is not true; I did not procure them whatsoever.

I already said the other day that decorations were under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I did not at all hijack that role, and even the Auditor-General himself confirmed that it was Foreign Affairs that dealt with decorations.

I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to page 21 of a document entitled, “Ministry of Foreign Affairs responses to the report of the Public Accounts Committee based on the special audit report of the Auditor-General on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM)” and it is already circulated. It is with us in this Parliament.

On page 21 - and it is under decoration or venues - it is stated that, “The bill of Shs 459,550,000 excluding VAT was presented by the Messrs Finishing Touches Limited for decoration of venues for CHOGM 2007 but has not yet been paid”. So, actually, even that money that they are alleging that I ate is not yet paid.

“It should be noted that this bill was verified by the Accountant General and it has now been included in the domestic arrears”.

It goes on to say, “The delay to procure the service was a result of the delay to complete the venues in time that were to be decorated. The magnitude of the assignment was enormous and complex hence the decision to use a consortium of firms. Negotiations were held between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the decorators, which resulted into a reduction of the outstanding to Shs 450 million VAT exclusive. Following extensive consultations with the Executive Director of Public Procurement -

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, we have to move. You made your statements and finished, but after you finished your statement, certain issues were raised. I think what you do is just to refute and say why you are refuting so that we can expedite the process.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the wise ruling. I think I have cleared that Foreign Affairs was the one in charge and I would also want to confirm that the allegations that I did procure cannot stand. 

I would like to draw your attention to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act No.1 of 2003. Procurement is clearly defined. It is defined as follows: “Acquisition by purchase, rental, lease, hire purchase, license, tenancy, franchise or any other contractual means of any type of work, service or supplies or any combination”. So, I would like to say that what the committee was asserting that because I chaired the meeting, that that meeting tantamounted to procurement, cannot stand and, therefore, should be dropped.

The other issue that was talked about here was in respect of the Shimoni exhibition grounds, and that was by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, where he was saying that Government spent money on construction of a park yard. That the park yard was later used by the private exhibitors and, therefore, the private exhibitors used public property. That, again, is false. 

The park yard was constructed by the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Works used that park yard for parking official vehicles and, therefore, the Ministry of Works accounting officer has already explained it.  So, I wish to re-state that the exhibitors were purely private; I did not procure them like he is saying; they were private; they did the exhibition and whatever money they earned was theirs; I did not collect it and, therefore, they were not even supposed to hand it over to Government.

Mr Speaker, I think those are the issues raised against me and as I conclude, I think I have ably demonstrated that the committee did not have any evidence pinning me to the allegations. The Auditor-General did not raise any queries against me and secondly, the allegations of procuring the contractors and the allegations of having taken money from the exhibition, that was purely private; and the allegations that I directed the accounting officer to pay money and hence cause financial loss to Government are all not true and should be dropped from this report.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying your conduct did not attract the Auditor-General’s query?

MRS MWESIGYE: Yes, there is nothing whatsoever; so, I wondered how the committee could drag me in just to taint my image. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us hear other people defending themselves. Any other minister wants to defend themselves?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the minister said that burden is on the committee to prove – 

THE SPEAKER: But you have already done it because in your report you made comments which must have been based on what you stated in the report. So, you are standing by what you stated in the report. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, where did PAC start from? We started with a query of the Auditor-General. On page 25 of the Auditor-General’s report, he dwells specifically on decoration under paragraph 6.8 and he said in bullet two of 6.8 that, “A consortium of decorators undertook the work without any contract or agreement with the ministry. They have since presented a bill of Shs 617,652,120. Owing to lack of a formal contract award process, I could not verify how the rates applied in the bill were arrived at. Besides, given that the work had perishable items like flowers, it is difficult to verify the actual work done retrospectively. Flowers were included in the deal.”

THE SPEAKER: No, as far as she is concerned, she had nothing to do with decoration; that was in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where she does not work. She has not said there is no query; she is saying if there was a query, it was not a query against her. So, if there is a query against her, point it out – that is what she is saying.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, on page four of the honourable minister’s response, in the second last paragraph, she said, “The meeting I chaired on 26th October, 2007, minutes attached, which PAC refers to on page 85 of its report – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, hon. Member, page 25 points out, “Decoration of venues - the Minister of Foreign Affairs was in charge of decoration of all the CHOGM venues. To have this done, a number of firms were engaged for the purpose.”

DR EPETAIT: Yes, Mr Speaker, but we are trying to connect how the minister comes in. She chaired a meeting on 26th October, 2007 – that meeting was purely to introduce the experts in beautification that she had got from Malaysia. She got the experts of beautification from Malaysia to help improve the decoration concept. So, the minister herself chaired a meeting and introduced the decorators she had sourced from Malaysia. That is why she is connected to the beautification saga, and that is how she comes in. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you very much for the information –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, allow us to make the points and then it is up to you to judge. The Auditor-General raised the issue and we asked the accounting officer to explain. The accounting officer said, “No, the Minister who was in charge of this committee was hon. Hope Mwesigye”. 

Now, the evidence of the meeting that the honourable minister chaired has been tabled here and they are annexed. She has also admitted that she chaired meetings and in those meetings, she introduced a consortium of decorators. 

I think the crux of the matter here is, where is the responsibility? What is the accounting officer responsible for and what are the other persons who got involved responsible for? The accounting officer ordinarily is responsible for monies, procurement and contracts; that is his work. They procure services and pay for them; they do the budgeting and the spending. Now, when an accounting officer gives evidence that he did not procure them, that means somebody who did the procurement becomes responsible. That gives us room to define what procurement is. Procurement includes many stages like planning, budgeting, soliciting of contractors, contract management, certification of work, disbursement of monies and signing – that is the work of the accounting officer. 

On page 26 of the Auditor-General’s report, second last paragraph, he said, “Owing to the irregular procurement of the decoration services and failure to supervise certification of work done, I cannot confirm that that bill reasonably represents the value”. He is questioning value for money and he is questioning procurement. 

So, where did things go wrong? Things went wrong at the procurement stage; at that point when this consortium was brought on board. The consortium of decorators was brought in by someone who was different from the one who would be responsible for supervision of works. You cannot say you are going to bring a contractor; you, whose responsibility is not to bring in the contractor, and you bring a contractor and expect someone else to supervise them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so, what you are saying is that our conclusions are backed up by page so and so, paragraph so and so. So, you leave it to these people. They will consider it and consider the plea made by her and then reach a conclusion. (Laughter) -(Mrs Mwesigye rose_)- [Mrs Mwesigye: “Order Mr Speaker.”] No, I think what is going to happen is that the Members will consider what is on page 25 and 26, and then conclude whether you are responsible for procurement or not. I think they will be able to do that. They have shown us the location of the evidence, which implicates you. So, leave it to them.

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order because clearly, hon. Oduman - and he knows it because that is his background – is intentionally trying to mislead this House -(Interjections)- yes, that I procured -(Interjections)- yes, I have tabled before this Parliament, the minutes of a meeting of 19th October, 2007 chaired by a one, Sarah Nakamya, of Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He has them. They are attached to my statement. Clearly, in those minutes, they demonstrate how they formed their consortium themselves as officers of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In fact, on page 2 of those minutes under Minute 3, they note that the meeting agreed - that is the meeting, which I was never in - agreed that when the time for procuring the consortium comes, the decorators would be informed after receiving formal communication from the chairperson of the venues’ committee.

The Auditor-General’s report is very clear that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was in charge of decoration. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order, to mislead this House by repeating wrong statements even after I have explained, for purposes of justifying what they had wanted to get? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what is happening is that he is expressing an opinion. Expressing an opinion does not mean that the House cannot express a contrary opinion. I think you just leave that to the House; they will consider it and then reach a conclusion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we need to be clear with one another. If hon. Mwesigye came up and said I erred, maybe people could listen. In the minutes of 26th October, 2007 which she chaired – this minute has been read more than enough times; Minute 16 of 2007 - “Way forward” - where she was chairing. 

We have two types of minutes. These ones we have attached in our report, the minute recorder was Sarah Nakamya, but the ones she has attached, she is putting Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho Sinani. That shows - and Ambassador Rhoda Kaisho Sinani was just a member. The secretary of the meeting was Nakamya. You can imagine that she has even tried to concoct things. (Interjections)

On the way forward -(Interjections)- [Mrs Mwesigye: “Point of Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I suggest that since you have shown us the area where there is evidence implicating the minister, just leave it to the House to come to its conclusion. Otherwise, we shall not finish.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker we agree with you, but what we have said is that on the way forward, where the Madam Minister chaired; it says, “The meeting agreed, for purposes of procurement, given the time constraint, one of all their companies be procured and contracted to decorate the CHOGM 2007 venues. The decorators also agreed that they would collectively be responsible for the decoration of the venues. The decorators unanimously agreed on Faith Petals and Stems to be procured. It was later established that Faith Petals and Stems lacked proper company documents and subsequently, Finishing Touches was selected by the consortium to be procured.” Who was chairing? The Minister; if you read only those, there are clear indicators that this Madam Minister was involved. 

But Mr Speaker, there is one more letter from PPDA which is attached to our – Members, you have this document; all these are inside there. This is one statement which I want to comment on –

THE SPEAKER: To whom is the letter addressed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The letter is addressed to the PS, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is dated 20th November, 2007; Procurement of decorators for CHOGM venues. But this is what it says, “In response, the authority advised that your entity should not be involved in initiating the consortium as this should be left for the decorators to decide on whether they would like to do it jointly or not.” 

Mr Speaker if you read the Auditor-General’s report on page 7, paragraph – I can read it. It is after the report - the accounting officers before the board of surveys. “The accounting officers explained that the funds were released late and the limited time left for CHOGM preparations could not allow them to apply fully the recommended procurement procedures. It was also emphasised that a lot of pressure was exerted on the accounting officers to produce desirable outputs despite the delayed fund disbursement.”

This is again in the Auditor-General’s report. Having put this case, it is very clear that hon. Hope Mwesigye - in fact, I hope it was hon. Kutesa who was in charge of Foreign Affairs. If you are saying decoration was Foreign Affairs, we see no reason why you chaired. It should have been hon. Kutesa to have chaired. But you went there; you left Local Government and came -(Interjections)- you saw money and that is why you came -(Interjections)- down to this -(Interjections)- So, that is a clear indicator.

The second issue is Shimoni. (Interjections) We need to clear all this quickly. (Interjections) It is very clear, exhibitions are done under the Ministry of Trade. It is Trade. The minister agrees that the land was graded using taxpayers’ money. That meant that was taxpayers’ property. Instead of the Minister of Trade, by then hon. Janat Mukwaya taking the issue or Rukundo, the Minister of State for Local Government again ran and took the exhibitors to the sub-Cabinet committee; you can imagine; leaving Local Government. Instead of leaving exhibitors under the Ministry of Trade, she goes to do it. This is clearly conflict. (Interjections)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. When you read her response and even as she has been clarifying now, she has not told us which exhibitors approached her, what terms they agreed upon, how much was to be paid to Government or whether the land was to be used for gratis. This was Government property; exhibitors approached her; you do not know them; nothing is paid to Government; and then you say there is no evidence! (Laughter) (Members rose_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this report is not only on this particular case. We have other cases.

HON. MEMBERS: It is a very big case.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, really. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this is a very big case. That is why she never came and we must deal with it here. The ones who appeared knew. 

THE SPEAKER: So, this is not “nkejje” but “empuuta.” (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this is a –

THE SPEAKER: But how do we complete this if we are to go at this pace? There are many other cases. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: I would like to get clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee on the Exhibitors. You talked about the fees that were levied and collected, but there is no evidence whatsoever that this money was collected. May you help us and tell us and how these fees came about? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if it was a free place, I think there was no need for her to go, as the minister. This is a clear indication. This is a public place. If the minister said it was a private matter, people should have walked and gone away. But they saw there was need; there was authority; and that is why they went and approached the Minister for Local Government. How? We do not know. And that is the question which we are asking. why did they leave Ministry of Trade and go to the Minister of Local Government? And how did they know her? That is the question. And how did this minister know these exhibitors?

Now -(Interruption)

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: I am insisting on the clarification. You talked about the fees that were collected, but we need evidence that this money was collected, then we shall proceed. Thank you. 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Chairman and his committee for the struggle they are making in fighting corruption. What is being alleged here is very serious and I think as we struggle to fight corruption, we must have a sense of justice. What is being alleged here is criminal - that there was false claim - and there must be evidence. I have heard the chairman of the committee quoting from page 7 and saying that it was emphasised that a lot of pressure was exerted on the accounting officer. Who exerted this pressure? It is a general statement.

I think whatever is being alleged here, evidence should be adduced. On page 25 it is very clear.

HON. MEMBERS: Page 25 of what?

MR NYOMBI: Page 25 of the Auditor-General’s report. It is clearly stated that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was in charge of decoration and we know that there were committees which cut across different ministries in executing the different roles of CHOGM. You must, if you feel that the minister committed an offence - because what is being alleged here is false claim. It is criminal. The onus is on you to prove that the minister actually was involved because there are indicators on page 25. The consortium of decorators undertook the work without any contract. The question should have been, “Who was responsible for concluding this contract?” We have been told in the same paragraph that it was the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There must be evidence; incontrovertible evidence to prove - 

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I think last week, I drew your attention to Article 164 on accountability and the first responsibility rests on the accounting officer. You only bring in the political leader under (2). So, evidence must be laid that a political leader directed or forced. That is when the political leader comes in under 164(2). That is the type of evidence. That is how you make your case under 164, by applying (2). 

So, the committee has said they have given the evidence. I think it is for you later to consider this evidence and make a decision. Otherwise, you are not going to agree here. I do not see one side agreeing with the other. That is the guidance I think I want to give you; that that is only when you bring in a political leader for accountability. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_) can we get another case?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what we are trying to say is that the exhibitors - and that is why we have asked how the Ministry of Local Government knew about the exhibitors and took them there —

THE SPEAKER: No, what you do, hon. Member, what you do -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to conclude on that.

THE SPEAKER: What you do is that you find out who is the controlling authority for that place and ask him, “Why didn’t you do this?” Then the person who is controlling or the PS who is holding that place says, “Really, somebody forced her way and did this and this and the other.” That is how you move with this Article 164(2).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what you are saying is true. When we asked the Ministry of Trade - that is why we have attached the minutes here. It is attached; how the Minister of State for Local Government took the issue of the exhibitors to the sub-Cabinet Committee of CHOGM and said the exhibition would start on 14 November up to 1 December. She even knew the dates and it is attached here in our report; the minutes are there and very clear.

And when we asked Ministry of Trade why they were not the ones responsible they said it was taken over by the Ministry of Local Government. We have the recording; you have it.

THE SPEAKER: Then the question will be, “Why didn’t the Ministry of Trade resist?” (Laughter)  This is a question. This is how you handle these cases. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: But I think we have heard enough on this particular case. Can we move on to another?

MRS MWESIGYE: Clarification. Mr Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you leave that to us really?

MRS MWESIGYE: No, Mr Speaker. You had given me a right to reply to the issues they raised, but hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising fresh things now and I need to put the record right. 

Trade had its exhibitions. I said earlier that the exhibition at Shimoni was purely private because Shimoni was an abandoned plot of land. In fact, it looked unsightly -(Interjections)– yes, it looked unsightly. We were grappling on how to beautify it and when the people who wanted to exhibit there wanted to clear it for Kampala City Council which was under the Ministry of Local Government, that is how Kampala City Council allowed them to clear the place and exhibit there. So, the issue of me having forced Ministry of Trade and Tourism does not arise. They had their other exhibitions at the National Theatre and the Uganda Museum; that specific one was outside the ones for Ministry of Trade. That is why I had to present it before the sub-committee of Cabinet for clearance so that it becomes part of the side events for security purposes. 

I did not want to leave the record incorrect simply because hon. Nandala-Mafabi wants to taint my image. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we move to another case?

4.13
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and Hon. Members, I suggest we move as follows: Hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya, hon. Rukundo, hon. Byabagambi. 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE, CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (DR EDWARD KHIDDU MAKUBUYA): Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I have reference MJ/AG/21 dated 2008 October 2010. This letter is addressed to you hon. Speaker and the subject is, The report of the Public Accounts Committee based on the audit report of the Auditor-General on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) 2007 Kampala, responses by the Attorney-General of Uganda.

Permit me to refer to the letter of the Rt hon. Prime Minister reference ADM16/01 dated 15 October, 2010 in respect of the above subject. This letter is attached as annex one. 

The following are my responses:

The structure of the Attorney-General’s chambers

To my mind, it is essential to set out the legal framework of the Attorney-General’s Chambers. This will definitely help to put the issues at stake to relief.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I know we are going to read this document, but can you just tell us the observation that has aggrieved you.

DR MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I have a problem which is that in many pages of this report, the Public Accounts Committee is unequivocal in its judgement and assessment of the office of the Attorney-General. Khiddu Makubuya is very small, but there is an Office of the Attorney-General which is provided for in the Constitution. The purpose is that this Parliament may give a fair assessment of this Office.

Frankly, I would find it difficult to skip many of the scathing judgements which appear in the report. I can give way to my colleagues such that we can make more progress this afternoon. I can go away and summarise it, but because of the nature of the assessment made by PAC, I thought that it was fair to put this on record.

THE SPEAKER: We can accept your write-up as part of the record, but briefly explain to us the gist of your objection. You can read it if you cannot summarise.

DR MAKUBUYA: To my mind, it is essential to set out the legal framework of the Attorney-General’s Chambers. This will definitely help to put the issues at stake in sharp relief. 
The office of the Attorney-General is provided for in the Uganda Constitution, Article 119. Article 119(a) provides for the Deputy Attorney-General. There is also the office of the Solicitor General; this office is not provided for by that name in the Constitution, but if you look at Article 174, it provides for a Permanent Secretary, and the PS of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is known as Solicitor. He is both the Permanent Secretary and Solicitor General. 

I refer to the Interpretation Act on page 4, Section 29, which says that, “Any power conferred or duty imposed on the Attorney-General by or under an Act may be exercised or performed by the Solicitor General in case the Attorney General is unable to Act owing to illness or absence, in any case or class of cases where the Attorney-General has authorised the Solicitor General to do so.” It is a fact, therefore, that many acts officially attributed to the Attorney are rarely the acts of the incumbent Attorney General. More often than not, there are acts taken by the Solicitor General or indeed taken for the Solicitor General.

On page 25 of the main report of the committee, the first recommendation states that, “Noting that it was irregular for the accounting officer to have signed the contract that was silent on tax matters, the committee recommends that the accounting officer, the Executive Director of PPDA and the Attorney-General should be held responsible for the loss.”

I do not know whether there is any loss established. I find this to be a peculiar recommendation in relation to the Attorney-General. PAC is of the view that the whole cost would not have exceeded US$ 2 million and, therefore, the taxpayer lost over US$ 2.5 million total cost of the contract being US$ 4.5 million. The committee further states that the tax obligation that should have been made good to Government was also not done.

There is no evidence on record to show that Government lost US$ 2.5 million in this contract. This contract was made in Uganda and it was, therefore, made subject to the laws of Uganda, including laws relating to taxation. There were no provisions in this contract exempting the contractor from paying applicable taxes. In these circumstances, the tax authorities are within their lawful rights to collect taxes from the contractor.

The view that it was irregular for the accounting officer to have signed a contract that was silent on tax matters is, with great respect, not supported by legal provisions. The contract may be silent on tax matters but the law of Uganda that is applicable to the contract is not silent on tax matters. Uganda’s tax law applies and there is, therefore, no omission or inaction for which to hold the Attorney-General responsible.

Page 6, paragraph 3.2, matters of Speke Resort Munyonyo, Shs 13.9 billion. The Public Accounts Committee report states on page 47 that, “The committee further found that in the case of Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo, whereas shares for Shs 15 billion had been issued, another Shs 13.9 billion under the agreement Article 4 for marina and pathways, was spent as a donation to M/S Meera Ltd, a company that belongs to Mr Sudhir Ruparelia. 

The committee questioned the terms under which Government was made to finance a private venture without due regard to public interest. The committee notes that the Attorney-General, without due regard to public interest, drafted the agreement and advised the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to sign and finance it. 

The committee recommends that all assets be taken on charge immediately and that all ministries should retrieve all assets to their stores. Use and/or disposal of these assets should be carried out in accordance with the PPDA regulations. The committee recommends that Government takes due consideration of this donation when divesting itself from Speke Resort Munyonyo investment. The committee recommends the appointing authority takes appropriate action.”

There is another finding on page 64, which says, “The committee found out that the President in a letter dated 5 July 2007 had directed the Ministry of Finance to explore the possibility of turning all the expenditures on this joint venture into capitalization. Furthermore, in a meeting of 25 July 2007, the President had directed that all funds used for Speke Resort Munyonyo, including for road works, be treated as part of Government equity. The President’s directive was, however, not implemented accordingly. Instead, the chairperson of the sub-committee of Cabinet, His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, decided not to inform the President that they had donated a marina and pathways to Munyonyo Resort. 

The committee found that the memorandum of understanding and the joint venture agreement between M/S Meera Investments and the Government of Uganda instead provided that Government was obliged under Article 4 to construct the marina and the pathway/parking. Government’s partner in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd. asserts that whereas the new marina was an enhancement of the old one, it was unsolicited for. According to him, therefore, he took it as a ‘donation’ to Munyonyo Speke Resort and not part of Government’s contribution to Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort Ltd. 

This was, however, found contrary to what the Attorney-General had stated when appearing before the committee, to the effect that negotiations were still going on with the owner of Munyonyo to recover these costs. The committee found that the Attorney-General misled Government on the need for parliamentary approval for private investment, citing wrongly the PERD Act.”

On page 65, PAC recommends that: “The Attorney-General should be held responsible for the Shs 13.9 billion at stake, the weaknesses in the joint venture agreement and the memorandum of understanding which was drafted and cleared by him.”

Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General’s chambers received instructions from the line ministry to draft the joint venture agreement and the memorandum of understanding on Speke Resort Munyonyo. The Attorney-General’s chambers had at the material time no record of the President’s directive of 25 July 2007. In drafting both the joint venture agreement and the memorandum of understanding, the Attorney General’s chambers dutifully carried out the drafting instructions as they were given by the line ministry.

The Public Accounts Committee cites a presidential directive to the Minister of Finance to explore the possibility of turning all expenditures on this joint venture into capitalisation. However, it is not clear from the report whether PAC investigated progress, if any, on the implementation of this directive. A record of this investigation would clarify the extent to which this directive was carried out and why. The Attorney-General’s office has no record that it was privy to decisions on the implementation of this directive.

On page 8, paragraph 3.3 - concerns on the opinions of the Attorney General - between pages 49 and 51, PAC states as follows: “The office of the Attorney-General was involved throughout in the preparations for CHOGM. The Attorney-General, by law, is required to clear all contracts entered into by Government except in cases that are covered under the exemption statutory instrument issued by his office. Any contract entered into without the approval of the Attorney-General is null and void. The Attorney-General is also supposed to give opinion and advise Government on the legality of any actions it intends to take. 

The committee, however, found the Attorney-General wanting in his opinions during CHOGM preparations. The Attorney-General, for example, gave an opinion allowing Government to invest in private hotels against the advice of the Auditor-General that such actions would need parliamentary approval. In this particular case, the committee found that Government’s investment in J&M Airport Road Hotel and Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo did not follow any established Government policy. 

The Attorney-General was found to have authorised Government to invest in these hotels using Article 8(A)(i) of the Constitution without due regard to Article 8(A)(ii). Furthermore, due regard was not taken by the Attorney-General to the provision of the Constitution to the effect that all public charges on the Consolidated Fund have to be approved by Parliament. The Attorney-General instead wrongly relied on the PERD Act to provide justifications for investing in private entities and yet he forgot that J&M Hotel and such other entities were not listed in the PERD schedule. 

The committee also found that the Attorney-General cleared contracts that Government entered into with the hotels without any guaranteed safeguards. Government stands to lose Shs 8 billion on the advances it made to the hotels without safeguards. The concern of the committee is that although these contracts were cleared by the Attorney-General, his failure to provide for guarantees in the contracts was exploited by the service providers and now the same Attorney-General is in dispute with the service provider and is in court. 

While meeting His Excellency the President, the committee drew the attention of the President to this concern and invited him to take a closer interest in the trend of legal opinions coming from the Attorney-General. The committee recommends that the appointing authority should review and take necessary action on the conduct of the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General should be responsible for the loss and be investigated for abuse of office.”  

On page 10, Sir, there is the matter of advance payment guarantees. The Public Accounts Committee explores that matter of advance payments guarantees in some details on pages 72, 73, 74 and 75 of the report. It further makes the following recommendations: “Since the Attorney-General authorised the contracts irrespective of the loopholes in them and led to the loss of public funds, he should be held personally responsible for the loss of US$ 4,522,820, that is, Shs 9 billion. The Attorney-General should be held responsible for the loss arising from these unsecured advance payments whose exposure could have been avoided if the advance payment guarantees were obtained. The Attorney-General should take political responsibility over his failure to protect public funds in these contracts.” 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, on page 11, the Public Accounts Committee was at all material times aware that the Cabinet sub-committee on CHOGM 2007 had met at State House, Nakasero on 25 July 2007. That meeting was informed that one of the bottlenecks in securing venues for meetings was the legal requirement for the venue owners to provide advance payment guarantees and performance bonds as required by the contracts committee. Insisting on this would have increased the cost of the hotel facilities. 

That meeting agreed that the legal requirement for hotels to provide advance payment guarantees be waived. I attach these minutes in Annex II.  It is, therefore, difficult to understand why the Public Accounts Committee is damning the Attorney-General when a conscious decision was taken in national interest to remove this bottleneck. 

The office of the Attorney-General did not receive communication that the said high level decision had been reversed or amended. If the Public Accounts Committee itself had received this communication, they did not reflect it in the report. 

There is indeed a spirited condemnation of the Attorney-General by the Public Accounts Committee. Given this factual background, the spirited condemnation of the Attorney-General by the Public Accounts Committee would, with great respect, seem to be misplaced. 

PPDA Rules and Regulations

On page 58, the report reads as follows:
“The committee was concerned that in all the contracts of procurement, the Cabinet sub-committee was bent on flouting PPDA Regulations. Instances were noted when the office of the Attorney-General was involved in identifying loopholes in the PPDA that could be exploited to bend procurement rules. 

The Attorney-General is quoted to have advised that the IGG should be made part of the procurement process if future problems have to be avoided. The committee takes this as a dangerous and unfortunate opinion that should not be accepted.” 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, to the best of my knowledge, the office of the Attorney-General has not participated in identifying loopholes in the PPDA with a view of encouraging the bending of the procurement rules. The Public Accounts Committee states that “incidences” were noted when the office of the Attorney-General had done this. This is a serious allegation, which implies that the office of the Attorney-General engaged is undermining the procurement law. Such a serious allegation should have been based on evidence. No such evidence is recorded. 

All the Public Accounts Committee states is that incidences were noted. Particulars of these incidences should have been put on the record. The office of the Attorney-General should have been given a chance to comment on these particulars. The report simply records a bare statement that “incidences were noted”; is this acceptable?

That is not all. The report goes on to state that the Attorney-General is quoted to have advised that the Inspector General of Government should be made part of the procurement process. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Attorney-General has no recollection of ever having so advised. The source quoted should have been indicated and the Attorney-General has never issued any such opinion. 

It is also fair to the office of the Attorney-General and the incumbent to state that even in the face of enormous pressure, both the office and the incumbent have successfully resisted supporting deviations from the procurement regime. The office of the Attorney-General, for example, rejected the idea of a blanket waiver of the procurement law in respect of CHOGM procurements. 

Annex III is very important because it was a response to my colleague who had proposed that to speed up matters just waive the law in these procurements. Annex III is on record as evidence of the Attorney-General’s office standing up to support the procurement regime. These two allegations will definitely need substantiation barring which they should be expunged from the report. 

J&M Airport Road Hotel

This matter is discussed extensively and is concluded on page 68 as follows:

The Attorney-General gave the wrong advice using the wrong laws to deliver certain interests. His advice premised on the wrong basis. It also suggested that there are certain situations when Government can decide to capitalise or give out loans without parliamentary approval. The Public Accounts Committee recorded the following material findings: 

The Attorney-General tried to argue before the committee that his advice to the Minister of Finance was that equity financing of the hotel could be done in line with Article 8(a) of the Constitution which provides for such to be done in national interest. He further quoted Section 29(1) of the PERD Act. However, Article 8(2) of the Constitution stipulates that: “Parliament shall make relevant laws for the purpose of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.” And since no such law is in place, the Attorney-General erred in law. 

Furthermore, the Attorney-General could not explain why he was fighting the PERD Act, which deals with classified enterprises when J&M Airport Road Hotel was not listed in any of the classes to the schedules to the Act. His further reference to approval by the committee under the PERD Act could not be substantiated since he could not provide evidence of approval by the Divestiture Reform and Implementation Committee referred to in the said Act.

Finally on page 70, the committee states that the Attorney-General should review his conflicting opinions in the interest of the country. The Public Accounts Committee then makes three recommendations about the Attorney-General: The Attorney-General should be held politically responsible for issuing misguidance and clearing an agreement that clearly puts the interest of Uganda behind those of an individual. The Attorney-General should be held liable for authorising Government to charge the Consolidated Fund without parliamentary approval as the Auditor-General had earlier on advised. The committee recommended that the appointing authority take appropriate action.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, it is a fact that the Attorney-General, under his own signature, issued an opinion to the effect that Government could lawfully acquire shares in private companies without first seeking and obtaining the approval of Parliament. The letter is attached as Annex IV. 

The Public Accounts Committee does not want to hear this -(Laughter)- but as a matter of fact and fundamental principle, the Attorney-General distinguished between a loan to a private company and acquisition of shares in a private company. The view, which I stated in my said letter, was that for Government to give a loan to a private company Parliament had to approve but for Government to buy or acquire shares in a private company, parliamentary approval was not a legal requirement.

The opinion did not say or imply that Government loans to private companies do not require parliamentary approval. This was and is the opinion of the Attorney-General. It would be stretching the language too far to say that this opinion constitutes abuse of office as there is no known connection between this opinion and a proven loss to the Government of Uganda.

There was and is nothing wrong with this legal opinion. The Auditor-General is provided for in the Constitution; the Attorney-General is also provided for in the Constitution. The Auditor-General and the Attorney-General have separate and different mandates. It is not stated anywhere that the Attorney-General commits a crime for not seeing eye for eye with the Auditor-General. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the reference to the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act also known as PERD Act needs to be understood in its proper context. The legal opinion of the Attorney-General embodied in his letter, which is Annex IV, is complete and has never been amended. The opinion cites only two legal provisions, namely, Articles 8(a) and 159 of the Constitution. These are the only laws cited by the Attorney-General in the said opinion. He cited the correct laws. 

There is no mention of the PERD Act in the Attorney-General’s legal opinion. Therefore, the question of basing the Attorney-General’s opinion on wrong laws does not apply. The Attorney-General was aware at all material times that J&M Airport Road Hotel is not in the Schedule to the PERD Act. However, when the Attorney-General personally appeared before the Public Accounts Committee, the question was put to him as to where Government gets the mandate to invest in private companies. 

The Attorney-General had responded that what is not expressly prohibited by law is impliedly permitted. The known existence of an express provision in the law barring Government from investing in private companies implied that it is not prohibited by law and, therefore, Government has the mandate to invest in private companies. It is in the course of interacting with the Public Accounts Committee that reference was made to the PERD Act simply to indicate circumstances where Government investments are provided for thereby not being an Act prohibited by law.

The PERD Act was merely used as an example and it was not in relation to equity financing that the PERD Act was referred to. Therefore, the reference to the PERD Act was in reference to where Government derives its mandate to invest in private companies. The reference was used illustratively to show that Government was not expressly barred from investing in private companies citing the PERD Act as an example.

One senses a sub-text in the way the PAC approached the Attorney-General’s opinion on Government shareholding in J&M Airport Road Hotel. It is convenient to insist that this is a loan to a private company, thus necessitating parliamentary approval and, therefore, asserting the supremacy of Parliament. It would not be fair to damn the legal opinion of the Attorney-General in order to resolve the historical struggle for political space between Parliament and the Executive in favour of Parliament.

On page 17, the Public Accounts Committee disagrees with the opinion of the Attorney-General. There is nothing abnormal about this. However, it does not follow that the “disagreer” knows better than the Attorney-General nor does it follow that by being disagreed with, the Attorney-General commits an offence.

There is indeed another sub-text beyond technical legal arguments. It is the policy of the Government of Uganda to pursue private sector led growth and transformation. Supporting the private sector within the limits of the law is in line with Government policy. The Office of the Attorney-General and the Public Accounts Committee clearly differ in outlook and orientation on this matter. Admittedly, this is an ideological difference, which may be difficult if not impossible to resolve through technical argument.

Assessing the performance of the Attorney General

In 4.1, the Attorney-General is a Cabinet minister and his performance as Attorney-General is subject to assessment by Parliament under Article 118 of the Constitution, which I set out on pages 17 and 18. However, the PAC report does not say that the Attorney-General should be assessed under Article 118. The Public Accounts Committee has not applied to the Attorney General vis-à-vis CHOGM the standards set out in Article 118 of the Constitution. 

The Public Accounts Committee assessed the performance of the Attorney-General vis-à-vis CHOGM and found him wanting. In its own words, the PAC assists the Attorney-General variously. On page 25 of the report, the first recommendation states, “Noting that it was irregular for the accounting officer to have signed a contract that was silent on touched matters, the committee recommends that the accounting officer, the Executive Director PPDA and the Attorney-General should be held responsible for the loss.”

I have indicated previously that this recommendation is not supported by the facts in the law. What standard is PAC applying here? On page 47, again in connection with Speke Resort Munyonyo and Shs 13.9 billion which I pocketed, the PAC questioned the terms under which the government was made to finance a private venture without due regard to public interest. The committee noted that the Attorney-General, without due regard to public interest, drafted the agreement and advised the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to sign and finance it. 

“The Attorney-General should be held responsible for the Shs 13.9 billion at stake, the weaknesses in the joint venture agreement and the memorandum of understanding which was drafted and cleared by him.” The PAC standard here is “due regard to the public interest.” 

On page 20, I say that the Attorney-General exercised due regard to public interest. The public interest of Uganda vis-à-vis CHOGM was decided by the appointing authority in Article 99 of the Constitution when he convinced the Commonwealth to hold CHOGM 2007 in Kampala, Uganda. It is also a fact that Government decided that public interest included Government support to private hotels in order to marshal enough accommodation for CHOGM 2007. The Attorney-General simply cooperated in actualising what the government had determined to be due regard to the public interest. 

The PAC would have greatly assisted the end user of the report if they had articulated their understanding of “due regard to public interest” and then applied this understanding to the actions of the Attorney-General. The PAC did not indicate this understanding. It may be taken, therefore, that there was due regard to public interest as understood by the Government of Uganda. 

Between pages 49 and 51, the PAC report raises concerns about the opinion of the Attorney-General. The report states that it found the Attorney-General wanting in his opinions during CHOGM preparations citing wrong laws, and not imposing guaranteed safeguards on hotel owners. All these have been explained in detail elsewhere in this response. In any case, what is “wanting”? How can these alleged facts, which have been substantively explained, be used against the Attorney-General as empirical reference of the so-called wanting?

The report raises the issue of PPDA and regulations. I have explained previously in this response that the Attorney-General took the very opposite view of what PAC alleges him to have done vis-à-vis procurement. There is no indication from the PAC what standards they are using to assess the performance of the Attorney-General on this procurement matter. The PAC would have helped end users of the report by articulating the standard against which it was assessing the performance of the Attorney-General. 

In 4.3, I go into other standards which may be used to assess the performance of the Attorney-General. The office of the Attorney-General has existed in the UK since the year 1243 when records show that a professional attorney was hired to represent the King’s interests in the courts of law. The office of the Attorney-General was introduced in Uganda as part of the colonial states. It is known that modern states have found it imperative to have an office of the Attorney-General to provide a wide range of legal services, to promote, protect and advance the interests of the state. 

In a number of Commonwealth jurisdictions, the Attorney-General is supposed to perform a wide range of functions including being the chief legal advisor to Government, representing Government in the courts of law, overseeing Government’s legal services as the line minister, being the guardian of public interest, promoting the rule of law, promoting human rights, articulating the country’s legal interests in external arenas, answering legal issues in and for Parliament and articulating and promoting the interests of an independent Judiciary. The Attorney-General is, historically in principle, the head of the bar and Article 119 of the Constitution is a modern restatement of this legal tradition. 

In all this, the Attorney-General is subject to certain professional standards. An ordinary member of the legal profession is required to exhibit reasonable standards of professional competence and efficiency in the interests of his client and in the interest of justice. The Court of Appeal for East Africa held, in the case of Champion Motor Spares Limited v Phadke [1969] EA 42, that an advocate is not liable for any reasonable error of judgement or for ignorance of some obscure point of law, but is liable for an act of gross negligence or ignorance of elementary matters of law constantly arising in practise. Matters which go beyond errors of judgement amount to professional negligence for which an advocate is liable to his client, as the High Court held in the case of Insurance Company of North America v Baerlein and James [1960] E.A. 993. 

Lawyers are retained to advance the interest of their clients, which they must do strictly upon instructions, as the court articulated in the case of A.P.C LOBO and Another v Saleh Salim Dhiyebi and Others [1961] E.A. 224. The point I am making, Mr Speaker, is that in the language of the legal profession, the Attorney-General is chief legal counsel to the Government of the Republic of Uganda. 

There is a specific body of law governing the lawyer-client relationship. This specific body of law provides standards and indeed a reasonable basis for assessing the performance of a lawyer vis-à-vis the interest of his clients. This body of law could, within limits, have been used to assess the performance of the Attorney-General of Uganda in relation to CHOGM contracts. The Public Accounts Committee, however, did not make even passing reference to this body of law when it was passing judgement on the performance of the Attorney-General. 

The PAC is a standing committee of Parliament with specific functions. However, there is also the sessional committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This committee serves as the immediate overseer of the Attorney-General on behalf of Parliament. Assessing the work or the performance of the Attorney-General may be done by PAC or any other committee of Parliament. However, the Office of the Attorney-General is subject to specific requirements and standards, which requires it to be in regular contact with the parliamentary Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

There does not seem to be a legal requirement that the PAC consults the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on matters of law. Still, the Attorney-General was surprised to learn that the Office of the Attorney-General was subjected to scrutiny by the PAC and found wanting without reference to the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

On page 23, I will go into two extraneous circumstances, that information received indicated that some Members were unhappy with the Office of the Attorney-General for issuing two allegedly controversial legal opinions: 

a) On 6 November 2008, the Attorney-General issued a legal opinion on whether Parliament or the parliamentary committee has the mandate or jurisdiction to enforce the Leadership Code Act No.17 of 2002. A copy of this opinion is attached. 

It will be recalled that Parliament sought the Attorney-General’s legal opinion on this issue during the progress of the parliamentary debate on the report of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the National Social Security Fund purchase of land at Temangalo, Wakiso. A legal opinion was that the enforcement of the Leadership Code Act 2002 was the responsibility of the Inspector General of Government and not of Parliament.

b) On 24 March 2010, the Attorney-General, at the request of Cabinet, issued a legal opinion on the powers and mandate of parliamentary committees vis-á-vis the Executive. The opinion is attached as annex 7. One consequence of this opinion was that PAC could not lawfully summon the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda to appear before it. This opinion does not seem to have gone down well with PAC. It is partly against this background that PAC proceeded to pronounce itself on the work of the Attorney-General vis-á-vis CHOGM of 2007.

On pages 50 and 51 of the report, it is stated that while meeting His Excellency the President, the committee drew the attention of the President to this concern and invited him to take closer interest in the trend of legal opinions coming from the Attorney-General. It goes on to say that the committee recommends that the appointing authority should review and take necessary action against the conduct of the Attorney-General who should be responsible for the loss and be investigated for abuse of office.

Mr Speaker, judicial pronouncements on the Attorney-General. In the final analysis, PAC recommends that the Attorney-General –

1.	should be politically responsible for issuing misguidance and clearing agreement contracts that clearly put the interests of Uganda behind individual investors;

2.	should be held responsible for Shs 13.9 billion at stake in respect of the joint-venture agreement he drafted and cleared;

3.	be held responsible for giving wrong advice and using wrong laws; and

4.	should be accordingly prosecuted for abuse of office and causing financial loss to Government.

First, I would like to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court of Uganda in the case of Bank of Uganda Vs Banco Arabe Espano; particular reference should be to the judgement of hon. Mr Justice G.W. Kanyeihamba, JSC as he then was. His Lordship states: “At the time the loan agreement was signed, the Uganda Constitution designated the Attorney-General as the Principal Legal Advisor of the Government of Uganda with functions inter alia to give legal advice and legal services to the Government on any subject, and to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which Government is party or in respect of which the Government has an interest. In my view, the opinion of the Attorney-General as authenticated by his own hand and signature regarding the laws of Uganda and their effects or binding nature on any agreement, contract, or other legal transaction should be accorded the highest respect by Government and public institutions and their agents. 

Unless there are other agreed conditions, third parties are entitled to believe and act on that opinion without further inquiries or verifications. It is my view that it is improper and untenable for the Government, the Bank of Uganda or any other public institution or body in which the Government of Uganda has an interest, to question the correctives or validity of that opinion in so far as it affects the rights and interests of third parties.”

The judge continues thus: “The contention of Mr Masembe Kanyerezi that the Attorney-General’s opinion is erroneous or in any event does not bind the Bank of Uganda is not persuasive and I reject it. I agree with Mr Semuyaba, the Counsel for the respondent that the opinion of the Attorney-General accepted the respondent was a condition precedent to the validation of the loan agreement. And once given in writing, as it was, became the valid and authoritative opinion for the legality and enforceability of the loan agreement.

While it is true that the Attorney-General played a dual role as the Government’s principal legal advisor on both political and legal matters, nevertheless, in the later role the Attorney-General is a law officer for the sole purpose of advancing the ends of justice. In this role, the Attorney-General has accessed all types of advice from fellow ministers who may have negotiated and authorised the signing of contracts. He has a host of qualified and experienced advisors on legal matters of the kind that were involved in this loan agreement.” 

Of the Attorney-General of England whose functions are legacies adopted in the Ugandan Constitution and the laws, it was said in the House of Commons, which is reported in John J.L. Edwards: “The Attorney-General, Politics and the Public Interest, 1984” thus: “It is the duty of the Attorney-General, in the discharge of his responsibilities entrusted to him, to inform himself of all relevant circumstances, which might properly affect the decision.”
 
The learned judge continues thus: “Consequently, the opinion of the Attorney-General on the matter should not be taken lightly. All things being equal, the opinion of the Learned Attorney-General on this loan agreement was the best any of the parties could have received. And having received it, the appellant should not have a sound reason for seriously questioning its correctness or applicability in relation to the loan agreement. In the result, grounds (1) and (2) of the appeal ought to fail.”

Mr Speaker, that is the quotation from the learned judge.

On page 27, part of the essence of this response has been to show that with particular reference to CHOGM, the Attorney-General did not misguide Government. All the contract agreements he cleared were done on the instructions of Government, which Government had identified the interest of Uganda in hosting CHOGM 2007.

There is no nexus between the joint-venture agreements in the alleged loss of Shs 13.9 billion.

At all material times, the Attorney-General simply carried out his constitutional and professional duty of advising Government on legal issues and rendering the necessary legal services. The office gave correct advice and did not cite wrong laws.

The impression has been created that the Attorney-General is implicated and is one of those who wrongly took CHOGM monies and so on. However, nowhere in the records does it show that the Attorney-General’s Chambers or Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was the cost or expenditure centre in the design or implementation of CHOGM project, 2007. The Attorney-General did not receive any CHOGM monies. The question of mishandling the same could not, therefore, arise.

Uganda appears to have spent around Shs 500 billion on hosting CHOGM 2007. On page 8 of the PAC report, the benefits for hosting CHOGM are referred to summarily, but is that all? Uganda will have to do a more dispassionate analysis to establish the overall benefits: Short-term, medium-term, and long-term; political and diplomatic; economic and social benefits do not far outweigh the alleged cost of Shs 500 billion.

Prosecuting the Attorney-General

PAC recommends that the Attorney-General should be prosecuted for abuse of office and causing financial loss. Abuse of office is provided for in Section 11 of the Anti-Corruption Act 2009 (Act No.6 of 2009) as follows:

“11 Abuse of office:
(1)A person, who being employed in a public body or a company in which the government has shares, does or directs to be done an arbitrary act prejudicial to the interests of his or her employer or of any other person, in abuse of the authority of his or her office, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years.”

(2)Where a person is convicted of an offence under sub-section (1) and the act constituting the offence was done for the purposes of gain, the court shall, in addition to any other penalty it may impose, order that anything received as a consequence of the act be forfeited to the government.”

Mr Speaker, the crime of causing financial loss is also provided for in Section 20 of the same Anti-Corruption Act 2009 (Act No.6 of 2009) as follows:

“20 Causing financial loss:
(1)Any person employed by the government, a bank, a credit institution, an insurance company or public body, who in the performance of his or her duties, does any act or omits to do any act knowing or having reason to believe that such act or omission will cause financial loss to the government, bank, credit institution, insurance company, public body or customer of a bank or credit institution commits the offence of causing financial loss and is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment of not less than three years or not more than fourteen years”; and then the bank is defined, insurance is defined, public body and so on and so forth.

It is also indicated on page 30 at the top that the decision to prosecute maybe taken by the DPP and that the DPP is totally independent because in Article 126 of the Constitution it says: “In the exercise of the functions conferred on him or her by this Article, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority” and I say that, Khiddu Makubuya, MP and Attorney-General and Minister of Justice of Uganda, is not above the law. In these circumstances, I will be waiting for appropriate criminal summons. Uganda will have hit the record books by being the first country in the world to have a sitting Attorney-General prosecuted for alleged abuse of office and causing financial loss.

Two final points:

Article 164(2) which reads, “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” It is clear that the Attorney-General falls in the category of persons to whom Article 164(2) applies and would ordinarily apply, other things being equal.

However, the central thesis of this response is partly that the Attorney-General’s carrying out of his duties vis-à-vis CHOGM contracts did not in any way offend the provisions of Article 164(2).

The title of the PAC report indicates that it is based on the special audit report of the Auditor-General on CHOGM 2007 Kampala. However, the special audit report did not cite the Attorney-General or refer to the work of that office vis-à-vis CHOGM to the extent that the PAC report referred to the Attorney-General. Such references cannot be said to be based on the special audit report of the Auditor-General.

Mr Speaker, I say this for God and My Country and I thank you very much for your patience! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I must thank you, the Learned Attorney-General. It has been a long journey from South Pole to North Pole -(Laughter)- but I think we are not tired. We have been traversing that journey in a modern A380, first class and we have enjoyed the sightseeing you have passed us through. Thank you very much, for putting your case.

5.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We want to thank the Attorney-General for his presentation. The Attorney-General has made a lot of issues here which we need to respond to as a committee and we believe as for now, we are not ready, but I need to make a few comments on a few of the issues.

In the last one he says; the Auditor-General never mentioned him. If you read the Auditor-General’s report - I will just quote the Auditor-General’s report. Let me start with page 15, rights attached to redeemed preferential shares: “The accounting office indicated that he would liaise with the Ministry of Finance and the Solicitor-General for guidance on the matter”. Redemption shares in J&M. I do not know what that means. Yes, he said the Solicitor-General is under his office. Please remember.

On page 17, advance payment guarantees. It is clear; because of moving the advance payment guarantees, it led to a loss of US$ 4.5 million.

If you again go to page 19, the Office of the Attorney-General is in court because losses have occurred. Why did he wait to go to court? Why didn’t he say I waived so I do not need to go to court?

Mr Speaker, the reason I was bringing this is to show that the Attorney-General is not above the Auditor-General’s report. It clearly shows that as in our investigation, it pointed to people who were involved.

THE SPEAKER: He is saying, maybe the Auditor-General may not be competent to express legal opinion. He is just showing you his work and his saying “maybe” even when you say that the Attorney-General referred to this and the other, is to weigh the Attorney-General’s opinion with that of the Auditor-General’s legal opinion. I think this is what he is saying.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are going to adduce more evidence to show the Attorney-General’s opinion, but just a small one again. On page 12 of the Attorney-General’s, he says there is nowhere PAC cited that IGG should be part and parcel of the meetings. I have the minutes here dated 8 February 2007; the cabinet sub-committee minutes which I laid here; I will lay it again.

On page 6 of the minutes, the third bullet says: “The Attorney-General had an interpretation of the procurement law and indicated that Cabinet did not have the authority to grant procurement waivers and that the best solution was to operate within the law and use the most appropriate procurement procedures. He suggested that the Inspector General of Government should be involved in the procurement process of the sub-committees to counter any allegations”. It is in the minutes. So, he suggested that Inspector General should be there. 

Mr Speaker, as I stated, this issue of PAD – we have his response and we are going to react to it later because we never knew that that’s how it will come, and I believe by tomorrow we will be ready with the Attorney-General’s. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Attorney-General for his elaborate presentation. The Prime Minister has lined up a certain order of responses; we have so far received from the Attorney-General. I thought we would get the next report - I think I heard you mention hon. Rukundo. Could we get another response so that it enables Members to peruse through the responses and make appropriate debate tomorrow? 

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, the paper I have is a response to allegations against the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities arising out of the Public Accounts Committee report on the CHOGM expenditure. I make reference to the letter from the Prime Minister, Ref: ADM1601 of 15 October 2010 requesting my response and also the PAC report regarding the above subject.

On the 10 March 2010, I was summoned to appear before the Public Accounts Committee herein referred to as PAC which was carrying out investigations on CHOGM expenditures. I appeared with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities technical team, some of whom included the permanent secretary, the commissioners and all the technical staff who were involved in the CHOGM activities. 

To my dismay, all the above were asked to step out of the room as the PAC said they wanted just a few clarifications from me. I was left alone as a sacrificial lamb to answer all the questions which the technical staff could have answered and provided evidence to. I took all the blame and yet I was not even told before I came to PAC so that I could prepare responses. The clarification I sent later after the meeting in regard to the issues raised was not even considered.

Mr Speaker, please find herein my response to the allegations raised in the PAC report.

On page 66 of the PAC report, regarding J&M Airport Road Hotel. 

The findings and recommendations of the PAC committee

In their findings, they say, “Mr Serapio Rukundo informed the committee that the proprietor of J&M Hotel invited him to inspect his hotel, which he did. After that, J&M sought a loan from Barclays Bank, but wanted Government guarantee. Minister Rukundo then wrote a letter to the Minister of Finance on 17 August 2007 requesting that the hotel be considered for a Government guarantee on the loan. That Mr Bahekanira (RIP) told the committee that he never approached any Government official for assistance. 

The committee, therefore, questioned the logic of the minister’s request for a government loan guarantee knowing very well that CHOGM was only two months away. That the minister misled the Minister of Finance to believe that J&M had contracted M/S Protea to manage the hotel. 

And lastly, that Minister Serapio Rukundo should be held liable for influence peddling on behalf of this hotel and be charged under the Anti-Corruption Act. 

My response

The late Joseph Bahekanira (RIP), proprietor of J&M Airport Hotel, wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the 10 July 2007. The letter was titled, “Appeal for bank guarantee of US$ 39.5 million for the J&M Hotel (Protea Hotel, Entebbe Uganda) for a loan from Barclays Bank.” 

In that application, the late Joseph Bahekanira made reference and attached a copy of the management and technical agreement between J&M Hotel and Protea Hotel. Please, see copy of the request letter from late Joseph Bahekanira, proprietor of J&M Hotel, to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development which is attached hereto and marked as Annex 1. 

On the 9 August 2007, the late Bahekanira wrote to the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Ministry of Trade and Industry, and requested it as a mother ministry to intervene and save his project. Please, see copy of his letter appealing to the Minister of Tourism attached hereto and marked as Annex 2. 

On 17 August 2007, the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and forwarded the request of J&M Hotel for a Government guarantee to Barclays Bank to enable them complete the first phase of the hotel in readiness for CHOGM. Please, see copy of the letter attached hereto and marked as Annex 3. 

Mr Speaker, the above letters clearly show that the proprietor of J&M Hotel approached the minister and not the other way round. As per the letter - Annex 2, the proprietor approached the Minister of State and it was the proprietor that sought a loan from Barclays Bank much earlier than that visit from the minister and the request for a guarantee was not forwarded after the minister’s visit as stated by the committee. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not respond to my letter and to the best of my knowledge did not take any action based on my letter. I was later informed that the President, after personally visiting J&M Hotel, recommended that the hotel be assisted. This was taken up by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as will be explained by hon. Fred Omach and he went ahead to give the hotel the money without my involvement. 

The second issue raised by PAC is on page 175 regarding the training of employees of private hotels. Findings by the PAC. The PAC report alleges that I, as Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife & Antiquities, initiated the policy to train employees of private hotels and did not provide proper guidelines on training, which led the government to lose Shs 1.7 billion. PAC alleges that training was brought in because there was money available and had to be spent.

They recommended that hon. Rukundo be held liable for influence-peddling.

I wish to totally disagree with PAC’s allegations and reiterate my position that our explanations furnished thereafter were not taken into account.

In regard to this allegation of causing Shs 1.7 billion loss due to hotel staff training, please see my explanation below.

The ministry received communication that a group of hoteliers had approached His Excellency, the President, and explained to him that there was a crisis faced by the hoteliers of training hotel staff to work in the numerous hotels that had sprung up.

The President recognised the need for Government intervention to offer the best service in these hotels during CHOGM to avoid incidences like food poisoning, filth et cetera in order to boost Uganda’s tourism drive on a long-term basis.

The President acknowledged that there were PPDA regulations to follow in such a matter, but there was insufficient time and advised that action be taken immediately. Please, see a copy of the letter from the President to the Rt hon. Prime Minister and others dated 3 November 2006 attached hereto and marked as Annex 4.

On the 13 November 2006, the Rt hon. Prime Minister wrote to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry and in the letter addressed as “most urgent” stated that the President had directed that Cabinet discusses this matter. He requested the minister to prepare the memo for discussion at the next Cabinet meeting of 22 November 2006. The Prime Minister also pointed out that the required training was estimated to cost Shs 494 million which the private sector could not afford. That is why the government had intervened.

In line with the urgency of the matter as pointed out by the President - please see Annex 5: 

a) The ministry followed the open tendering process and advertised the tender in the media. (Please see copies of the advertisements in the newspapers including The New Vision of 13th and 15th November 2006 attached hereto and marked as Annex 5)

b) The receiving of bids closed on 7 December 2006 and were opened on the same day. Seven firms responded to Lot 1 for training clinics of hotel in-service staff. The firms were:

(i) 	Saatchi & Saatchi
(ii) 	Basic (U) Ltd
(iii) 	East African Hospitality Group
(iv) 	Makerere University Business School
(v) 	International School of Business & Technology
(vi) 	The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute & Associates
(vii) 	UNISIS & Kenya Utali College

c) The contracts committee of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry (of which I am not a member) met on 16th January and discussed the report, which it found satisfactory. It proceeded to award the contract to the best evaluated bidder namely, M/S UNISIS and Kenya Utali College as a consortium. The results as per the evaluation were:

(i) 	M/S UNISIS & Kenya Utali College scored 83.426%
(ii) 	M/S Basix (U) Ltd scored 60.606%
(iii) 	The Hotel and Tourism Training Institute scored 67.896%
(iv) 	M/S Saatchi & Saatchi scored 38.694%

The last three:
(v) 	M/S East African  Hospitality Group,
(vi)	M/S Makerere University Business School, 
(vii) 	M/S International School of Business and Technology, were eliminated at the preliminary stage.

In a nutshell, I wish to state that I did not participate at any level, in the formulation of the policy of training hoteliers nor in the procurement process.  The ministry’s technical staff handled the procurement as per the PPDA Act of 2003 and took the steps as discussed above.

I wish to clarify that Government did not make a loss, as the training was carried out and the staff successfully served the CHOGM delegates. There was no unfortunate incident of food poisoning, filth or embarrassment to our hotel industry and the tourism industry at large as feared by His Excellency the President.

The tourism sector was boosted by the successful hosting of CHOGM and Uganda has been acknowledged to have the capacity to handle international conferences. Indeed, Uganda has since CHOGM hosted many conferences, for example, the International Criminal  Court Review, the African Union Summit, to mention but a few.

Mr Speaker, the third issue in the PAC Report is on page 177 regarding renovation of Uganda Museum. PAC findings in brief: The PAC Report states that the government contracted Matrix Construction Company Ltd to construct a cultural village at a cost of Shs 501,401,311 which was later varied to Shs 800 million under my directive.

They recommend that I should be severely warned for interfering in the procurement process against the law, knowing well that I am not the accounting officer. 

I wish to express my utter shock at this allegation of the PAC Report. This allegation is intended to tarnish my name. I wish to state that I was never involved in the preparation and execution of this project. The project was handled by the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication which was in charge of preparation of the bills of quantities and supervising the project.

The Works Ministry worked hand-in-hand with the accounting officer of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

To the best of my knowledge, there was no variation made to the original quotation and a copy of the schedule of payments obtained from the Ministry of Tourism’s permanent secretary shows that the sum of Shs 506,887,313 was paid out and not the Shs 800 million as alleged by the PAC Report. (Please see a copy of the schedule of payments to Matrix Construction Company signed by the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Tourism, attached). You will see that the first payment was Shs 100 million, the second Shs 55 million, the third Shs 105 million, the fourth Shs 184 million, then Shs 61 million making a total of Shs 506 million and not the Shs 800 million as alleged.

In conclusion, I thank you for this opportunity given to me to defend myself against what I consider to be biased, false and baseless allegations laundered against me by the PAC Report. As explained above, I carried out my duties faithfully and diligently in my position as Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, to ensure the success of CHOGM and the glory of Uganda without any selfish interest or benefits. Indeed, the Auditor-General’s report did not find any wrongdoing attributable to me. I do not appear in the Auditor-General’s report. The CHOGM was successfully held and the image of Uganda has since been acclaimed internationally. For God and My Country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Response noted. 

Hon. Members, before we proceed, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Law and Joy Primary School, Mukono. Please stand up for recognition. (Applause) You are welcome.

Well, those are the responses we have received today and which you will consider when debating the report. We have come to the end of today’s business. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 10 November 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
