

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am looking around and I did not give you recess. So, I do not know why people are not here; nevertheless, we should start and other Members will find us along the way. I do not have much to communicate today, but the Leader of Opposition had wanted to raise something.

2.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I want to raise a matter of public concern which most of us might be aware of. For the last one week, Dr Kiiza Besigye, the FDC President, has been hounded by state operatives under the command of one Assistant Superintendent of Police, Omara, at his house. This climaxed into his detention at Kasangati Police Station on 31st of October 2011 and release after nine hours without a charge. The courts had earlier on ruled that Dr Kiiza Besigye’s residence is not a gazetted detention centre and that walking is not a crime.

On the 1st of November 2011, some goons were ferried to his residence with fictitious claims demanding for payments with claims that they were polling agents in the 2006 general elections in Rukiga and Nakawa divisions. We all know that we do not appoint polling agents for constituencies, but for polling stations, and these ones had their letters reading constituencies and showing appointment in December 2005. This resulted in a scuffle, which was captured on various TV and radio stations, and they confessed that they were ferried from different parts of Kampala to cause chaos at Dr Kiiza’s residence. 

I have today’s New Vision on page 5, which I am going to lay on the Table; and the Daily Monitor for today, on the same issue. 

In the process, some of the goons were arrested. One of them is Kasalita Juma, mostly known as Isma, and Chemwa Moses. They were taken to Kassangati Police Station by our Deputy Secretary of Defence and Security in FDC, Mr Salim Angoliga, who registered the case with the Police and their references are: SD24/01/11/11 and SD30/01/11/11. He made a statement, but only for the suspects to be released without any charges preferred on them as if the Police were aware of their actions.

FDC has also got credible information that from now on, the Police are not going to block Dr Kiiza Besigye from walking to work, but instead, has organised goons who will pretend that they are supporters of Activists For Change walking alongside Dr Kiiza Besigye, only to cause mayhem along the way. But more scaring is their main objective of harming and killing Dr Kiiza Besigye. 

All of you know that the Arinaitwe scenario is still very fresh in the minds of Ugandans. They are also planning that in case Dr Kiiza Besigye is harmed and he is being evacuated, he could be injected with a very poisonous substance leading to his death. Efforts by FDC party officials to meet the Police leadership and dialogue over these sensitive matters, were turned down by the Police. 

Dr Kiiza Besigye has constantly made it clear that his is a non-violent and peaceful walk-to-work as a demonstration against the escalating cost of living, and this remains so. Therefore, we are appealing to the concerned authorities to take the necessary measures to prevent these uncalled for provocations and abide by the decisions of court, and also to ensure the safety of Dr Kiiza Besigye.

I have the letters of the so-called agents, which I am going to lay on Table. I have also the statements made by our Secretary for Defence and security, Salim Angoliga Muhammad. I am also putting my statement here.

2.36
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, PLANNING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Hon. Nandala Mafabi has raised very important issues. I want to give assurance that we shall take time off to study all the documents that you have tabled here with a view to ensuring that corrective measures are put in place.

However, I would like to state that it is not the intention of Government to harm Dr Kiiza Besigye. It is not the intention of Government to cause trouble to any peace-loving Ugandan, and we shall try to ensure that there is peace and tranquillity, and for everybody to enjoy his/her freedom within the limits of the law.

2.38
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East Division, Kampala): I stand here on a matter of public concern. The Eighth Parliament made a law to take over Kampala Capital City. Among other issues, the new authority was to ensure that the residents of Kampala receive better services and a better administered city. Currently, because of the torrential rains, most of our people in Kampala do not sleep at night. They spend most of their time standing on floating beds - floating mattresses - in the areas of Bwaise, lower Kansanga neighbouring my colleague, hon. Namara. It is a similar situation when you go to Bukasa neighbouring the Minister of Defence. As he is sleeping at home, his neighbours are standing on floating mattresses and beds. We have even lost lives. In September, two people died because of the floods in Kampala. We have seen loss of property and income because in those lower areas where we experience floods, people are no longer renting the houses and that is loss of income, mostly in this era when we are experiencing a financial crisis.

We passed a budget, but most of the items in the budget are not targeted towards working on these drainage channels. We have got what we call the primary drainage channels and that is Nakivubo and Lubigi. We have got secondary channels and these are drainage channels which feed into the two main primary drainage channels, and there is no plan so far to work on re-sifting these drainage channels -(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About two and a half years ago, this Parliament approved a World Bank loan intended to work on the drainage system and roads in Kampala City. Up to now, we have not seen any progress. The Information I want to give is that it is not only the budget that was approved by Government, but some other loans have also been extended to work on the city roads and the drainage system, specifically in Bwaise and parts of Makindye. However, we are not seeing any progress being made, despite the fact that the condition is worsening. So, I think it is important for this Parliament to get more information on how money is being spent or how this project is being implemented. Thank you very much. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much for that information, hon. Namayanja. Madam Speaker, the issue we are talking about, and if hon. Lukyamuzi can bear witness, is that if it rains, crossing from Nalukolongo on Masaka Road to Wankulukuku becomes a nightmare. Currently, those who love soccer have also experienced loss of income and money as a result of the Dstv not being able to televise live matches because of floods in Kampala. That is why at this point, I want to request the minister in charge of Kampala to –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to extend to my colleague, who is also a Member of Parliament in Kampala, is that the conditions in Kampala City are pathetic. Very soon, the distance from the centre of Nateete down to a place called Kutaano –(Interjections)- when it rains, the waters attract Tilapia to swim all the way from the lake and be accommodated. So, this is a very big challenge to the minister in charge of Kampala. Mind you, we are addressing the centre of the Capital City of Kampala. If the minister and the government cannot address the current situation of floods, they would rather get out of Government so that we come into power. (Laughter)

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the Kampala Capital City Authority Act empowers the minister in charge of Kampala to override even decisions of the council. In this case, we request that the efforts being put into demolishing buildings and evicting vendors be the same efforts put in working on the drainage channels of Kampala. So, we request the Minister for Kampala to work out an emergency plan –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, today I read the papers and I realised that there are also other pertinent issues. As the honourable member talks about the floods and who does the works, the issue of contracting certain companies in Kampala is also appalling. Contracts are given to specific companies or contractors just like honourable members have noted and those that have failed have continuously been granted similar contracts to the extent that today, due to the abject poverty that you are witnessing in Kampala, I read that some of our people from Katwe and other areas were ferried to Kasangati to act. The children of this country, because of abject poverty, are being paid to go and act as conmen against the FDC President, Dr Kiiza Besigye, to extort money. They were beaten and when I looked at them, these were people from Kampala; people that I know and this is due to poverty and suffering that people are going through; they are easily used for such dirty politics in this country. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appreciate that there are other problems, but we are diverting from the major problem of the floods and it may disappear. 

MR SSIMBWA: As I conclude, I request the minister in charge of Kampala to work out an emergency programme of resifting not only the roadside drainage channels, but also what they refer to as secondary drainages so that water can run and flow smoothly, and the issue of floods can be partly worked upon. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, of course I want to confirm that we passed that loan here. I do not know whether the Minister of Works or the Minister for Local Government will say something, because it is true that we approved that loan, specifically for Kampala. 

2.47
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are right. We passed a loan, and to the best of my knowledge - because I have seen the adverts - the project coordination unit council is implementing a number of projects related to that loan. What I can assure the people of Kampala is that Government made an effort and now Kampala has a drainage master plan. It is now a question of implementing the major problem of –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for giving way. Whether we have billions and trillions to modify Kampala, the disease must be cured first. I want to inform you that in Kampala, people are littering rubbish everywhere. When Gen. Paul Kagame took over power in Rwanda, he instituted a team of security people along the streets to guard people from dropping rubbish and he did this for four years and everything is okay now. But here in Uganda, I want to give you a situation that I encountered on Monday. I met policemen on a patrol vehicle and I told them that people had thrown some bad things in the culvert; I said, “Please, can you go and help us and stop these people or arrest that vehicle?” They said, “No, we are here guarding somebody.” I am of the view, hon. Minister, that before you release money, let us train our people. Our children in school are trained on how to keep rubbish in dustbins, and after school, they join society and continue with the same behaviour. What I am saying is that with these many Police officers that we have in Kampala, let them also play the role of guarding against people throwing rubbish and empty bottles of mineral water everywhere, in addition to guarding particular people who are going to hold rallies or to move on foot. These people should do this work as they do other activities. What are these people doing at the Constitutional Square the whole day when people are dumping rubbish there? They see them, but wait for Ssewungu and Col. Besigye, and when those ones are saved they continue and go to their beds.

So, as conclude, honourable minister, let us institute a team. Let us train people to avoid dumping rubbish everywhere. As you go to Mukwano - this Mukwano bypass - whenever it rains it is the bottles and the rubbish that block the culverts. Where are we headed in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I do recall - I do not know whether it was in the budget last year - where we were to create the Environmental Police. We passed it here, but the minister for environment is not here. But we agreed on it here in this House.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like you have already said, the loan was passed and I thank my colleagues hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Namayanja for bringing this up. Some of the tenders - I want to inform the minister - were already given out and one of the contractors is Spencon and there is another team. When you come, for instance, to Kawempe, all the roads are impassable. Most of you have experienced the grid lock or the jam in Kawempe. 

The honourable minister for works, Nafumbambi and Muganza Awongera roads are impassable. Right now, they are totally impassable. I understand National Water and Sewerage Corporation have dug them up to put their pipes there and they have rendered it impassable. Go to Lugoma and Kawala roads, they are totally impassable right now and it is becoming an embarrassment. Why should we look at one road - Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road, Bwaise-Bombo Road - when people cannot move and services cannot be accessed? The Fire Brigade, ambulances and the rest cannot pass; you spend over four hours in Bwaise. 

I wish that this Parliament would take action. Madam Speaker, you are on record for saying that you want to demonstrate. This loan was passed last year in haste and we want to look at the roads that were going to be worked on plus the drainages. How can you pass a loan in Parliament, they give out a contract to Spencon and they sit on the money? Are they gaining interest on that money? What has happened? Let us take action. This Parliament must be seen to be serious, instead of only passing money and it remains on somebody’s account earning a lot of interest. Parliament must commit today to follow up the money that was passed for the roads. We are tired of the floods and the rubbish. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, because of that concern, I instructed the rules committee to create another committee to oversee the performance of the loans because we give loans and nobody follows up for implementation. So, the rules committee will be bringing a proposal here for another committee to handle that particular issue.  

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, Government has already provided money and that money was effectively used to produce the Kampala Drainage Master Plan. What is remaining is the implementation, and to the best of my knowledge, the designs for the critical channels like Lubigi - that is one of the critical ones - are there. They just need to be reviewed and then tendered out. So, what is missing is the money. 

Turning to what hon. Sebuliba talked about the roads, you remember we passed the Kampala Capital City Authority Act. In that Act, there are clauses conflicting with one another. Section 7 stipulates what is to be done by the Authority, and Section 22 stipulates that Ministry of Works will be in charge of roads. What happened was that the Executive Director of KCCA went ahead and decided that all monies - because of that conflict, the interpretation was that it should be done by KCCA. So, all the contracts my ministry had entered into were handed over to KCCA until we, the government, come back here and clarify on section 7 and 22. Thank you very much my learned friend, Odonga Otto. (Laughter) We are going to come back here to clarify sections 7 and 22 so that we know exactly who is in charge of the roads in the capital city. So, what hon. Sebuliba was saying and all those issues as of now, should be addressed to the Authority and not my ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister for Lands.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Members have raised fairly pertinent issues noting that all of us who reside in Kampala have been inconvenienced in one way or the other, either due to the garbage, floods, overflowing of the pipes and so on and so forth. I will be raising these issues with the minister in charge of Kampala, who should be in a position to come and provide a fairly comprehensive statement in regard to what is being done. 

All I know is that there is need for a new physical infrastructure plan for Kampala, because the original plan and the structures which have been developed can no longer match - there is an ever growing population –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Stand up hon. Sseggona.

MR SSEGGONA: I am already up, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)- and this is the biggest of gifts I could receive in this world - the height. I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. If the question is one of developing a physical infrastructure plan, I would like to know from the minister, if we do not have that plan in place, what are we following in breaking down people’s buildings? Why don’t we start with first things first and then we do last things last? Develop a plan and then follow the plan.

The second thing is to seek clarification from my honourable colleague. Can we have a timeframe? Because we have heard these statements, but as long as they are endless we may not get the results we want? So, we want a timeframe from Government as to when these things are going to be implemented. Otherwise, we shall keep waiting forever.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Byandala was once in Kampala City Council and he is now the minister. I am surprised that he is talking about a master plan which he was working on when he was still in Kampala City Council. He is still talking about implementing that plan; that implementation is not yet done. 

I am surprised at the way things are being done. The World Bank loan that was approved was specific. It is a project - the Kampala Institutional Infrastructure Plan - which was supposed to have time limits and certain things were supposed to be done during certain periods, but up to now, we are talking about implementing a loan that was approved years back. What my colleague, hon. Sseggona has talked about - the infrastructure plan - is part of that loan. It is also something that has been worked on and approved. 

If we are talking about implementing, capacity and incompetence, let these technical officers be looked into, because I can see all that is affecting the city is due to negligence.

I support hon. Sebuliba when he says that something must be done to see to it that the city’s status is addressed. 

3.00  
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we are talking of the state of the roads, it should not only be Kampala. For us who come from Apac, Kampala might be having far better and smoother roads to drive on. I have been to the honourable minister’s office and to that of the regional engineer, and I am happy to say that I received a warm reception and a sympathetic listening ear, and I am still waiting for something to be done on my road because as I speak, Apac Town is cut off. I can’t go through the feeder roads – people are just being carried on other people’s backs, if you saw what was in the Red Pepper today - and it has been like that for the last many months, although the engineer is trying to fire-fight. The main road in Apac, that is, the one from Masindi Port to Lira, which has had very many promises of tarmacking from the President, is almost impassable. The bridges are broken; the lorries carrying products for sale get stuck and the products have to be offloaded before they can push the lorries. I have received reports of people breaking their legs on those broken down bridges which should be a national highway. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is now becoming a general debate. The issues were about Kampala. I also have a problem with Jinja-Kamuli Road, but I don’t want to raise it. 

3.02
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues; one is on the roads in Rukiga County. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. First of all, there was no statement here. The hon. Ssimbwa complained about the drainage in Kampala and the inaccessibility. If everybody is going to speak about that - it is just Kampala.   

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the second issue is the issue that hon. Nandala-Mafabi touched on, which the Acting Leader of Government Business responded to - the haunting and -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. On that one, we are expecting a statement from the government. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, but there is an issue I would like to raise. 

THE SPEAKER: No, let us finish with the roads. It is just roads, and roads in Kampala. 

3.03
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The problem of flooding is a very big one in Kampala, and the main cause of these floods in Kampala is greed, because people have built in the wetlands and the water cannot find its way into Lake Victoria. 

To add to that is the fact that the population in Kampala has grown and yet the government has not made any plans to settle the problem of the ever increasing population in Kampala. The government policy is that they want the population to be big. I would like the minister to visit the Namuwongo Channel and see what is happening down there. People have built in the wetlands and, therefore, water finds its way on the roads. 

In Kyambogo, where I live, when it rains, it is impossible to cross the road; there is flooding everywhere. This is because people have built in the wetlands. I remember one time the Head of State said, “No, I want factories and I want people to build” and the greedy ones grabbed land in Kitintale, Bugolobi, Namuwongo, Kyambogo and built in the wetlands. This is a serious issue. So, don’t talk about bottles; it is the big problem of building in wetlands. This is a very serious issue and Government must look into it. 

Government must look at the population in Kampala because there have been no plans to –(Interjections)- okay, I will take the information. 

THE SPEAKER: Not municipality. 

MR RUHUNDA:  No, Kampala. Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I sit on the Natural Resources Committee and what you are saying is very true. The bigger problem on Jinja Road from Lugogo is that there is a gentleman who constructed a petrol station in the wetland. And this gentleman frustrated NEMA even when it tried to use security forces. This gentleman had armed guards who prevented NEMA from executing his eviction from that piece of land. That is why when it rains, that whole road is blocked off. 

So, the problems of the environment as submitted by the Ministry of Environment are really acute, because people are standing with impunity; they do not want to follow the rules; they have totally put aside what NEMA requires just for their selfish gains and we are paying the price. 

Now, when we talk about the drainages, I think the Members should look into the way Kampalans conduct themselves when it comes to the blockage of these drainages. Because every time the drainages are opened, there are these plastics and other waste dumped into the drainages and what do you expect? You expect the drainages to block and thereafter cause havoc through floods. So, we still have a very long way to go and Members, this is a very serious matter; I hope that we take it very seriously. 

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: I thank the honourable member for that information although I wish that he had mentioned the owner of that petrol station. I understand that the owner –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the same person he is referring to is the owner of Fuelex Oil Company called Maniraguha. He has gone ahead to block another drainage channel which starts from Katwe and goes through Kansanga, and as you cross Gaba Road, he has also constructed another petrol station in the wetland on the left where he has blocked a wetland from Katwe. So, when water flows because of that construction, it overflows backwards. That is the owner of that petrol station opposite Spear Motors and the one in Kansanga. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude on this matter, please. We have other matters to handle.  

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for that information. This is a very serious issue. We thought NEMA was there to assist this country, but on many occasions, NEMA is compromised and they go ahead and give clearance to these people to build in the wetlands.

When you reach Spear Motors as you go to Ntinda, there is a wetland there, which has been cordoned off. This is very serious. It does not matter whether this person called Total is FDC; we are going to hang him for that action. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, when I went to Rwanda, I think I reported to you that I met Ugandans there and they told me that in Rwanda, if you build in a wetland, they will allow you to build and complete your house very nicely. As soon as it is completed, they will come and break it down, and you will ask no questions.

3.10
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member from Makindye brought the issue as one of national interest and importance, but this issue is not only about Kampala because Jinja Road, as you see, is the only road, which supplies us with all the materials, goods and other things.

I want to put it to your attention that last week it was blocked for almost three hours around Kitega where there is Lugazi Cathedral and the reason was the floods. The place had flooded and a trailer got involved in an accident and fell in the middle of the road. 

People in that area poured a lot of soil in that swamp and blocked the drainage channel. So, whenever the water from around Geregere and Kisaasi reaches there, it does not move because it cannot cross the road. What it does is flood the road and that is why that accident came about.

Two weeks back, we lost two children around that area. They drowned in water because it had rained for around three hours. The area flooded and the children were playing around there. Unfortunately, they were swept away and died because of that flood.

I request the Ministry of Works to come to our rescue together with NEMA and stop those people from pouring soil in that area. You know, sometimes things turn against us. We talk but we are small people and we are politicians. We do not want to be pushed around or to be held responsible for breaking people’s houses or stopping them from constructing on their plots. So, I request the departments concerned in NEMA, Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Environment to come to our rescue so that our people and children do not die and we do not waste time and resources. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): I have conferred with the honourable minister in charge of Kampala in regard to the loan that we passed here for addressing infrastructural issues. She has given an undertaking to come back here and update Parliament on the implementation arrangements that are being pursued. She wishes to come back and provide a statement to the House within three weeks.

Secondly, in light of the nature of the problem that we are dealing with and that is causing all these problems in Kampala, a number of ministries - the Ministry in charge of Kampala, Kampala Capital City Authority, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Local Government - we have been meeting and discussing a clear plan for addressing all these problems, including decongesting Kampala. This is because one of the reasons why we are having these problems is the over-population in Kampala, and the planning which we had initially put in place, clearly cannot cater for the ever growing population in Kampala. Once we are done with these discussions, we should be in position to come to the House and inform you on what we as NRM Government are doing to make sure that we find a clear solution to all these problems.

In the meantime, I have received information to the effect that although some big people in this House could have built in swampy areas, they have taken the trouble to secure environmental impact assessment approval, but more importantly, they will be able to rein in on others not to follow their bad example. I thank you.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I really want to thank you very much indeed for being so central in bringing to Kampala the Inter Parliamentary Union conference next year. I can tell Members that Kampala has become a preferred destination for conferences because of its cleanliness. That is why I am really saying that this is not really a partisan matter; no. This matter is one of national importance, that Kampala must not only be clean, hospitable, but also safe. This is very critical.

In today’s newspaper, there is an article that Uganda is the best tourist choice. One of the variables they use in making a choice of where an international conference or tourists must go, include cleanliness of the city, the safety of the city, the hospitality of the people and the degree of entertainment.

All these are very vital for Kampala as the capital of this nation. Kampala is the front desk for Uganda and your concern is shared. I can assure you, Members putting on the other hat, that the government side is completely committed and that is why these loans are borrowed to make Kampala clean. We must put our act together and make Kampala an island of peace; an island we can all be proud of. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Minister, you have reinforced my point. I hope it can be done before March 2012, because so many people are going to descend on this country for ten days for that very important meeting. So, we expect good roads, no congestion, clean and safe. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: And with your support, Madam Speaker, you will feel very proud at the end of the conference. Thank you.

3.19
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising an issue of national importance. I have been given some information from my constituency concerning our relationship with Southern Sudan. If you will allow me – because I was sent information by email and I contacted the people and got the details – just to read for the Members.

THE SPEAKER: Just summarise.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The heading is, “Looming Diplomatic Strain between Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan”. This has caused a lot of fear. The details are as below: 

“Southern Sudan authorities accuse Ugandans of illegal lumbering in Southern Sudan: The authorities in the Republic of Southern Sudan in Magwi County, are accusing Ugandans of illegal lumbering of Southern Sudan timber and illegal distribution of Southern Sudan’s land to Ugandan citizens. These accusations were made by the Commissioner of Magwi County, Equatorial State, H.E. Peter Ochilo Bongomin and this has caused a lot of fear. They even say that part of their territory has been taken by Ugandans and they want to reclaim it, adding that the grading of roads by Uganda inside their territory is undesired. 

He says that he is disturbed by Uganda’s claim that the GPS borderline reading that shows the border between Uganda and South Sudan is at Pogee contrary to the border known to them at Limu River. The RDC of Lamwo District in Uganda, Omony Alfred Ogaba, was literally temporarily held and asked to sign some documents, but he refused. One of the resolutions in that meeting at Pajok Payam where the RDC attended, called for the withdrawal of the UPDF. Another resolution allegedly agreed upon was that land distribution in Candek – that is Ngom-oromo and Oyom in particular, and lumbering in South Sudan, must stop with immediate effect. The conflict has already claimed lives of 18 Acholi of Magwi, who died on October 26. The people of Ngom-oromo in Lukung sub-county as far as Kitgum are living in fear.”

Madam Speaker, with this report that is causing tension and unexplained claims by our neighbours; let the minister concerned come and give us a detailed account and the way forward on how we can handle this situation before it escalates. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I recall that hon. Fungaroo also brought issues of a similar nature about tension along the border. So, I hope you will be able to bring a statement so that the people understand what is happening. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Anywar for bringing to the attention of the House that important matter. I will bring it to the attention of the Executive because the issues raised touch foreign affairs, lands, internal affairs and I am sure we shall be able to come up with a statement here on the Floor of the House within one week.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY AND THE GOVERNMENT REQUEST TO BORROW FOR COMMUNITY AGRICULTURAL INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (CAIIP) PROJECT 3

3.26
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on this Floor to present a report from the Committee on National Economy on a loan request. However, before I do that, allow me register a word of appreciation to the members of the committee who diligently played their role and mandatory obligation, and traversed the beneficiary districts to ensure that their work is done.

Well aware that time is not on our side and cognisant of the fact that loan requests require careful and diligent scrutiny, I beg the indulgence of hon. Members to be a little patient so that we can peruse through this report. This report is made up of only 14 pages; it is quite brief but pregnant with a lot of content.

This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request –(Interjections)– copies have been circulated. Actually, since yesterday, copies have been circulated and this morning we had other copies that were brought and I expect all Members to be having the report –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is good we are going to get more money for the third project of CAIIP. But I would have been happier to have dealt – we cannot have money to enjoy when other people are not free. I would have been happier to have a concrete response from Government on the issue I raised of where our party president, who is a Ugandan who went to the bush and brought this government to power. He was a doctor, who treated the President, and one of the generals would have even died if he was not there in the bush. You remember when we were in the bush. (Laughter) No action; nothing is talked about, but only coming to approve a loan and then keeping quiet. Is this fair?

Therefore, I would be comfortable if the Leader of Government Business would come with a precise date and action on what he wants to do, before we can move ahead. That is the procedure I want, because this is a serious matter. Today, it could be me; tomorrow, it could be the other one.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, when I stood up, I clearly indicated that I need to consult over this matter and we were exchanging notes with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We are going to meet so that I can get more details -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have very high respect for hon. Migereko and I have been here with him since we started Parliament. I have not at any single minute got any comment, whether written or verbal, and he is coming here to tell us that he has been exchanging notes. This gentleman, is he really honest in his life to make such an accusation, which is not right? Is hon. Migereko right? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I have been watching you smile at one another. I do not know what you were exchanging. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it was fairly clear and at some stage, I had fear that you would reprimand me because I was paying more attention to hon. Nandala-Mafabi because of the signs he was making, indicating that he wanted us to talk. I really want to request hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we move on so that you can avail me more information. That way, I can go and carry out the necessary consultations and we make a statement. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, why don’t you give us time to do this work while you do the consultation and report to us by 4 O’clock or 5 O’clock. Let us do some work while you consult.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we all want to debate this loan request. We are not going to sit. The whole country wants to know when Government will make a statement on Besigye’s arrest. Please, just get up and tell us the date. We are not just going to hurriedly approve loans casually when other people are under incarceration.

If the minister cannot come out to give a concrete date on when they are going to make a statement on Dr Kiiza Besigye, we may as well choose to walk out and leave you to approve the loan. Please, give us a date, and I am talking as Chairperson of the Government Assurance Committee. We want to know when Government will give a date -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto, for giving way. It is important that I give you hon. Odonga Otto and this Parliament this information; if it be for the purposes of emphasis, let you hear it, Madam Speaker and at the risk of repeating what is obvious to this country, I will still say it.

It is very easy to downplay the matter of Dr Besigye’s safety and to even think it is not a matter for this nation until some hopeless policeman sprays him and he is nearly dead; you and I cannot walk through that town. I want to tell this country and I will say it again, if anything happens to Dr Besigye the man, none of us will sit here to transact business. It will be chaos -(Interjections)- you can shout. We can only hold together as a country -(Interjections)- Yes, I am being honest. These shouts coming from that side cannot be repeated here. The best we can do for this country is to ensure stability and the safety of Dr Besigye so that you continue on that side shouting and I say “no” from this side and there is peace. We will not hold together as a nation if it happens. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have asked the minister to go and consult while we do this work and report back before 5.00 p.m. today. Please, present our report.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With me, is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $60 million, which is the equivalent of UA40 million from the African Development Bank and ID 7 million, which is the equivalent of $10 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the implementation of Phase 3 of the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme.

This request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and consequently, referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Article 159 and Rule 152(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee did its work, considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

In its methods of work, the committee met and interacted with various stakeholders, and among them was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Local Government, the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Governments.

At the same time, the committee had many documents that it referred to and among these documents, we had a minister’s brief on the loan request, the project appraisal report, the CAIIP-1 quarterly progress report and we also looked at the progress report of CAIIP-2.

We also scrutinised the loan financing agreements. As you will all observe as we move along with the report, we are getting funding from two banks. So, as we scrutinise these loans, we referred to two loan financing agreements.

The committee also undertook field trips to some of the implementation sites for the projects in the districts of Mbale, Mayuge, Jinja, Mukono, Gulu, Nakasongola and Luwero.

The documents that we referred to - I have them here and I request that I lay them on Table together with the minutes which emanated from the deliberations of the committee.

On page 2, we have the background. This project is one of Government’s strategic investments aimed at enhancing farmer access to markets, attracting competitive prices and increased incomes through improvements in rural infrastructure development and management by well mobilised communities. 

The programme was designed to contribute to the seventh pillar of PMA, basically looking at physical infrastructure with particular focus on the improvement of rural roads and markets. This programme is consistent with the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme, and the goal of the pillars of CAIIP is to eliminate hunger and reduce poverty through agriculture. 

The CAIIP activities are also in line with the National Development Plan of 2010, the Agricultural Sector Investment Plan of 2010 and the Rural Development Strategy of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, with special emphasis on market access for agricultural produce. Strategies of the Ministry of Works and Transport as outlined in its District Urban and Community Access Roads Investment Plan and the Local Government Sector Investment Plan, Strategy No.6, which is Local Economic Development. 

The programme activities also lend support to the NAADS plan for zonal agricultural production, agro-processing and marketing, which encourages production for the export market.

Additionally, the investments are in line with the Electricity Act of 1990 and the Government’s rural electrification strategy and plan of 2001, in encouraging private sector participation and energy supply for rural transformation through support for basic social services. This programme, hon. Members, is being implemented in phases due to the limited resources, with the aim of covering the country’s entire rural space. 

In 2007 and 2009, the Government secured funding from development partners to the tune of $ 137 million to finance the first two phases of the programme, namely, CAIIP-1 AND CAIIP-2 covering 175 sub-counties selected from 41 districts in Central, Eastern and Northern regions of Uganda. The overall sector goal of the project is to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth in Uganda, through enhanced commercialisation of agriculture. The specific objectives, however, are to enhance farmer access to markets, attract competitive prices and increased incomes through improvements in rural infrastructure and their management by well mobilised communities. 

On page 4, we have a table that clearly illustrates the programme coverage by number of districts per region. In that table, we have the three phases of CAIIP and the districts per region. In total, we have 23 districts from the Western region, 25 districts from the Eastern region, 10 from Northern region and 14 from the Central. This is the total number of districts which we expect will be covered by the three phases of CAIIP.

The proposed CAIIP is an investment loan and is a follow-up on two existing projects, namely CAIIP-1 and CAIIP-2. It is expected to increase household incomes by 20 percent, increase the volume of agricultural produce that reaches markets by 25 percent and lead to post-harvest loss reductions of 20 percent in project areas. This project will cover 68 sub-counties across 31 districts and these are, namely: Apac, Bugiri, Buhweju, Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Busia, Hoima, Ibanda, Isingiro, Kabale, Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kanungu, Kasese, Kiruhura, Kisoro, Kole, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Luwero, Masindi, Mayuge, Mbarara, Mitooma, Nakaseke, Namayingo, Ntoroko, Ntungamo, Oyam, Rubirizi, Rukungiri and Sheema in a bid to improve road infrastructure and facilitate the movement of agricultural produce from the rural areas to the urban markets, and hence, bolster the incomes of the rural poor. 

The bulk of interventions will take place in the Western region where the programme will deepen previous interventions under the area based agricultural modernisation programme, by raising coverage to 50 percent of sub-counties in each district. CAIIP-3 will also extend interventions to 22 sub-counties in Central, Northern and Eastern regions, in districts not previously covered by CAIIP-2, to ensure the continued even and balanced roll-out of the programme across the entire rural space of Uganda. 

On this one, Madam Speaker, allow me say it clearly that we are talking of three phases of CAIIP, and we know that there are certain areas that have not really been captured by the CAIIP programme, but in this case, we are talking of a continued even and balanced roll-out programme across the entire rural space, and that means that even those other districts or areas that are not captured in this are expected to be captured in the near future. 

Let us move to the objectives. The principle objective of the programme is to increase agricultural productivity and improve incomes among rural households through investments in rural infrastructure and community access roads. 

The programme will also establish rural market infrastructure, grain millers, milk coolers and rural electrification equipment. Improvement in rural road infrastructure will facilitate the movement of agricultural produce from the rural areas to the urban markets for sale or processing, hence raising the rural household incomes. 

For the components on page 6, we have two components for this project; rural infrastructural improvement and under this one, we expect that 3,740 kilometres of community access roads will be rehabilitated and constructed across the 31 districts. The programme will also construct 68 market structures and 68 agro-processing facilities, as well as supply rural electricity to the agro-processing sites or markets, which will open up the countryside and facilitate the movement of agricultural produce from the rural areas to the rural trading centres en-route to bigger markets.

The second component is community mobilisation. Under this component, mobilisation and training of rural communities will be carried out to enable them effectively participate in selection, approval, management and maintenance of infrastructure. For the project financing, this project will be implemented over a period of five years and it is expected to cost to the tune of $ 70 million as indicated in Table 2. On page 7, we have the table that shows the project costs estimates by component. We have activities - the amounts in US dollars - and then again, we have the components. 

Hon. Members, I hope all of you are looking at that table. For community access roads and rehabilitation, we have $47.2 million and the percentage is 66.8 percent. Construction of the markets and agro-processing facilities, we have $9.6 million in percentage. For rural electrification equipment for markets, we have $1.6 million and the percentage comes to 2.8, which means that we have a sub-total of 83.2 percent in physical investments. 

We also have monies for community mobilisation and capacity building, which is $5.9 million, which gives us 8.4 percent; and programme monitoring, evaluation and audit, also standing at
$5.9 million, which also gives us 8.4 percent. 

Madam Speaker, with the project cost as seen in this Table, it is very important to note that unlike some of the previous projects, where we have been seeing big percentage of monies being spent on monitoring and evaluation, on this project, we have 83.2 percent on physical investments. I think that is really good and I assure hon. Members that with this kind of finance design, we should expect tangible results on the ground. 

The terms and conditions of the loans

From the African Development Bank, we are getting $60 million, which is the equivalent of UA 40 million. We have a service fee of 0.75 on disbursement and outstanding balances. We also have a commitment charge of 0.5 percent on an undisbursed portion of the loan, and a maturity period of 50 years, including ten years of grace. 

With the Islamic Development Bank, we are getting $10 million and the maturity period is 25 years, including seven years of grace. Sorry, hon. Members, there is a small error; we had indicated 40 years, but it is 25 years, including seven years, not 10 years of grace period. The administration fee is 2.5 percent of the loan for the entire loan period.
 
The above terms are highly concessional and in line with the Government debt strategy. Of course, we have other pre-requisite conditions attached to this project; for instance, the legal opinion of the Attorney-General of Uganda on the legal validity of the loan documentation to Government. 

We have another condition of opening up of special accounts in Bank of Uganda for the receipt of proceeds of the loans. Government to provide the lender’s evidence that right of way has been secured for the contractors in the relevant sites for the works, and also NEEMA approval of the social and environmental plan. 

For the implementation, monitoring and evaluation, the Ministry of Local Government is the executing agency for CAIIP-1 and CAIIP-2, and will also oversee the implementation of CAIIP-3. 

This will ensure that institutional knowledge and experience are carried forward and facilitate timely start-up and implementation of the project. The Ministry of Local Government maintains an experience project facilitation team, which is fully integrated within the Ministry of Local Government and will be responsible for the day-to-day coordination, and monitoring implementation of the project actives. 

As is the standard management procedure under CAIIP-1, or as it was the standard management procedure for CAIIP-1 and 2, each beneficiary district in this project will second relevant technical staff to support project implementation. The implementation of project activities will thus be carried out under the office of the chief administrative officers and with support from the project facilitation team. 

The project facilitation team will collaborate with other Government ministries and institutions such as Ministry of Works, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, National Planning Authority, NAADS, Rural Electrification Agency, and NARO, as well as projects financed by other development partners that are directly or indirectly linked to the successful implementation of CAIIP-3.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I think the gist of the matter lies on pages 10 and 11, where we have the observations and recommendations.

Observations and Recommendations

 i) 	The committee observed that on the overall, investing in rural infrastructure such as rural roads and markets, reduces transportation costs, induces further production, and enhances incomes through access to markets and better prices. CAIIP has demonstrated that value addition from agro-processing, not only creates ready markets for agricultural produce, but also leads to increases in household margins through improved quality and reduction in post-harvest loses. Other direct social benefits include induced commercial enterprises and settlements along improved roads and around the market places. The challenge, however, remains the effective maintenance of the infrastructure put in place.

ii) 	The committee observed that in all districts that were visited, there was overwhelming appreciation of CAIIP among the district leadership as well as the district population. They actually gave positive testimonies about this project. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government ensures that local governments do provide adequate funds for the maintenance under their annual budgets, in order to maintain the infrastructure and facilities under CAIIP. The committee also recommends for better prioritisation of district roads and community access roads directly linked to major agricultural production areas by the beneficiary districts. This will contribute to the unlocking of the investment potential of these areas.

iii) 	The committee further observed that the financial and contract management capacity in terms of equipment, personnel and cash flow management of some of the contractors was very low. With this observation, the committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Works, should scale-up the building of capacity of local contractors to enable them compete favourably for local and regional projects. 

iv) 	The committee observed that there was low absorption of funds by districts owing to procurement delays, especially for agricultural inputs. With this observation, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should strive to ensure that the beneficiary districts plan all procurements early in the financial year to avoid unnecessary delays, and improve absorption of funds. Training of procurement staff in districts should also be scaled-up to build their capacity as well. 

v. 	The committee observed that project activities at the districts were not adequately supervised by the District Engineering departments. This was attributed to the logistical problems such as transport facilities at the districts and sub-counties. Inadequate supervision may also result into failure to detect and correct errors in time. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and the project facilitation team should make efforts to facilitate the district local government to improve their supervisory role of the project activities. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in conclusion, CAIIP is a critical investment intervention in enhancing farmers’ access to markets, attracting competitive prices and increased incomes through improvements in rural infrastructure development and management. 

CAIIP contributes to the fight against poverty and the uplifting of standards of living of the people, especially in the rural areas. The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow $60 million from the African Development Bank, and another $10 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the implementation of CAIIP-3. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair. I will be calling upon the Members, but just before I allow the Members to speak; hon. Minister, I was very interested in this project and I launched all the programmes in Kamuli and Buyende, but recently, when I went back, the rice haulers were not there and the maize mills were not there in all of them. 

Therefore, we want to know: Kisozi, no rice haulers, no maize mill; Namwendwa, no rice haulers, no maize mill; Buyende, no rice haulers, no maize mills. The structures are there. Then, they also complained that instead of 20 kilometres, some have been reduced. That was in Kisozi. Those are my interests for now. Let me declare them. 

4.00
COL (Rtd) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, I rise to support the request by Government to borrow this money. It has been clearly demonstrated in the report that this initiative is aimed at creating wealth among Ugandans; it is aimed at increasing household income; it is aimed at increasing food products for our consumption; it is aimed at increasing products for export; it is aimed at increasing and improving agro-processing and value-addition to our products; therefore, creating jobs for our people.

I totally support this request, but caution and appeal that the departments of Government involved in propelling this initiative should be more serious; should be transparent and take the concerns of the people of Uganda. This is because if it is fully-implemented, it will not only increase the support of NRM, but also entrench Government’s programmes of service delivery and job-creation. I am particularly supportive of this initiative because for the first time, this project is coming to my district and my constituency. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.02
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. But when you look at the report on page 2, it is clearly stated that this loan is aimed at increasing farmers’ access to markets. It further goes on to say that it is designed to contribute to the seventh pillar of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Also, it notes that Government committed itself to increase the agriculture budget to a minimum of 10 percent. Further, it notes that the project, is in line with the National Development Plan and the Agricultural Sector Investment Plan 2010; and it says, it is supposed to lend support to the NAADS plan for zonal agriculture.

When you look at the methodology, you find that the committee interfaced with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Local Government and also, the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government. It also notes that the committee looked at the minister’s brief, project appraisal and other aspects.

Clearly, from the methodology, it means that the committee never interfaced with: The Ministry of Agriculture, the committee responsible for agriculture, wthe Ministry of Trade and Industry, or with the Committee on Trade and Industry. 

This brings me to the procedure; this is a matter which has been coming up. We have the Committee on National Economy most of the time handling projects or loans that affect other sectors. As much as possible, they do not try to interface with those sectors, the ministries and the relevant sessional committees of Parliament. This has led to a situation where most of the projects are off target. There are projects meant to support our people – they clearly come and from the analysis and objectives, you find the project is noble. But when you go to the ground, you find that these projects have not had the impact. This has happened not only in this area, but even in Health, Education and others. 

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Dr Lyomoki, for giving way. I would like to give information to Dr Lyomoki and the House that most of the markets that have been constructed, when you look around - actually, when you go especially to the highways, once a market has been completed, that market is lost completely. When you go to the sub-counties – we used a lot of money, especially during CAIIP-1 and CAIIP-2, to construct these markets. The money we used to construct these markets was so much, yet when you go to the market you find three people selling things - four or five. Instead, people go and concentrate in their locally-constructed markets.

Probably, we could concentrate more on roads than construction of the markets. Wherever a market is constructed in a sub-county, it loses even the – people just shy away from that market and go to their locally-constructed ones. This is a very big problem and we have used a lot of money to construct these markets.

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t that be solved by the community mobilisation aspect which was in the report? I saw it there. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, hon. Kiwanda, for that information. I have been dealing with the markets, basically because the market workers under the informal economy - the Uganda Markets Union - have been in charge of that and have many issues. One of the issues is what hon. Kiwanda has said. The markets are very important and construction is okay, but I think the problem has been consultation. You know, you do not involve the stakeholders; as I have said, the ministries and also the leaders of markets. So, you end up constructing markets in areas that do not make economic sense -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes, please. Let us go to hon. Kamateeka, Khainza. I have seen you all. Dr Katwirwemu was quiet. Those who did not contribute yesterday will speak today. That is the arrangement. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you Madam Speaker -(Mr Lyomoki rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But you gave away your time? Okay, half a minute to wind up. 

DR  LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point is, you cannot construct a market which does not make economic sense and you expect market vendors to use it. That is why we need consultation of all stakeholders so that by the time you come up with a project or a loan, everyone is ready to utilise it and it is going to be useful.

The last point is the issue of the unit cost. These loans vary using different analyses. How much does a market take? If, for instance, you look at some other loans, we have used different amounts of money to construct markets and then, you look here and there are different amounts. I think we need to have a unit cost so that we get to know that if you are constructing a market, say in a municipality or town council and so on, this is the standard amount of money it takes to construct such a market or other infrastructure. Otherwise, most of these loans are used by civil servants and other people to get money. They just use us to approve them, but when the money gets onto the ground, this money is used for other purposes.

So, by the time we pass a loan – it is only because this loan is good. Otherwise, I was of the view that we need more consultations on this loan before we pass it. But since I can see that many colleagues think that this is a very important loan, if I insist that we first consult more, I may be risking being called somebody who is against it. The best alternative should have been to have further consultations with the relevant committees on agriculture, trade and the sector ministries together with the market vendors, before we pass this loan. Thank you very much.

4.10
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Ministry of Tourism and the people of Uganda, on Uganda being named the first tourism destination for 2012. I hope the ministry will make this a reality.

Secondly, allow me to congratulate the people of Uganda and Makerere University, for manufacturing the first electronic car, the Kiira EV. It is a pride to the whole nation. I hope that they will quickly patent this product.

I rise to support the motion that Government be allowed to borrow $70 million for this project. It is generally a good project and it is a critical strategic investment intervention in enhancing farmers’ access to markets, attracting competitive prices and increased income for the households. It is a good project for the nation.

I agree with the recommendations of the committees, but I would like to point out that preparatory activities like discussions with district officials and identifying people to be trained, should really start now instead of waiting to first get the money. We might take a lot of time on these activities as the loan interest accumulates.

I also support this project because it extends to the western region. It also deals with the misconceptions that the western region is okay and does not need any such interventions. As a result of these misconceptions, food security in Western Uganda and indeed the whole country has been adversely affected.  Because of this, 85 percent of the children in Western Uganda are suffering from stunted growth. This has been proved by scientific studies.

If we get more of such projects, Uganda will easily remain the food basket for the Africa Region. We need the agro-processing element to add value to our products because this increases the famers’ incomes. But like hon. Mwesigye has said, it also earns the country foreign exchange.

In recommendation two, the committee says that the local governments should provide funds for the maintenance of the community roads and markets. And that the project should provide for the local governments to improve their supervision of the project. This appears in recommendation number five.
 
I agree with this recommendation. The project should enhance the capacity of the local governments to supervise the project. But I am also wondering – we all know that district budgets are constrained. So, where are these local governments going to get money to maintain some of these facilities that will be created by this project? I know that the local governments are already providing funds for the maintenance of the community roads, but they should be considered for additional funding. This will help them maintain some of those facilities when put in place.

4.15
MRS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the committee chair on the following: One, the committee should avail us with the full list of the districts that have so far benefitted from the CAIIP projects, 1 and 2. We also need to know which districts are benefitting after CAIIP-3 because you said it is being done in phases. If I am to go back home in Bududa, in some of the sub-counties, the CAIIP project ended prematurely. Why? Thank you.

4.15
MR YORAKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their good work. I trust that this project will be implemented under the Ministry of Local Government. I also hope that this time we do not get the saga like the one we were debating here yesterday.

I would like to support this loan because it is for infrastructure and it should be able to transform the rural areas. I think that if there is good financial prudence in implementing this loan, we should be able to get effective enhancement of the productivity of our people and poverty reduction in the country.

Madam Speaker, when I looked at the financial design of this loan, I got a little bit comfortable with it, because 83 percent of it is going to be directed into what we call core work, while the other 17 percent will be going into capacity, monitoring and evaluation. I think that is a fair ration. And when we get serious people to do implementation; we should be able to get something good out of it. And I would like to say that I have no doubt this will happen. We have a capable minister there and he only needs some serious staff to work with him.
 
This loan will affect almost the entire production chain, from production to marketing and processing. But I would like to share hon. Dr Lyomoki’s argument that if there had been some close consultations with the Ministry of Agriculture, we would have addressed the issues of production. I am saying this because if you do not have appropriate seedlings, you may not produce anything. Indeed, we should have addressed that issue; it is very critical in terms of production. 

Anyway, I am happy to mention that in this loan, there is some money for community mobilisation and sensitisation. This is important because we have problems in the rural areas regarding work ethics among our people. (Ms Kabaale rose_) I do not have much time -

THE SPEAKER: But you have three minutes.

MR KATWIREMU: Madam Speaker, there is an issue with the work ethics of our people. I do not know about your constituencies, but in my constituency, we have an issue with young people who need to be encouraged to work harder than they are doing at the moment. So, I hope this capacity building and community mobilisation will improve on the work ethics of our people. 

I am happy that there is some money going to the road network. If we can have murram all-weather roads, then we would go a long way. Madam Speaker, I saw the other day in the papers you were stuck somewhere on one of these roads. I hope this will go a long way in improving –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I would like to applaud the committee for the wonderful work done and the ministry for the good work they are doing. 

I want to point out a few issues: One, is the issue of community mobilisation. I have seen it myself. Roads are put in place, but what the farmers do when they are farming is block the drainages and you find that the road is destroyed in no time. I believe that this issue should be handled carefully. Let the community be sensitised to maintain their roads. I have seen it in Rwanda. There is what they call community mobilisation and general cleanliness. If we can bring this here, I think it will help our roads.

On the issue of the committee recommending the prioritisation of district roads, I completely disagree with this. Let the districts take up the task to repair and make their own roads. This programme is intended to open up small roads so that our farmers are helped and the business community gets to access these communities to trade. Therefore, I do not agree with the committee on this recommendation. 

We have had phases 1, 2 and 3. I want to know when the ministry will come up with a new programme of selecting other sub-counties. We need to give equal opportunity to other communities as well. 

On the issue of the loan, I am really impressed. First of all, many loans have been signed, but others have been eaten on the way. I am happy with CAIIP as a programme. I have seen it starting and I have seen it going. And that alone is enough to applaud the coordinators of the programme. 

If you look at the cost of administering this loan, it is manageable and I have a belief that three years from now, Uganda will be in a better position to handle its loans. Therefore, I call for more loans, which can help our communities as early as possible. 

Madam Speaker, I second the motion. Let the ministry borrow this money. I thank you. 

4.24
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you. I rise to support the motion. It is heartening to hear that where it has been practiced, it has done well. But considering that a whole sum of $137 million has been used in some regions of Eastern Uganda, I think, 21 districts of Eastern Uganda, seven of Northern Uganda and 22 of Central Uganda, it would be wise for all of us to learn about the strong points and gaps given what these districts have gone through, so that as it rolls out to other districts, we know what to avoid. 

So, it is better if the committee can give us this report so that it can form the baseline of how we operate. 

I am heartened when I see on page 2 of the report that for once as an African country, we are going to dedicate 10 percent of our total budget to agriculture. It is very heartening because it is a long time since we signed the Maputo Protocol, and indeed, we have been borrowing, but we have not been putting much emphasis on agriculture. Between you and me, you note that agriculture is the way to go if we must revive our economy and come back to manageable spending of the common man. 

However, I note that much as this loan is to be implemented under the Ministry of Local Government, there are a number of ministries that have a stake in it: the Ministry of Agriculture, for increasing agricultural productivity and incomes; Ministry of Works, for roads; Ministry of Energy, for rural electrification; and Ministry of Trade, for markets. So, I am wondering about the cohesiveness, and how these ministries will work together. Much as Energy will be in charge, how about the sharing of these monies. To me, it is an issue of concern. 

On page 5, they say, “Selection of sub-counties will incorporate additional consideration such as presence of NAADS, and additional factors such as ongoing DSLP and CAIIP…” but Madam Speaker, many of us have seen NAADS in operation. NAADS money is eaten in some management chain. I would want to see that this money reaches the common man who needs it. Most of these monies end up in thin air, but this time let CAIIP money reach the targeted people. 

Lastly, I thank the committee for considering my people in Ibanda, Ibanda being one of those very productive counties in the whole of Uganda. I thank the committee members and those people who thought about this loan. I believe that when I go down to the ground, I will be one person who will come back to this House to tell you the wonders of CAIIP-3. 

4.29
MRS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. Indeed, it is commendable work and thus, I think we should get the loan to support the CAIIP programme. 

Just as it is observed by the committee, I happen to be privileged to have welcomed them to my district as they were touring. As they put it in their report, in all the districts they visited, there was overwhelming support or appreciation for the CAIIP among the district leadership because we moved with the whole district team. The local people were also very happy with what was going on. We moved around the roads and they are really in good condition.

Where I disagree with hon. Lyomoki is when he says that the impact was not felt. In Mbale the impact has been felt because one of the markets has been built along the highway and it serves three sub-counties. This is at least a good start. Much as he recommends the markets to be in the villages, these ones are big markets that bring people together to ensure that their produce is marketed. We are the people who are crying for markets, for our crops, but we also lament when markets are built. 

For Mbale, it is quite a good transformation. We are seeing good transport on improved roads to the markets. People are bringing goods to the markets and we are having improved household incomes. The people are taking their goods to the markets and this has improved their incomes.

Another person also complained about the maintenance. One thing that I learnt in Mbale was that there was community mobilisation such that even at the time when we were touring the roads, we found that many roads had been maintained. The roads are really in a good condition. 

The other thing that I noticed was that they had also put up two milling machines; one for rice and one for maize. The people are really in high spirits as a result of the milling machines and they use them to ensure that production goes up, and as it was once called the food basket of Uganda, Mbale will regain that status.

4.29
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): When I go through this report, I get disturbed somewhere. I want to seek clarification on a few areas. Whereas I do appreciate and support any programme that is geared towards improving the agricultural sector, we should not just borrow for the sake of it. The question should be value for money! In view of the loans that we have been getting for CAIIP, how successful is this programme that we are taking to Phase III? How did the previous two phases perform? 

One of the areas that needs attention is production in Karamoja. Every year, you hear that there is hunger in Karamoja, but I am wondering how the planning was done such that even this good programme could not involve Karamoja. I want to hear from the minister how this programme could leave Karamoja out.
 
MR LOKII: I must thank my colleague for giving way. I want to inform my colleague and this House that the Ministry of Local Government left an area that is needy and should have been considered for this project. Karamoja is dry and, therefore, food production is very low, and this leaves the people there vulnerable. Karamoja has about 1.4 million cattle and this puts our country in a position where we could benefit in terms of GDP. So, leaving out Karamoja means that you have left out Uganda in general.
 
I would like to ask the Minister of Local Government to clarify on this issue. Why was there an oversight not to include a region that is very needy from benefitting from such a good project?

MR TANNA: I am very supportive of the programme, but I have my own concerns. The honourable colleague has talked about Karamoja, but he represents a municipality just like I do. CAIIP I and II, and now CAIPP III, do not cover municipalities or urban centres. They do not cover the roads; they sit in the municipalities to disburse money to the rural areas, but they do not cover even a kilometre of road network through CAIIP. 
We have pre-urban areas within our municipalities just like my colleague on the Floor has mentioned. So, I would like my honourable colleague to expand and include municipalities like the one he and I represent. I would like to add that the honourable minister and the chairman of the committee, give us a small portion, especially that eight percent that they have put in monitoring.

MR ALEPER: I want to thank my colleague for that information. The other point I wanted to raise is that in the 1960s we had a training institute called Nabweni Agricultural Zonal Institute, which was attracting many agricultural trainees from Nairobi and other parts of this world. From the time this institute collapsed, we have never addressed the issue. I thought that this well-intended programme would cover such training institutions.

What improvement are we talking about on agriculture when we are not building on institutions that can empower the people with the skills of producing quality food or quality products?

I am seeking clarification from the minister. If there is a plan for that, we need to know; and if there is no plan, we also need to know why.

4.40
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I stand to support the report in that, despite the budget being small, CAIIP is covering the whole country. CAIIP works on community access roads -

THE SPEAKER: Is she a member of the committee? Any committee members? No. 

4.40
MRS MARY PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this report and the Ministry of Local Government for honouring its mandate of resource mobilisation to cater for the improvement of our household incomes and to also contribute to poverty eradication and extreme poverty as is stated in MDG I. I also thank the Ministry of Local Government for considering Rukungiri District and particularly Rubabo County, which I represent. 

All of us know very well that our community access roads are in a sorry state, and I am happy that this particular loan is going to address that challenge, and that this particular component on improving community access roads will not only facilitate agricultural production as well as providing access to the markets, but it will also go a long way to improve on the health of our women and children who are suffering due to lack of accessibility to the health centres. 

Therefore, I would like to request the Ministry of Local Government, since it is charged with the responsibility of implementation of our policies, to also think about maternal and child health, because this money is going to the rural areas where the majority of the people responsible or who participate in agricultural  production, are mainly women and these are the ones facing the challenges of maternal and child health complications. Therefore, for us to create wealth and to improve household incomes, we have got to come up with finances to support maternal and child health. Whereas this loan is going to improve on the MDG I, we also need to address MDG IV and V because health is wealth. 

I also appeal to the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that this money, once secured, will be utilised for the intended purpose. I, therefore, thank the committee and the Minister of Local Government, and again appeal humbly that next time, they should come up with a loan to address maternal and child health, because Uganda is doing very badly as far as maternal and child health is concerned. In fact, we have been blacklisted. We are among the 68 countries in the whole world which are nowhere near to achieving MDGs IV and V – that is improving maternal health and reduction of child mortality. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.43
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good work and I have a few concerns on the recommendations. First of all, we are so glad that this report has come, meaning that we are going to get more money, and actually, we are going to borrow more and more. However, the road, especially in Kanungu - and I am going to say this based on experience. In the last years, I was on the district council as a councillor and these roads used to be under the district council. But I have heard that these days, they are under UNRA and it is so unfortunate. I do not know whether Kanungu is very far from the centre, but we do not really appreciate the work of UNRA in Kanungu because the roads are very bad and by the time they come to work on them, they are worse. Even when you are on foot, you cannot move. Some of you have been there and you can testify. If we are going to improve on this agriculture infrastructure with UNRA in Kanungu, I really do not know –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, I am the chairperson of the road committee in Mubende and there are roads for UNRA, while CAIIP works on community roads. So, I want to inform the honourable member that we should not mix the two. The money for UNRA is separate from the roads which are worked on by CAIIP. There was also another Member who asked that after the roads have been worked on by CAIIP, who will maintain them? Again there is money for maintaining these roads under the Road Fund and Members should not worry about that. Let me end by thanking Government for this loan.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much for the good information. Actually, I was not aware –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my sister from Kanungu. The clarification I want to seek is that in that region, we have the Prime Minister of this country. Is the Prime Minister aware that we have bad roads in Kanungu?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister is for Uganda and not only Kanungu, and I actually love him for what he does. 

I also wanted to comment on the procurements committee. I realised that the procurements committee is constituted by civil servants only. I do not know why it can’t be changed to involve some politicians because I have seen that wherever politicians are involved, they cause things to move very fast, and when I read these recommendations, I find that at times they delay to organise the whole process. So, I suggest that we analyse and make some changes to include some politicians so that the procedure moves faster because there is pressure from the people. 

I have also realised one problem in this programme, and I would like to say that the issue of providing, for example, seedlings, should be revised. You find that they are, for instance, getting seedlings from Kampala to Kanungu and the whole process does not go well. So, I think that it is better if in this process of procuring specifically the seedlings, they always look for seedlings from within that particular district, and not get them from very far. 

And since I have the opportunity, Madam Speaker, allow me to say that in Kanungu, we have a problem with NAADS, especially with our coffee. Coffee has really dried up in some sub-counties like Rugyeyo and some parts of Kihihi. I have been hearing about cocoa -(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the loan that has been brought before us and I would like to add that the loan is not the problem, but the problem is how we use it. So, whereas I am in support of the loan, I hasten to add that the Ministry of Local Government should take keen interest in the use of this loan.

I have been in the Local Government and we are beneficiaries of the Area Agricultural Modernisation Programme (AAMP). I can give you a specific example of the Nyamukana-Kibare-Byanamira Road that was worked on using around four hundred and something million, contracted by Jerusalem as a company. I can tell you, today if you went there, you would not realise that that money was spent on that particular road. Minister of Local Government, I wish you would visit that place. The reasons are very many why I support this loan, but fundamentally is the level of community mobilisation. 

More often than not, as a country, we have lost focus and I think this is why we need a paradigm shift and a policy shift. There are a lot of political and social distortions. Our people have been made to believe that if this is a road, then it is a government road. You cannot believe that even where the culverts or the drainage channels are washed away, people cannot go there to clear them. It is a very big problem. 

Ministry of Local Government, when shall we stop politicking? We are talking about community access roads and I can tell you this project is going to Mbarara, but we cannot sit down to see politics override this project. Because when you say, “Community access roads,” and you say, “No more volunteerism and no more ‘bulungi bwa nsi’”- I must use that word in quotes - then this project is dead.  These loans must be sustainable in a way. We must stop politics when we have finished elections.

I wanted to add that my colleagues from Karamoja, I believe you are going to benefit. I see Kaabong, Kotido, Abim and Moroto from NUSAF. I think as Members of Parliament, when these loans are approved, we should go beyond regionalising them. I am saying so because I am sure every Member has this map attached. NUSAF has actually been there right from Masindi to Nakapiripirit to Yumbe, but it is not anywhere in Mbarara - it is not even in Bundibugyo -(Member timed out.)

4.52
MRS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the request to borrow money to finance the CAIIP programme. As a Member of Parliament from one of the districts that benefited from CAIIP I, I want to say that this is a very good project and it has helped the people in the areas where it has been implemented, mainly the component of constructing and rehabilitating of roads. But I must also add that I am yet to see the maize mills that were part of the programme. So, I pray that the component of putting up maize mills in Mityana be expedited.

I am also glad that this particular loan has a community mobilisation component, and I pray that this time the community mobilisation will be very vigorous and it must emphasise community ownership. Many Members have alluded to the fact that the communities where these projects are implemented look at these projects as Government projects. One thing I have noted in Mityana is that, many of the roads that were worked on in the initial phase have now grown narrow and they are full of potholes because there was a mixed message that the money provided by this programme was enough to make the roads and to routinely maintain them.

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that local governments provide adequate funds for maintaining these roads. However, much as this would be a good recommendation, we know that local governments and the districts in particular, are grossly underfunded. We know that many districts are constrained in terms of collecting local revenues since the abolition of graduated tax. We also know that the Ministry of Finance gives districts indicative planning figures at the beginning of every financial year, but when it comes to releases, the monies which have been promised are not given as expected. On Monday, I was in Mityana and I was attending the district road committee, and I learnt that for this particular project, the CAIIP project, a third of the money which had been promised had been cut and is not going to be sent -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You contributed on the other roads earlier; you have had a chance today. Let the others who have not spoken have a chance. Hon. Members, I want to give many people an opportunity on many things. If you have spoken this afternoon allow the others to speak.

4.56
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, it is true that the intention or the objective of borrowing the money is very good. Our challenge has always remained on implementation modalities. In Ngora District, before it was curved out of Kumi, we had four short roads under CAIIP II. One of the roads that now happens to be under Ngora – the road from Ngora to Kobwin - the contract for the rehabilitation of that road was signed over a year ago, but no work has been done to date! And that remains a worrying matter. So, the Minister for Local Government ought to put a lot of interest in following up the implementation of these contracts.

On page 3, in the middle paragraph, CAIIP I started in 2007 and CAIIP II was in 2009, two years later. Is it by design that now we are going to CAIIP III, another two years later? Should we expect CAIIP IV in 2013 and CAIIP V in 2015? If that is the trend, may I look at the figures?

CAIIP I, honourable colleagues - if you could check in Appendix I - we had a total of $65 million and with that money the target was 4,682 kilometres of community access roads and 520 kilometres of district feeder roads. That is $65 million. We are now borrowing $70 million for CAIIP III and what is the target? I am talking about Appendix A under CAIIP I. Now, the target for this loan that we are about to approve is for 2,600 kilometres. In fact, the total number of kilometres we are targeting for the $70 million is about 60 percent of what we achieved with $65 million under CAIIP I.
 
5.00
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really support this loan request because if we are talking of an increase in productivity, then we have to look at the farmers’ wellbeing. But as I kept on reading this CAIIP I, II and III, I did not see where the issue of storage facilities is mentioned and yet it is the core. It is not talking about increasing productivity and helping our farmers to increase their income. And since we are also not handling the issue of storage facilities, we are not going anywhere. If the farmers don’t have storage facilities when they produce and harvest, where are they going to keep their harvest? That means that the harvest cannot be kept well and safe and yet we are talking of increasing value addition. So, I feel that the issue of storage should be handled very well if we are to increase the farmers’ income.  

Another issue that I would like the committee and the minister to address is that we are talking about helping our farmers, but the minister should note that if we don’t link up with the Ministry of Works to work on the roads, then we are going nowhere. Because, when you look at the UNRA roads in our district, they claim to have worked on them, but when you get to the swamps, they were not worked on at all.  

CAIIP III is talking about community roads, but community roads link up with district roads, which are now called UNRA roads. How are we going to link up the farm produce with the UNRA roads if they are not worked on? 

Then another issue is about the rural electrification, which they are talking about. If we are still faced with this problem of loadshedding then it means that there is no way we are going to add on our value with the processing machines they are talking about. Maybe another suggestion is that we need an alternative source of power like generators or solar energy if it can work. (Applause)
 
The other issue, which the minister and the committee should address, is to increase the income of the farmers as we talk of borrowing this money. It is common sense that we are going to increase the income of the rural people, but what is the bigger sense of this big loan that we are about to get? What is the market -(Member timed out.)

5.03
MR FRED  EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this wonderful work and the Ministry of Local Government. The people of Kole who are 170,000 today have requested me to thank the committee for this wonderful work -(Applause)- because 80 percent of the population of Kole depend on agriculture and 70 percent of the population of Kole are poor.  Therefore, this programme will go a long way in helping them alleviate poverty. Above all, the community roads that we are talking about will help the mothers who are heavy and about to deliver reach the health centres faster. 

Secondly, the rural electrification, for example, that we wanted to take to Bara Health Centre III, should also benefit from this programme because we have been looking for a way - you remember, hon. Minister, the chairman of my district came to your office to request you, if possible, to link up the Bara Rural Electrification Programme to this project.  So, as this loan is going to be passed, I beg you to put this rural electrification programme under this project. 

Lastly, I would like also to appeal to the Minister of Local Government that Aboke Trading Centre has a small market, but it is not yet organised. So, we believe that the market infrastructure should be put in Aboke to avoid the casualties that we normally get from road accidents, because young children come and sell fruits on that road.  Hon. Minister, I wish you could put that market infrastructure in Aboke to avoid and reduce on these accidents. 

Then, I would like to say that the people of Kole and I, as their Member of Parliament, are behind this programme; we support it and we will not look back.  Thank you. 

5.06
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the borrowing of the money, but I have some concerns, which I wish Government to address as we get this money. The issue of road maintenance is a very crucial one. I will give an example. In 2001/2002, we received a lot of money from the Belgian Technical Corporation in Kasese and by then I was the chairman. We opened very good roads in all the productive areas in the district. But seven years since that time, those roads are now impassable. 

They gave us money to open the roads, but there was no money for maintaining them. There are virtually no roads. So, I would wish the minister to take note of that recommendation No.2. As we open these roads, we must ensure that there is money to continue maintaining them, otherwise the loan will go to waste.

Two, integrate these roads with other agricultural activities. I said on this Floor sometime back that as long as our farmers are still using the hand hoe, which my great grandfather used 200 years ago, and as long as our farmers are still depending on nature, waiting for rain, the internal rate of return of these roads will be very low. 

We need irrigation; we need agriculture mechanisation as a matter of priority; and our farmers need to be trained on soil conservation methods. Otherwise, these roads will be put there and we shall have no produce to carry on them if we are continuing with the hoe and waiting for God to bring rainfall in this country. So, we should integrate this infrastructure we are borrowing, with other agricultural methods in this country. 

Three, with this excitement about maize mills, we should be able to look at our market abroad. Most of the countries which import our maize do not eat posho. (Applause) They eat maize grain. So, when we get excited about maize mills to produce posho, we may end up producing maize flour and have nowhere to sell it. I think the Ministry of Commerce should look at this.  Who buys our maize and in which form do they want it? Do they want it in form of grain or flour, before we get excited about these maize mills? 

MR MANOAH: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way. I would like to assure this House that I am not deferring with the speaker holding the Floor. There is a huge market for posho in the region. In fact, I concur with you on the point that unless we remove the hoe from the farmers or the people, we shall not make any headway at all. We should have mechanised agriculture and then industrialisation will come. Sudan is next door and this new nation has a huge potential market for posho. That is the information I had.

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Madam Speaker, the man gave me information, which I had already given on the Floor of Parliament, so he ate up my time. I need not emphasise this. 

We have some areas in this country, like Kasese, where we are producing a lot of cotton. During the ploughing period, we mobilised tractors from the whole country and you find that one peasant can open up two to four acres and is able to produce a lot of cotton.

But if he was to plough with a hoe, I am assuring you that one person would not maintain even one acre of cotton in a season. So, let us be serious about this. Even if we mean to borrow money to reinstate the tractor hire units, please, Government do it; otherwise we shall make these roads but have nothing to transport on them and they will go to waste. Thank you very much.

5.11
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the idea of this loan, but I stand to oppose this motion. My county, district and region, have been systematically excluded from CAIIP I, CAIIP II and now CAIIP III. I heard somebody say that it is because NUSAF is in the Northern region that Karamoja and West Nile were left out.

I would like to say that if this argument is solid, why have some parts of the Northern region been included when they are also under NUSAF? It means that that is not the reason why West Nile and Karamoja regions were left out.

Therefore, I am not going to support this. My region, district and county will never forgive me for being part of the approval of this motion. Therefore, I do not support it in its current position.

I would like to suggest that the Minister for Local Government submits a written explanation detailing the basis on which the districts were selected and why in particular West Nile, as a region, has been left out. I am sure my colleagues in Karamoja will say the same thing. Why has Karamoja been systematically excluded from this project? I want to be very clear and on record that I will not support this motion because my people will chase me away from home. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

5.14
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I strongly support the programme because I know Kassanda North would benefit, being a rural area. My concern is the money put aside for monitoring. In most cases, this money lands in the hands of big officers in big offices, who visit the programme once in a while to see how it is going, and they forget the implementers at the grassroots who move door to door in unfriendly environments through rocks, hills and valleys and these are the extension workers.

I suggest that more money should be given as an incentive to these extension workers, who are technical and have the knowledge of consulting, mobilising and sensitising. Some of the people in rural areas do not even have cells for their radios and they do not listen to Government programmes. I suggest that this money be given more to the implementers on the ground.

Second, is the point of value addition. Sometimes we may work hard to produce and say double production, but if we do not add value to what we produce, where are we going to get the market? Let this programme also consider – say, if Kassanda North is a maize grower, let us have processing facilities so that they add value to what is produced. This will make it very easy for them to find market. Those are my contributions.

5.16
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at this project, I really welcome it. However, I have a few concerns because it is a community agricultural infrastructure improvement programme. When we are looking at the communities, who are the people majorly involved in this agricultural sector? When we go back to our communities, we realise that in families you find an elderly woman engaged in agriculture and yet we are talking of improved agriculture.

They are no longer strong and I, therefore, concur with my colleague, hon. Bwambale that we should think about tractors. Recently, there was a group of women from my district who tasked me to look for a tractor to help them till the land. We looked for a tractor in Sheema and Mbarara and we could not get it. The only tractor that was there was hired by the people of Fort Portal. So, you can imagine. People want to use the tractors but they are not there and yet this is not considered anywhere.

I also have a concern on the monitoring and evaluation, where there is 5.9 percent of the budget. This is a multi- sector project, which includes various ministries and concerns various projects. So, who is going to do the monitoring and evaluation ?

My concern also goes to the capacity building and mobilising of the people, because it is very important to mobilise the people. I want to refer to the project of the fruit factory. The explanation was that when people started processing, within a few months there was no fruit being supplied to the factory. Therefore, when we do not prepare our people to produce, we shall find ourselves in a dilemma, where we have the facilities on the ground, but we cannot sustain them in terms of supplying the products.

Therefore, who is going to do the mobilisation? Is it the Ministry of Local Government, the agricultural extension workers or the Ministry of Trade and Industry? I believe that is where we lose money when we talk of mobilising people. Those technocrats tend to do everything when they do not have the capacity or the skills to do it. However, I have heard about the markets that are being supported by this project. During my campaigns, I was telling the people of Sheema that we do not have any single roadside market where our women can sell their fruits, vegetables and other –(Member timed out.)

5.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I got this report and I saw page 4, I found that one region had 22 districts, another region four and yet another three. I got very concerned. I share my concern with the Members from Karamoja and West Nile as regards the distribution of this programme. I thought it was unfair that one region should have to wait for another to develop before they get their share. I suggest that a review be made on how these districts are chosen. When you look at the map, you see that some of these districts are very small, especially those in western Uganda, compared to those in Karamoja and West Nile. We need to have a better approach to the distribution criteria.

I am also concerned about the cost per kilometre of the roads, because the chart on page 7 shows the kilometres that are expected and the amount of money that is attached. You find that Shs 32 million is attached per kilometre of murram roads. The Minister of Works has stood here and given us the value for a kilometre of murram road, and I think this is on the higher side. We might have to look at this figure again, because in this country, many times, whenever we see an opportunity of money coming, people think of how they are going to steal and share the money.

Thirdly, the Minister for Trade one day stood here and told us that her ministry is going to establish maize mills and processing plants in different parts of the country. In this regard, I am calling for collaboration between these ministries such that where NUSAF or CAIIP has started a similar project, it should not be the same place to benefit from the programme that is in the trade ministry. We need collaboration to avoid duplication so that we have fair sharing and distribution among the various districts. Thank you.

5.22
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a beneficiary of CAIIP II in Ngogwe sub-county and we are very grateful. The excitement was caused majorly by the opening up of the community access road, which was formerly in bad condition. We want to find out from the Minister of Local Government the place of the Member of Parliament. Many times, when these loans are secured and the projects are being implemented, the Member of Parliament may not even have space to supervise because he is not aware of the job specifications. In that case, you will be left to watch things as they are happening. You will not have a voice in order to ensure that the specifications that had been made are followed in order to get value for money. When we go to our constituencies, our voters come around inquiring about these programmes, but if they are being implemented behind our backs, it means we are not going to be part of the mobilisation. 

And what message is being passed? It is not everywhere that you can see a community access road or a good road, that poverty will be history. No. It depends on the message you are passing on to the community regarding how they can use this infrastructure for their benefit in order to boost their income. Whereas there is a budget for mobilisation, whether that mobilisation will transform itself into people’s participation in utilising this infrastructure for their benefit, remains a big question. It is the reason I am asking for an evaluation where CAIIP I and II have been done. A committee of Parliament should be able to tell this House that there has been actual improvement in household income as a result of the infrastructure that we saw.

Regarding community markets, they are very important, because women can roast gonja, sweet potatoes and so on to sell. However, that is not as important; the markets we should be looking at that will stimulate agricultural production should be those outside Uganda like South Sudan. But who cares to ensure that there is a linkage between the communities that produce and these outside markets? The locals continue to be exploited by the middlemen who take colossal sums of money between the producers and the real markets –(Member timed out_) 

MR ROLAND MUGUME (Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the project because one of the principle objectives of this programme is to increase agricultural production and household income. However, my concern is about community participation; that is where we have problems in this country. At implementation level, the communities are not usually consulted, which later leads to a big problem after the project has ended; sustainability becomes an issue because you cannot go back and ask what happened. So, we need to target the communities, especially at the stage of training, because these projects, for example, CAIIP I and II, target groups yet some of these are briefcase NGOs. Such groups are only formed in anticipation of funding. So, I think we need to spell out clearly the role of the communities in project implementation.

Secondly, we are talking about markets; most of these markets are situated in wrong places, especially those along the highways. When you see accidents happening on highways, it is because of these markets. You find a woman carrying gonja running across the road without considering traffic and they get knocked. As a country, we need, especially the engineers who are behind this arrangement, to see where we should put these markets away from the highways. Otherwise, I support the programme because my district is also included. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, in addition to what hon. Mugume has said, I usually worry because people contravene the Enguli Act in those markets. They drink enguli and sometimes -

5.29
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion, basically because I am a beneficiary. My constituency is a beneficiary of CAIIP I and it has been a success story. The rural access roads that have been made have really improved  the standard of living of the people in those areas. They sell their produce and the prices of the produce have gone up because the people find them in their homes instead of having to transport them for a very long distance. So, for that, we are indeed very grateful.
 
My concern goes to the Minister of Local Government. The committee is saying that maintenance is a problem. Government has promised to give road units to districts and I am sure that if these road units came, they would be a cure for this particular ill. There would be a road unit in each district, but for Kibaale, I am sure the minister will consider giving us about three, because we are a very big district. We are almost one million people. You cannot give one unit to - I do not want to mention the district - a district of 100,000 people - and then you give Kibaale District with about one million people also one unit. I hope that has been taken note of. 

I was saying that definitely, when the road units are given, they will go a long way to address maintenance. Alongside the road units, I think the ministry should also begin to look at increasing the budget for road maintenance for districts because it is really very low. When you look at how much is allocated to district roads and how much is allocated to central roads, I think there is need for the people at the Road Fund to look at how they can increase on this amount. 

The committee also raised the issue of capacity of the contractors. I also want to find out from the government what affirmative action they are putting in place so that local contractors are the ones that take up these contracts. I mean, how are you improving on their capacity? How are you helping them to ensure that these local contractors have got the capacity to handle contracts up to this magnitude? That is one way of building capacity in the districts. You will find that when some of these people come - if a contractor is going to come from Kampala to Kibaale, he brings all the people from Kampala and yet the people in Kibaale would also have got some little bit of revenue. (Member timed out.)

5.33
MRS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mubende happens to be one of the districts which has greatly benefitted from CAIIP. I rise to support the motion because CAIIP has really done commendable work in my district. 

However, I have one problem, especially with recommendation No.2, which hon. Besisira has just commented about. I had the same proposal that the ministry makes sure that the road units are procured because many of the roads which were worked on in Mubende have gone to the dogs. If we had road units, maybe we would have been able to maintain the roads. 

Secondly, I have got a problem with the unit cost of these roads. When Government goes out to contract the road, surely the unit cost is so high. If we had road units and maybe had a revision of PPDA, where districts will be allowed to do their construction, I think we would save a lot of money and be able to work on more roads than we are doing right now. 

I want to comment on the issue of markets. Under this programme, very beautiful markets were constructed, but since we have been in the programme for so long - we were in CAIIP I - I have got some experience. Before the markets were constructed, the market vendors were not involved in the setting up of these markets. So, after completion of the construction, they refused to use them. These are very important stakeholders. So, I would recommend that this time round let us make sure that we consult them. As we give a road to the community, we give them pre-conditions as well that this road is coming with a market, which market you must use, but where do we put it. The community should then agree and so that we put the market there in order to ensure value for money. 

I want to appeal to the ministry to also come up with a standard width of these roads. When you move around the country to different districts, you find that the width differs. I am sorry to comment about my own district, but when I am in Mubende and I look at the CAIIP roads, they are quite narrow and they have become death traps. There are many accidents happening on these roads. However, when I cross my district and go to the neighbouring districts, at least the width is a little bigger. So, I would recommend that the ministry makes a standard width for the CAIIP roads.

Lastly, there are new districts in all regions. The old districts like Mubende benefitted from CAIIP I and CAIIP II and now other districts are benefitting from CAIIP III. What plan does the ministry have for the new districts, which were created last year, and maybe those which are about to be created? Like from Mubende, we expect three districts - the districts of Kasambya and Kasanda; what plan does the ministry have for the new districts? Thank you.

5.36
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that the government borrows money for CAIIP. However, I would like to point out that in some districts like Buyende, CAIIP has worked in only two sub-counties and in one sub-county, the work has been left incomplete. The reason they gave was that CAIIP was expanding to other regions. I would like the minister to explain why they are expanding and yet in areas where they are working, work has not been completed and there is some dissatisfaction. 

Whenever there is expansion, there is a problem of diseconomies of scale. I am very sure that as this programme expands, we shall experience diseconomies of scale. I think the minister should help the districts which are having this programme so that the work which has been started in those areas is completed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to concur with my colleagues in support of this motion. I will not support it just because I have benefitted, but the committee has done commendable work to assist Government in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 

Secondly, in the areas where CAIIP has been implemented, it has done very well and the communities are appreciating. So, it is not only that we have benefitted, but because we have been persevering and this programme has been ongoing - CAIIP I and CAIIP II - and those areas have really done very well. 

For those who have benefitted in CAIIP III, we really appreciate the government efforts in considering us. I beg also that in the next phase, CAIIP IV, the Government considers Karamoja and West Nile so that the whole country is covered because we all need to really benefit.

On page 6, the committee cited that there would be community mobilisation in selection of the type of infrastructure which is supposed to be put up in that particular district. I appreciate this because I know that the programmes in districts differ. You may have fixed programmes when they are not comfortable in other districts. So, when you involve the local communities in selection of the project, monitoring, programming and all that, I appreciate this. 

I appreciate the work that the committee has done in this and that is why I differ with hon. Kiwanda when he said that they remove the component of construction of markets. There are some districts where people, especially women, are selling in the market under rain and sunshine, and are seated on the ground, which is really unhealthy, and the food which we take is also not kept well. However, when they construct markets, then we shall know that the food is safe, the women are safe and everything is going on very well. So, the selection process should be done by the local people who are beneficiaries of this programme. 

I appreciate the programme because when constructing the market, I think the CAIIP programme will consider toilets. Hygiene has been a problem in most of the markets. The people in rural areas are doing it in the bush, others are doing it everywhere near the market –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to the debate by supporting the motion and appreciating the work of the committee in scrutinising the need for the Government to borrow this money. 

I want to report that my district, Nwoya, is a beneficiary of CAIIP II, but through another district, Amuru. Because of that, we are undergoing a lot of challenges that I would really like the minister to address. First of all, all the funding, mobilisation and everything is being done through Amuru District. In the end, the work which is being done in my district is so shoddy. As an example, are the roads that have been constructed through the funding of CAIIP; the bridges have already been washed away, and there is one road which is incomplete and yet the contractor has been paid. I am wondering whether this project facilitation team from the ministry is doing enough monitoring, otherwise we stand to lose on a very good project. I think they concentrate on some districts where they do thorough work and then they do not work well in other districts. 

I would also like to propose, like the honourable colleague who was on the Floor mentioned, the need to develop some kind of unit cost for some of these roads. This is because when you hear what people or the engineers say on the ground, it is very abnormal to have about five kilometres of road being constructed at Shs 200 million; it defeats one’s understanding. It makes us conclude that probably there are only few people or civil servants who always try to see how they can con or get money out of the Government.

I would also like to say that our roles need to be defined as Members of Parliament. How are we going to participate particularly in the mobilisation and monitoring? If our roads are not designed, it becomes very difficult to go and probably intervene or mobilise, particularly when it comes to you. I have about two roadside markets that have been constructed, but the people are not using them and I find it difficult to know when I should come on board to start mobilizing people. Then also, when –(Member timed out.)

5.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): I thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I rise to make a response to one or two issues before the honourable minister can come in. 

I want to allay the fears of the honourable Member of Parliament for Buzaaya Constituency, whose concern was on page 10. Actually, in his submission, he said that he does not support the recommendation that the committee came up with as shown in recommendation No.2. I actually want to allay his fears. The committee recommended for better prioritisation of district roads and community access roads. I think when the honourable colleague heard of prioritising of district and community access roads, he must have got a little mixed up and so came up with the idea that he does not support that recommendation. The CAIIP project is basically looking at community agricultural access improvement; it is not looking at the district roads, but the community access roads. I would request that he changes his mind and supports that recommendation.

The second concern was that of hon. Lyomoki. His concern was that the committee should have interacted with other stakeholders like the Ministry of Agriculture and others. I would want to assure the honourable colleague that this programme moves through a long process and by the time we interacted with the Ministry of Local Government, the ministry together with the project facilitation team had already interacted with all the other stakeholders. In some of the documents that I laid on the Table, we have the appraisal document and the progress reports which already allude to the fact that all these other stakeholders were consulted. So, out rightly this programme is complementary in nature and reaps from the synergies of collaborative efforts. I definitely feel that that has been answered.

The other issue was from the honourable from Karamoja, hon. Simon Aleper, who talked about the issue of value for money, that it is not a question of borrowing but we need value for money. I would like to assure the honourable colleague that that is one of the issues that we are looking at. When we receive these documents as a committee, and most especially when they talked of 83.2 percent as going to be spent on physical infrastructure, we really felt that it was pertinent for us to move into the field because seeing is believing; we wanted to find out whether we had tangible results on the ground.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the testimonies we are hearing from honourable members are just enough to show that there is something good on the ground. So, hon. Aleper, I think the issue of value for money, specifically for this project, is not doubted.

Lastly, there is an honourable colleague who talked about the issue of storage facilities. You will realise, those of you who have had an opportunity to look at some of these documents, that in CAIIP I and II the item of storage facilities was captured. However, because we are talking of CAIIP I, CAIIP II and then moving on to CAIIP III, we are now reaping from collaborative efforts where we are looking at the feedback from the first two projects. 

In this case, from the feedback that we got from the district officials and the local communities - Members are aware that this is another form of community mobilisation - it was very clear that the local communities opted to go in for those items that are targeting rural vulnerability. They particularly spotted rural community access roads, agro-processing facilities and markets. As long as you have the access roads, then whatever you produce can easily be marketed. When you have markets, then you can easily take whatever you produce to the markets. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.50
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): In the interest of time, Madam Speaker, let me thank the honourable members for the concerns and compliments in some of the districts like Mubende, Mbale and Kibaale. However, we have also had challenges in other districts which we shall definitely address. 

About your concerns, Madam Speaker, the information I have is that the maize mills, rice mills, milk coolers and coffer huller have all arrived in the country and it is only a question of phasing the installation. As we speak now, they are being installed in Mbale and Tororo, and very soon our team will be in Kamuli. I will also send an evaluation team to go and check on the roads that have not yet been completed, to ensure that they are completed –(Interjections)– I thought members had enough time to raise their questions? 

We shall continue with community sensitisation; it is part of our plan in the project. Funds for maintaining these roads will come from the Road Fund. Of course, the money is not enough, but there is a provision for maintaining all roads, including CAIIP roads. The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) does not handle UNRA roads; CAIIP complements the efforts of the districts and sub-counties to make sure access roads are done.

Our estimation is that the next phase will start in 2013, that is, CAIIP IV. I have the full list of districts here and it includes all regions - the eastern region, some districts from central and some districts from the west - but I cannot read it in the interest of time. However, I am going to photocopy the document for all honourable members to see for themselves –(Interjections)- I will answer for Karamoja and West Nile. 

On Karamoja, we had understood that there is a full project called Karamoja Integrated Development Project (KIDP) in Karamoja. This was our understanding. However, since we met in the committee, we agreed that when we start CAIIP IV in 2013, we should roll out Karamoja and West Nile. West Nile also had a project called the North-West Small Holder Agriculture Development Project. We thought this intervention had done some work, but if it has not, the assurance is that CAIIP IV will definitely be in West Nile –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank the minister for giving way. I think the problem is that we have too many projects and they could even be duplicity in the districts. We have NUSAF, which is also doing community roads. It is very important that we sit down –(Interjections)– in fact in Karamoja they even receive food from World Food Programme. So, we need these projects to be harmonised so that we can know which project is responsible for what, so that we can fill in the gaps. 

We have some experience. There was a school which was built in one district and three parties were claiming it - Government and two donors – and yet there were no set finances received and spent on it. So, I propose, hon. Minister, that you do not hurry to embark on Karamoja. Get all the projects harmonised and then decide which one to take. 

MR MWESIGE: Let me wind up –(Ms Alaso rose_)- We have another motion, hon. Alaso, please let me just wind up. 

For the municipalities, the Ministry of Local Government together with the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development had designed a project called the Urban Infrastructure Development Programme, which is a US$ 130 million project funded by World Bank. It will work on roads in municipalities in Uganda. 

For markets, the ministry has a programme of constructing 26 markets in municipalities in Uganda. Effective this month, we have started with seven - Mbale, Lira, Gulu, Jinja, Hoima, Fort Portal and Wandegeya. The project will roll-out to all municipalities of Uganda in the next five years. 

The role of the MP is confirmed by law. I do not think this project alone can say the MP can do this or not do this. The role of the MP is conferred by law; you have power to monitor projects in your constituency. However, on our part, we shall ensure that whatever information is given, we shall insist that the Member of Parliament is fully involved in mobilisation and evaluation.

On road units for districts, the pre-shipment inspection team of engineers from the Ministry of Works will leave for China to inspect the road units next week. The information I have is that the shipping of the road units will commence in December this year.

For new districts born out of old ones, our policy is that even the new districts will continue to benefit from the CAIIP project. Why should we expand to new sub-counties when we have not completed old ones? The answer is what has happened on the Floor of this House; when we start a project in one area, especially when it succeeds like CAIIP, there is always demand for the same project in other areas. 

Yes, the resources are getting scattered in many areas, but wherever we go, even if we pick two sub-counties in every district in Uganda, I think that is a contribution made. So, we intend to continue that way. When funds permit, we hope this project will cover the whole country, of course complementing other Government programmes like UNRA, and the money which is normally sent to districts for road construction.

Madam Speaker, with those few clarifications, I beg to stop there –(Interjections)– I have answered the road unit question. I beg to stop here and pray that the Members approve the loan. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 28 Members have contributed to this report. I now put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow unit of accounts 40 million from the Africa Development Bank and 7 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support implementation of phase III of the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP) III. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had tasked the Acting Leader of Government Business to consult concerning a matter raised by the Leader of the Opposition. Let me ask him to give an update. 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You directed us to come back with a statement in regard to an explanation as to what is happening to the freedom of Dr Kiiza Besigye. I had the opportunity to confer with the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and hon. Bahati, and we subsequently managed to raise the Minister of Internal Affairs and  Minister of State for Internal Affairs. 

Unfortunately, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs is presently in Adjumani. He was representing us at the burial of the departed wife of Gen. Moses Ali. Hon. Hilary Onek had an accident as he was proceeding to Adjumani, but he managed to come back. We agreed that they come and attend to this matter tomorrow when Parliament opens. That is the agreement we had. I am sure hon. Nandala-Mafabi will be able to confirm this.

6.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Migereko, the Leader of Government Business. What he has stated is true; we agreed that tomorrow, the Minister of Internal Affairs will come and make a statement. I want to thank him for being good; despite the fact that many ministers’ phones were not available, he used his best methods until he got them. I want to thank you. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for making our life easier today. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT PAYING TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. WANGARI MATHAI FOR HER OUTSTANDING ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN THE SERVICE OF HUMANITY

6.02
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Members, for the patience and commitment to participate in this motion. 

Hon. Members, I move under Article 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to pay tribute and to honour the work of the late Wangari Maathai.

“WHEREAS the late Prof. Wangari Maathai was born in Kenya in April 1940 and died on the 25 September 2011;

AND WHEREAS she was, throughout her life, involved in the struggle for humanity not only in her motherland Kenya but throughout the world; 

AND WHEREAS in the 1970s, she founded the Green Belt Movement, an environmental non-governmental organisation focusing on planting trees...” -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, Dr Epetait is destructing me very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Epetait!

MR BAHATI: “...RECOGNISING that Prof. Wangari Maathai received several awards including the Environmental Prize Medal in San Francisco, the Hunger Project’s Africa Prize for Leadership in London in 1991; the Edinburgh Medal in 1993 and several others;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that Prof. Wangari Maathai was the first President of the Africa Union Economic, Social and Cultural Council and was appointed a goodwill ambassador for an initiative aimed at protecting the Congo Basin Forest ecosystem;

FURTHER NOTING that the late Prof. Wangari Maathai dedicated her life politically to promoting democratic governance by, among others, striving to unite the people of Kenya across their political divide for the promotion of free and fair elections in Kenya in 1992, and environmentally focusing on the campaign for tree planting and environmental conservation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament of Uganda: 

1. 	Honours Prof. Wangari Maathai as a role model towards promoting women’s rights and empowerment.
2. 	Honours Prof. Wangari Maathai’s extraordinary contributions and strives towards the betterment of humanity.
3. 	Acknowledges that her death has robbed the African continent of a great leader and sends condolence messages to the Government of Kenya over her demise.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Can you justify.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Madam Speaker and colleagues, a few weeks ago, one of the greatest daughters of Africa, Prof. Maathai, closed her eyelids in a long sleep. From this Parliament goes our deepest sympathy and prayers to her children and our profound solidarity to the people of Kenya and to the countless women and men across the world to whom she was an inspiration.

Prof. Maathai serves as a beacon of strength for activists from many walks of life, not just in her native Kenya, but also here in Uganda and around the world. As the first African woman recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, Prof. Maathai tirelessly dug wells of environmental protection, democracy and advocacy for the downtrodden women, which will continue to flow throughout generations. It is, therefore, right that we honour her for all the good works she did while still in this fleeting moment on earth. 

Prof. Maathai was born in 1940. She obtained a degree in Biology and in 1971, she obtained a PhD and became the first woman in East and Central Africa with a doctorate degree. She founded the Green Belt Movement, a grassroots organisation whose main focus is the planting of trees with women groups in order to conserve the environment and their quality of life. Through the Green Belt Movement, she assisted women plant more than 20 million trees on their farms, schools and church compounds. She was recognised internationally and she was named the Woman of the World in 1989.

Wangari was elected as one of the best 100 persons in the world who have made a difference in the environmental arena. She was, and remains, a living and shining example to all environmentalists, including our own, “the Man”, Ken-Lukyamuzi-Applause)- and women all over Africa. 

Her civic-mindedness over the last half a century will encourage young generations. Prof. Maathai leaves a huge hole among the ranks of women leaders but leaves behind a solid foundation for others to build on. 

Prof. Maathai believed, like many of us believe, that if women are healthy and educated, their families will be better off; if women are free from violence, their families will be at peace; if women have an opportunity to work and earn as equal partners in society, their families will prosper -(Applause)- and when their families are peaceful and prosperous, then communities flourish and nations will grow. That is why we are encouraged that the government in power and the government in waiting all believe that focusing on household income is one of the strategies to move Uganda forward.

Madam Speaker, in her memory, we have an obligation in our times to free thousands of women who are trapped in the prison of poverty. Time has come when overcoming poverty can no longer be taken as a gesture of favour by governments, but an act of justice and protection of fundamental human rights, the right to a decent life.

Today, I want to call upon honourable members to honour the memory of the late Prof. Maathai by celebrating the women leaders who have graced our country such as our very own, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Ms Rebecca Kadaga. (Applause) We should also respect the contributions made by our women in communities every single day, most importantly and urgently, by committing ourselves to the continuing promotion of girl-child education, allocating adequate funds to save those who die in labour as well as saving the lives of so many children who are denied the opportunity to reach their first birthdays. We should also bring to life policies relating to the environment, which are gathering dust in our offices.

Prof. Maathai, through her Green Belt Movement, planted over 20 million trees. If she were here today, but she is not and I can speak for her, she would appeal to us to take up this cause and multiply her effort by planting hundreds of millions of trees to tackle the looming threat of drought and climate change, which directly impacts on our food security. She was a voice to women across Africa and we can keep her legacy alive by committing ourselves to bringing out the voice of those ordinary women in the remotest villages where basic services are difficult to access and yet on whose labour and sweat all of us come to live and be what we are today. 

Madam Speaker, we can remember Prof. Maathai as a great mother to three children: Waweru, Wangiri and Musa. You know, sometimes we take our mothers for granted because that is just mum; but if you want to know the value of your mother, ask me who lost one at the age of three years and has never seen her photograph.

Finally, in her speech early this year at one of the American universities, Prof. Maathai said thus: “You can make your own life an inspiration just by living it right.” Driven by her dedication to protecting the environment and contributing to her nation through consistent public service, I believe that Prof. Maathai embodied her advice. Mwenyezi Mungu amubariki apumuzikke kwa amani milele na milele. I beg to move. (Applause)

6.13
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion as moved by hon. David Bahati. When you look at what Prof. Wangari Maathai did as a Kenyan, we do not look at her only as a Kenyan, but also as an African woman who fought various battles.

Through her Green Belt Movement, women became aware that planting trees or fighting to save forests was a bigger mission to create a society that respects democracy, decency, adherence to the rule of law, respect for human rights and more specifically the rights of women. Through that movement, women were able to take up leadership roles; they were running tree nurseries, they worked in forests and implemented community projects and earned incomes that supported their families.

We know that women hold primary responsibilities for tilling land, deciding what to plant, nurturing crops and harvesting the food. That is why she was supportive of food security in her country, Kenya.

So, what do we learn from her campaign as Ugandans? I would like to say that we need to know that there is need for us to stand up in defence of forests. This is because the effects of climate change affect women, particularly in terms of food security and water. You know that most women walk very long distances to fetch water. Also, many young girls walk very long distances in search for water, and in between they are sexually abused. This has led to most of them dropping out of school with those who remain in school not performing very well.

As we celebrate the life of Prof. Wangari Maathai, we should remember that she was also concerned about girl-child education and HIV/AIDS, with particular focus on women and girls who are very poor. At this moment, I would like to call upon the Government of Uganda and Parliament to emulate the example of the late Prof. Wangari Maathai. We should invest more in planting forests in Uganda. I am saying this because it is as if we do not have the minds to realise that our country is becoming bare ground with the green Pearl of Africa being deforested.

I also ask the government and Parliament to critically look into the role of women in promoting economic activities because it is from those activities that they earn some income to support their children, especially the orphans. I beg to support, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to very strongly support the motion and to add onto its framework as a matter of strengthening it as follows: “A motion for a Resolution of Parliament paying tribute to the late Prof. Wangari Maathai for her tireless efforts to conserve the environment as well as accomplish the service of humanity.”

Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late Prof. Wangari Maathai whom providence unceremoniously summoned recently to the destination where we shall all meet. The late Prof. Wangari was a great woman and that greatness should attract the attention of the people of Uganda. When, Madam Speaker, you were elected the Speaker of this Parliament, she called me all the way from New York and asked me to congratulate you for winning that great position as a woman, and all along she has been praising women.

On top of what the presenter has said, Prof. Maathai was Africa’s first black woman to win the Noble Peace Prize. She was also the first woman professor in the Kenyan University of Nairobi. She was a former minister in H.E. Mwai Kibaki’s Government and the coordinator of the Green Belt Network.

I had the opportunity to work with her in a place called Machakos in Eastern Kenya, when we were using the development fund of ICRAF to promote tree planting in arid zones. We worked with women enthusiastically in places like Nunguni and Kalama. I have also been told, reliably, that the place where we planted trees is now a forest. I feel proud even before I join her that we did make some effort in promoting afforestation on the African Continent. 

Prof. Wangari Maathai’s efforts to promote afforestation and tree planting started in her home. She converted her home into a small nursery project with the assistance of Kenyan women. That nursery project later became the source of the Green Belt network. She has inspired so many people. She has transformed the livelihoods of over a million women, and as hon. Bahati said, they have planted so far, nearly 30 million trees.

I came to know her when I was the secretary-general of the Wildlife Clubs of Uganda. I went to Kenya and she attracted me and we worked together. The little I have been able to achieve, namely, the position of Vice-President Globe International, would not have come if it were not for her support. She supported Uganda when I stood for that position, which had the opposition of so many other people worldwide, in Cape Town. I won because she campaigned highly. 

In the 1980s, she managed to attract support for women in Kenya. They were getting some little money as they promoted afforestation, and they earned a living. Right now as we speak, those women have been able to build themselves houses and improve their farmlands because of the efforts of Prof. Maathai Wangari. 

Prof. Maathai Wangari was also a politician. She was once a minister in Kibaki’s government and she performed very well. During the time of His Excellency Arap Moi, she struggled to protect Karura Forest in the centre of Nairobi, as well as stop the construction of a 60-storey building in Uhuru Park. She was badly harassed and at one time she even volunteered to go naked, to remove her clothes, together with other women, in order to demonstrate their concern so that Karura could be protected, and Karura is now protected because of her. (Applause) 

If I were to describe Prof. Wangari Maathai, she was a woman of joy. She was a conservationist at heart. She was a forester, a woman of conviction and a woman of passion. I would like to pay tribute to her because I see that a lot of what she fought for is badly required by Ugandans; for example, is it not a challenge as we struggle to protect Mabira – Mabira serves two great cities in Uganda. In terms of geography, on one side you have Jinja and on this side you have Kampala. It is important that Ugandans think twice before they see any big forest like Mabira destroyed. 

As we embark on harvesting of oil, we will face more problems related to climate change. So, we need the framework of Mabira to attempt to absorb some of the bad gases that will be emitted as a result of harvesting oil. 

As if that was not enough, it is important from now onwards for the women of Uganda to emulate that good example and hard work in the way Prof. Maathai Wangari worked. Because of what she did, I have written a poem which I want to read and I beg you to pay attention to the poem.

Maathai Wangari
Wangari Maathai,
Wake us now, 
To plant more trees
We recall the struggle you begun 
To save Karura Forest
You nearly went naked 
In defence of the forest.

Prevail over our leaders
To save Mabira Forest
Prevail over the leaders 
To save the wetlands
You are the voice of nature
And nature is about God.
So, you are near the Lord.

You made Africa proud,
To win the Nobel Peace Prize,
You made Kenya proud
To protect Uhuru Park.

Africa is rich,
Africa is great,
At the Murchison falls,
When the waters flow
The lions roar
The giraffes yawn,
And the rains come.

Maathai Wangari,
Wangari Maathai,
Wake us Wanga,
To plant more trees
And save those trees.
Do not forget Wanga,
That we shall meet again,
To celebrate your crusade
On the talk of nature to man
Goodbye Wanga,
Maathai Wangari, 
Wangari Maathai.

(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, should I put the question? [Hon. Members: “Yes”] I think the motion was moved and seconded well and was concluded by a poem. I do not expect anybody to oppose. I, therefore, put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do resolve to pay tribute to the late Prof. Wangari Maathai for her outstanding contribution and accomplishments, and I think we add the amendment of hon. Lukyamuzi, “in the service of humanity”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, can I ask the Clerk that when it is completed, it should be transmitted to her family in Nyeri.

Hon. Members, there is another matter which we wanted to handle, but it concerns our hosting of the 126th IPU Conference and I wanted more Members to be here to listen to what the IPU is about. So, I think we shall defer this item No.5 to tomorrow so that Members can understand all these things that we have been talking about. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 O’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 November 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

