Wednesday, 17 November 2010 

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I believe you had a peaceful Idd El Adhuha, which was celebrated yesterday. Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have lecturers, professors and students of Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi. They have come to observe how business in the House is conducted. Please, if you are here, you stand up so that you are recognised. Apparently, they are not here.

Again, we have teachers and pupils of Hidden Treasures Primary School in Mukono District. They are here to see how we conduct our business. Please join me in welcoming them. There are other unidentified visitors; I will introduce them when I get the details.

3.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and that of the House so that we could vary the Order Paper such that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can be in a position - we can be in a position to receive the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the National Development Plan.

The National Development Plan guides our budgeting process and as Government, we are running into a lot of problems, being in a position to move the budget forward without the approval of the National Development Plan. It has appeared on the Order Paper several times, but it is also true that some of the business which we are currently handling is very important and pressing. 

But in order not to let our budgeting process and implementation of the budget run into problems, I would like to kindly request that you permit the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a submission such that the House can consider and adopt the report in regard to the National Development Plan. I beg to request.

3.06
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are being unfair to people in this country. We have been running budgets in the country and some of the budgets we have run, have got issues to deal with now and that is the CHOGM report. It will be very unfair if we decide to shelve the CHOGM report -Interjections)- please listen to me. 

The NDP can come as a committee report of Parliament and we are saying that, let us dispose of the issue of the CHOGM report then we can deal with these other matters. There must be another motive that we should not deal with this report. If there is nothing, it is time we continue from where we stopped and finish the report then the rest will follow. You cannot have a budget which is being mismanaged, and the current budget continues running. I thank you.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Chief Whip has raised a point which will be in the interest of my honourable colleague, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, that you have a National Development Plan; it was submitted to this House and committed to a committee of Parliament.

The day the committee was to report, there was a conference of FDC and consequently this reporting was overtaken by the events. So, this report should have been precedence for discussion, but by doing so, you will have allowed the implementation of the budget to go in accordance with law. This report has been debated by committees; it will take very little time to enable the House to debate the CHOGM report until its very end. But to hold the report, you will paralyse the legal requirement for implementation of the national plan as well as the national budget.

I plead that it is normal to re-arrange the Order Paper; it has been done in the past. I do not see any excitement that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is putting on this CHOGM report; we will defend it. It seems like there is a hidden agenda not to have this report debated. Why? It will be debated, but this would ease out the work in terms of sequencing the Parliamentary Order Paper. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Kamuntu is right to say that it was presented in the House. The CHOGM report we are talking about was presented in the House on 23 April 2008. What we are talking about is not today. We are talking about something at the back and we must deal with it. We should be fair to each other in executing public duty. What we are talking about – CHOGM - is Shs 500 billion, which is 10 percent of the budget of Uganda. The development budget you are talking - nobody has objected. National Planning Authority has been here; we have been making plans and we should do it. Nobody is objecting, but what we are saying is let us deal with this first; we shall deal with the others later. Nobody has objected to it.

MR ODUMAN: The National Development Plan was already launched; His Excellency, the President, signed and launched it. As we speak now, it is being implemented. Even the budget we passed, was passed on the basis of the National Development Plan. Indeed, the Budget Speech gives a preamble that clearly makes reference to the National Development Plan. So, the National Planning Authority forgot that this Parliament was very important in the process of approval. They did - they forgot -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us be fair to the planning authority. The report was submitted on time to us here; the committee could not process it - yes, the default was with us; it was not with the Authority because the minister brought it here on time and it was taken up by the committee. It is the committee that did not submit on time and that is what caused the problem. I know that and you are not going to correct me on that. I know! Please – yes, those are the facts; it was submitted here. It is our committee which failed to process it.

MR ODUMAN: The draft National Development Plan was submitted to this House on a Tuesday. Now, the committee, of which I am a member, was required to submit the report back here on Thursday. On that Thursday, FDC had a National Delegates Conference and the House could not sit on that day. Meanwhile, on Friday, we got invitations in our pigeon holes that the national launch was on Monday. So, the launch was already arranged even before the report was brought here. In terms of priority – what I am saying as information is that it is not very urgent - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, how long do you think this will take because I have to decide? How long do you think this will take?

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you. Mine is a Point of Procedure. Item No.5 on our Order Paper talks about the presentation of the report as requested by hon. Migereko. It is on the Order Paper. The request was to shift this item so that we consider it as No.1 and then we follow –(Interjections)- maybe it will take 15 or 20 minutes – but when some colleagues say that Government is shelving a very important item, I get lost. 

I wanted to request that instead of wasting much more time on procedure, that colleagues accept the request so that we deal with that item, finish it, and then do other business. I thank you very much. 

3.13
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In as far as this institution is concerned, all reports of Parliament that come here are of equal importance and so, in managing this Parliament, there is need to have the principle of, “First Come, First Serve.” 

The CHOGM report has been on for quite some time. It was shelved for quite some time and now that debate on it has kicked off, and bearing in mind that by next week, this House will more or less be closed because everybody will be going home for nominations. 

It is only fair, I plead to this House, that let us continue with this debate of CHOGM, dispose of it and then time allowing, we can then give opportunity for this report to be presented. But as of now, what will happen to this report of CHOGM if we cannot conclude it within this time; what will happen? So, really, first come, first serve; all these reports are important and I pray that we continue with the CHOGM report, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): I thank you very much. I want to take this opportunity to inform the honourable House about the ears on the ground in respect of the CHOGM report. 

Out there, the public is crying and there are already allegations that some money peddling has been taking place to ensure that the CHOGM report does not succeed, and this is one of the methods of doing it. So, my prayer is that let the CHOGM report take precedence. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the CHOGM report was “murdered” and, therefore, it does not live. Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have the head teachers from various primary schools in Lira District and they have come here to observe how business is conducted. Please join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome, ladies and gentlemen. (Applause) Who was on the Floor? Okay.

MR MIGEREKO: I have been holding consultations with the chair of the committee and the Minister of Finance regarding the question you asked, “How much time would it take?” With the support of the Opposition, I reckon it will not take more than 30 minutes but it is certain –

THE SPEAKER: How much time?

MR MIGEREKO: 30 minutes –(Interjections)- it will not take more than that. I request that we receive the report, handle it as fast as we can –(Interjections)– it is fairly clear that the CHOGM report is heavily involved and requires a lot of attention and detail, and it really requires a lot of time and patience. 

I would like to request that you permit immediately after the loan on maternal health, that we come in with this report on the National Development Plan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odit.

3.17
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I feel like we are wasting a lot of time arguing on what takes precedence and the Executive should not come and hijack the work of Parliament. 

Normally, when the Chief Whip has something of importance, he should consult his colleague from this side. My opinion is that we proceed with what appears on the Order Paper and see where the day ends. Otherwise, we have already spent 15 or so minutes arguing on what takes precedence. 

What is on the Order Paper is what I feel that Parliament has decided that should consume our day today. Therefore, let us submit that we start with what appears on item No.2 on the Order Paper. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The next business.

  MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 85.7 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO US$ 130 MILLION (USH 286 BILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK, FOR FINANCING OF THE HEALTH SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Minister.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I should remind you that the debate actually took place. We only had one problem of allocation of the money. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: That is what I precisely wanted to say after thanking you. In the interest of time, because the remaining issue was on how to re-allocate funding to ensure that the maternal health element is enhanced and the sector minister has done an extensive adjustment work to reproductive health commodities.

I would like without wasting much time, to request you to allow the sector minister to provide information to the House so that this matter is debated expeditiously. 

The Ministry of Finance as a ministry would undertake to do any re-adjustments in the allocation of this loan during the period of implementation so that as the loan is reviewed by the two partners, the World Bank which is the financing institution and the ministry and Government, these adjustments can be harmonised to ensure we do so in accordance with the agreement that the two parties have signed.

So, I just want to undertake before this House that during implementation, these adjustments which the Minister is going to communicate to you can be done precisely, because to adjust a loan after it has been negotiated and agreed at this material time, would delay the implementation and disbursement of these funds, and that would be to the disadvantage of the very demand that Members were requiring on enhancing the budget of the reproductive health facilities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (General) (DR Richard Nduhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 3 November 2010, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development moved a motion for the government to borrow SDR 85.7 million equivalent to US$ 130 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for financing the Uganda health system strengthening project. 

As my colleague from Finance has just said, we went back after Members had raised concerns and decided to re-allocate to reproductive health commodities from the other component, a total figure of US$ 8,009,400 and this is the point that was mainly raising people’s concerns that we were giving US$ 10 million to human resource development and management and US$ 5 million to leadership management. 

So, we have agreed to re-allocate at an appropriate time - but I wish to pray that we pass the loan and as per procedure, the re-negotiation with World Bank will be done and effected during the re-negotiation. As we stand today, and as we have already explained before, the negotiations that were made between the two parties was already agreed upon. Therefore, at this stage, we cannot make that re-allocation; but there is room for doing that during the implementation. 

3.23
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is speaking in tongues. He is accepting that he agrees with our recommendation to re-adjust, but he says we do not have the power to do it. 

I am the Vice President of the Parliamentary Forum of the World Bank. We normally have country dialogue with the country representative and I have attended international fora with the World Bank; Hon. Banyenzaki is the President. 

The President of the World Bank had put it categorically that they respect the Constitution of this country, and this Parliament has deferred several loans which the World Bank has accepted it.  So, I request that the Minister should agree with our recommendation and go back to the World Bank and agree; after all, this loan is a request of Parliament. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, often when we have an engagement with the World Bank and we present a case showing that the loans, which they are pushing to us are not well structured, they always say that it is in our hands as Members of Parliament to do what we want. And whenever we ask them to have the loans restructured – in most cases we are arguing for infrastructure development and not capacity building. But their argument is always that it is within the powers of Parliament to do what you want. For them they only do what the Executive presents to them. 

So, Mr Speaker, I think it is in order for this Parliament to give a recommendation and the Executive to take it on and accept the recommendations of this Parliament.

On the issue of re-negotiations, the terms of this loan can be re-negotiated; there is nothing about this agreement being inscribed in stone; they can be changed.

THE SPEAKER: I think the loan is acceptable provided that there is an adjustment. And, therefore, if that is the case, you can, therefore, approve subject to the adjustment –(Interjections)– yes, that your permission to Government to borrow is conditional in the sense that the allocation should be adjusted as reflected here. 

3.26
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, World Bank is an institution which lends money to those who want it. And it is the people of Uganda who are borrowing; and they are the ones who will have to pay. In the wisdom of the Ugandans, some of the negotiations of the Executive were not right and they need some re-adjustments. When people come to Parliament, they want us to imagine that World Bank is a monster sitting somewhere and cannot change anything. We are the ones who went to World Bank for the loan and we are the ones going back to them for adjustments. That is acceptable and we are talking from experience. 

Mr Speaker, it is very wrong for our colleagues like Prof. Kamuntu to say that it is impossible. It is possible; we insist that most of the money should go to development and not consumption; that is the argument. If anything, we would put all the money to development and for consumption, we could use our local budget. 

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me confirm to this House that I have been on both sides of the counter; I have worked with World Bank and I can state this without any fear of contradiction. I have also been a Member of Parliament for some time and I can say it with equal confidence that Parliament has the power to accept or to reject this loan. 

Secondly, Government negotiates with the World Bank on behalf of this country. Fortunately, Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer. These are two parties making an agreement; and by the time you sign an agreement, there should be an appraisal report of this project. In appraising the project, the various effectiveness of these components are debated. So, by the time it comes to this House, all these negotiations have been done. 

So, I want to confirm to this House as a Member of the Executive that so far, when this loan was appraised and negotiated, these adjustments were not made. But we in Government undertake to put these adjustments in the loan because they have emerged after the negotiations. But since we are a party to the agreement, clearly and legally, we have a right to re-negotiate this loan as directed by Parliament. But if we reject it and say, “Take it back”, this is what happens; by delaying implementation – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, suppose we accept it on condition that there is this adjustment; what do you lose?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am making an undertaking to this House that I will re-negotiate these adjustments. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this minister is speaking far better than the Minister for Health. He has agreed that we can pass the loan subject to these adjustments and that they will go back after concluding the negotiations, and they will relay the position back to this House. So, let us approve, they go back and negotiate as directed by Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, we accept on condition that this adjustment is incorporated and they do not have to come back –(Interjections)– no, the licence we give to the government to borrow is subject to the adjustment. Therefore, if they implement it then that would be illegal; and the record will show that our permission was subject to the adjustment. 

MR EKANYA: We only need the information for purposes of oversight and monitoring. They can give us as a committee for purposes of oversight and monitoring, but your proposal and advice is acceptable.

3.31
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I want to agree with your guidance and seek Members’ indulgence that the Sessional Committee on Social Services and Finance while looking through the budget and policy statements of this ministry - because this is not a one-year project - we will make sure that the adjustments are adhered to and that the commitment wanted is from the minister that while working with Social Services and Finance at budget stage, this will be implemented, but not at our level of scrutiny of the loan. I thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, it is true that your advice is okay, but I would like to be clarified because, normally, they say our resolution is just to advise Government. They normally do not honour resolutions of Parliament. We want concrete confirmation that you will honour the resolution of Parliament.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Much obliged to your guidance. But, Mr Speaker, I seek further clarification. I thought the process of Government borrowing on behalf of the people of Uganda is not complete until authorised by Parliament. In that respect, whereas the process is initiated by Government, we as Parliament have final input before the terms and conditions are agreeable to all parties. 

In that regard, maybe, unless there is something of emergency in nature, I even know that the World Bank knows that at the end of the day, their terms and conditions have to be approved by Parliament. In which case, Mr Speaker and honourable members of this House, can we have it neat and tidy so that once we say, “Aye”, it is indeed, “Aye” rather than waiting on you to go, because by the time you come back, maybe you will find another 9th Parliament and not necessarily the 8th Parliament. You may find new Members who may not have the record of what took place. 

Hon. Ministers, you should assist us to look tidy in the eyes of the public. These gymnastics of hon. Ekanya saying, “Okay, we approve subject to your coming back to Parliament” - which Parliament are you talking about? Can we wait a bit so you do this work and then you come so that once we approve, we approve with a clear conscience that what we have agreed upon is indeed what is being agreed to with the World Bank. I seek your clarification, Mr Speaker, on this. Why the emergency? Why the hurry now? Why are we agreeing piecemeal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have information, Mr Speaker. When we approved NUSAF I in the Seventh Parliament, we gave it an open check. And you know what happened; the money was mismanaged. When we approved money for Nakivubo Channel, when Byandala was in KCC, he knows what he did with it when we gave them a blank cheque.  

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me make it very clear to the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union, also chairman PAC, that that project of Nakivubo Channel was highly rated in the World Bank. So, there was nothing nasty or wrong. You can go and check the documents. So, is this chairman, Nandala-Mafabi, in order to allege and try to spoil my name, which is highly rated?

THE SPEAKER: I think you are giving him information, which information he has accepted. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, I want to conclude by saying open cheques are very dangerous. If there is a way –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if we say, yes, we allow you provided there are adjustments; if the adjustment is not carried out, our permission is negated. This is what it means; they do not have to come back. It is permission with a condition. If the condition is not met then the licence is not there. This is what I think can be done rather than expecting them to go and then come back. We do not have that time, do we?

3.37
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you. Colleagues, let us look at the bigger picture. This money is coming to address a bigger problem. There are these problems that we are seeing and which we have pointed out to Government. And as the Speaker rightly notes, if the resolution is conditioned and these conditions are not fulfilled, then there is no way this House will have been said to have approved this loan. And good enough you are dealing with the World Bank. 

The first thing they will ask is a resolution of Parliament. So long as this resolution clearly spells out these other conditions, I do not see any harm, in my view, to have an approval with conditions. I think we are dealing with the World Bank and the chairperson of the committee will make sure that the resolution that comes from this House spells out those conditions. Let us look further than these small problems.

3.38
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have all talked about adjustments to the items in this loan and I think that for purposes of giving the conditional approval, we want this on the record of the House officially. That will help us know what was re-allocated from what, or what is proposed for re-allocation in the re-negotiation. 

I think that the minister should read this; we put it on the record. I see a proposal to re-allocate and provide funding for reproductive health commodities. So, once he does that, then we will have the conditionality of the resolution on record.

Ordinarily, I would not be keen to support a conditional approval. But, Mr Speaker, this is about maternal health. I was told of the US$ 130 million; US$ 30 million is set aside specifically for maternal health. Seventy five percent of the remainder is meant for strengthening health infrastructure and some of us would even want at a later stage the minister to sieve out what goes into the maternity units of the health infrastructure; and that about US$ 8 million is for reproductive health commodities. 

Now, someone did ask - I don’t recall who that was - that what is urgent about this. What is urgent about this is, just today, approximately 16 mothers have died in this country. (Interjection) Yes, just today. You mean the honourable minister does not know this? The minister of finance does not know that roughly 14 mothers die every day in this country because of matters related to child bearing. Probably he does not even know that many more children die in -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I know the honourable distinguished member is a member of the crusade on reproductive and maternal health. Basically, an average figure is an average figure. When I said “today”, today it could have been 12 and not 16. That is all I wanted her to know. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, this type of joke from the Minister of Finance is a huge disaster for our country. Whether it is one mother dying, this country should be terribly concerned, and because of that, we will give the conditional approval. However, let the minister put on record the issues he proposes for re-negotiation and then we will pursue the matter further. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think without going into detailed reading, the ministry or Government is proposing an adjustment outlined here and this is the document. What we can do is that once the document is tabled, which is part of our record, it will be captured. Okay.

MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, the document is faulty -(Interjections)- this document is faulty. It is not showing us what currency it is. It is just a box. What currency are they telling us? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, he can do that, but he need not read the details. Just table it and, therefore, it becomes part of the record.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the adjustments to the reproductive health commodities, in dollars, amounting to 8,009,400. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.43
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had meetings with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Health and indeed, agreed on several areas where adjustments must be made; although what we agreed as the way the document would be presented is not the way it is being presented. However, I just want assurance from the Ministers of Finance or Health, about what exactly will happen. We agreed on the adjustments, but I also know that for these kinds of programmes, usually you make substantive changes in the mid-term review. 

The assurance I want from the minister is: What will happen at the commencement of the project that will ensure that these adjustments will be effected? Otherwise, we do not want to be here and be hoodwinked - we pass a document and nothing changes. So, what exactly will happen on the day of commencement to ensure that these changes are effective?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, before disbursements of these funds to Government by the World Bank, as already pointed out by the honourable Member of Parliament, hon. Katuntu, a resolution of Parliament is always required. At that point, this resolution of Parliament will contain these adjustments that have been made, and consequently, at the very time of implementation, all these would have been taken into account. The social services committee and ministries, and everybody in the implementation machinery and process will be guided by what has been passed on the Floor of this House. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, isn’t it time for me to put the question on the motion, but conditioned on the adjustment that has been tabled? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING

(Debate continued.)

3.46
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, when we left, we had heard from four ministers who had presented, including the Vice President. As you recall, on 9 November 2010 hon. Hope Mwesigye said, “I wish to state that the burden of proof whether or not the allegations made against me are true or false lies with the one that alleged”. It is at this juncture that we want to respond to the allegations of the four ministers so that we put that matter away and then we have another block of four to proceed with. (Interjections) We never had a ruling; we never agreed. So, that is what I wanted to proceed with. We never agreed. We need to cross-examine them and then we move on. (Mr Musumba rose_) Mr Speaker, should I proceed? Yes, we - 

THE SPEAKER: What the honourable member should know is that you are not in the dock. You are not. We received the report and the ministers have made their defences - what they call their defences. So, other people are entitled to make a contribution on those defences and we go on. I would think you should come in later, after you have heard many others; otherwise, you will be up and down; up and down. Why don’t you wait for others to make their contribution? You are not in the dock.   

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedural guidance. In as far as this report is concerned, many ministers and civil servants have been implicated. There are those like the politicians; that is, the ministers, who are privy to defending themselves in this House. Then there are those other civil servants whose names have been mentioned, but who do not have the opportunity to defend themselves. Here and now is a situation -[Mr Migereko: “You were not around.”]- I have not been around, but you were also in China with the Secretary-General of the NRM-O. So, please - but I have been well briefed. 

The point that I wish to seek clarification and guidance on is the following: We have so far heard defences from four ministers. Four ministers have given their defences, which has also enabled us who are not members of PAC to hear the type of defence they gave to that committee, and probably at this point we would wish to ask them a few questions. 

Now, I do not know whether we are going to go through the whole process and all those who are implicated come up and give their defences, and then we begin having a general discussion. I really wish to seek clarification because there are things which certainly will get off our minds. What do we do? Do we have to wait for everybody to come in and make their defence and then we go and open up the debate and ask supplementary questions; what do we do? That is the dilemma in which I have found myself and over which I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: You can seek clarification from any statement made by whoever has made it. I think the point of hon. Nandala-Mafabi was, let us clear the four and then proceed. This is it - 

3.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the last time we attended Parliament here before we broke off last week, you guided the House on that matter -(Interjections)– Yes, the Speaker guided the House on this matter. It would be wrong for us to entertain this kind of filibustering when we are supposed to be handling this report in a fairly expeditious manner. The ministers who were mentioned in the report are set and ready to submit and we would like to request that you permit them to come forward and submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me make our case first. That day you will recall that hon. Tumwebaze got up. You say that you are David. I want you to go and read Sirach 24:1-6 and tomorrow you will be a responsible person. When we left on Thursday, it was Frank Tumwebaze who came and said that we think about it and then you said, “House adjourned”.

MAJ GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chairperson of PAC, to consume a lot of time of this Parliament, when he chaired a committee which went through all the rigours and processes of making the report, rather than giving opportunity to members who are not part of the committee to clear the procedural matters? Is it in order for hon. Mafabi to continue taking the thing as if it is a personal matter? It looks as if it has become a personal matter between the chairperson of PAC and the people who were mentioned in the report.

THE SPEAKER: I have said that the committee is not in the dock; the report belongs to the House, and it is the House to consider what is in the report plus what is being said. As a member who participated in the proceedings of the committee, he can come in. 

I would advise that if the members of the committee want to come in, let them listen and then come in later.

I think it is proper to listen first and then come in to correct later; otherwise, you are going to have an exercise of moving up and down from your seat. I would rather give you an opportunity to come in later.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What you are saying is true; we have now listened to the four and we want to respond to those now. After the four, we need another set. I am ready to stand up as many times as I can to deal with this problem.

MS MARY MUGYENYI: I think that procedurally, the Speaker guides and his guidance is final. So, what is going on right now? This is diverting us; we will never deal with this report and finish. You need to be firm, Mr Speaker, and guide us. We are going around in circles week after week and people do not have the time. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether I should use PowerPoint to deliver home what I want to say. Let us listen to one another and you can come in after listening to criticisms.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I suggest that ministers answer in this order: hon. John Byabagambi, hon. Mbabazi, hon. Musumba and hon. Omach.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on this procedural question. I listened to the government chief whip saying that as far as Government is concerned, everybody should defend themselves. Is this Government business or ministers themselves have personal explanations to make? Are they representing Government or themselves?

THE SPEAKER: I think you can seek clarification from the government chief whip.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. He is the one who rose up and said that as far as Government is concerned, the four have presented so the rest will present. Is he implying that Government is shouldering CHOGM explanations or he could have allowed leeway for ministers to individually explain?

MR DOMBO: I want to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business. A while ago, he read to us the order in which the ministers will come out to defend their culpability as shown in the report. Was this an arrangement that was determined by Cabinet? Are they defending themselves as part of Government? 

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, therefore, I coordinate their activities. Some of my colleagues have other assignments tomorrow and that is why I have made this arrangement and it is subject to being amended as problems arise. I suggest that we plunge into the exercise, otherwise we shall not finish. I suggest that we start.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I gave the copies to the clerk. My submission is very short; only two and half pages. I do not want to – Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Kassiano Wadri. 

When I go to page 1 of my response - I will skip the background and go to paragraph four on page 1 - the role of the ministry – 

THE SPEAKER: Which page are you reading from?

MR BAYBAGAMBI: This document. The title is – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think it would be very important for the minister who has given us the document he is going to read to start from the beginning to the end, for record purposes.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, for the sake of time, I wanted to summarise the document. 

After Uganda was notified as the venue to host the 2007 CHOGM, a Cabinet meeting of 16 June 2004 approved the organisational framework for the event, which included a Cabinet sub-committee and a national taskforce. The national taskforce created sub-committees working directly under it, which were chaired by the permanent secretaries of the line ministries. One of such sub-committees was the infrastructure sub-committee, charged on the Ministry of Works and Transport.

As the line minister of state, it is my routine duty to inspect works, including infrastructure undertaken by the government. The role of the ministry in the context of CHOGM was to prepare physical infrastructure to facilitate the meeting. For this purpose, several roads in Kampala and Entebbe were selected for rehabilitation and resealing. The Entebbe roads which were selected for rehabilitation and sealing work under CHOGM infrastructure project were packages 3, lot 1 and 2. These roads included:

(i) 	Under contract 3, lot 1, Kampala Road - stretching from Golf Course in Entebbe, passing by the main entrance of the State House, through the trading centre and connecting back to Kitovu - Mugwanya Road, Circular Road and Kitoro Road.

(ii) Under contract 3, lot 2 we had Berkeley Road, Dr Lubega Road, Tamale Ssali Road and Nakiwogo Close.

Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General’s report, under the engineering audit of CHOGM activities, mentions these roads and reviews, and their procurement process and implementation on page 42 to page 43 and from page 46 to 47. Extracts of the pages are attached as “Appendix A”.  The Auditor-General on page 43 notes that, “All the roads were visited and work done on them seen: The work done on these roads is still visible and does not show any notable failures.”

On 24 July 2007, I inspected the selected roads which I have mentioned with a team comprising of the following engineers: Were Higenyi, G.M. Kaaya and E. Mubiru, all of Ministry of Works; Mr J. Mukiibi from Entebbe Municipal Council; engineers A.D. Muloiti and J.P. Wambi both from Multiplan, the consultant. Others were Mr N. Mirali Krishna and Mr B. Prabhaker, both representing Spencon, the contractor; and Mr James Oloya and Mr Ambrose Omoding, both representing Dott Services, the contractor.

The purpose of the inspection was to assess the progress on the roads in Entebbe under CHOGM infrastructure, project packages 3, lots 1 and 2. On inspection and assessment, we found the following progress:

(i)	Mugwanya Road was 80 percent complete, but it needed widening of the pavement.

(ii)	Circular Road was 79 percent complete, but it needed widening of the pavement.

(iii)	Kitoro Road was 80 percent complete, but it needed drainage and pedestrian access slabs along it.

(iv) 	Tamale Ssali Road was 78 percent complete, but it needed widening the pavement.

As Minister of State for Works and Transport in charge of roads, I did not look at these CHOGM infrastructure projects in the context of facilitating the CHOGM event only, but as national projects which should live beyond CHOGM. I gave the instructions that the several deficiencies assessed by the team should be rectified within the framework of the CHOGM infrastructure project, hence the minute: “The consultant should work out the bills of quantities and cost implications and vary the work accordingly and process it for final approval by the Ministry of Works and Transport.” The minutes of the meeting are attached as Appendix B

Appearance before PAC

I was summoned to appear before the Public Accounts Committee on 19 April 2010 to throw light on matters in respect of which my name was mentioned during the public hearing. The summons did not mention specifically what matters I was required to throw light on. I have attached the letter.

When I appeared before it, the committee read from the minutes - which I have attached – which they had not provided me with prior to or even during the appearance, that I had directed the consultant engineers, Multiplan, to carry out additional works as minuted and I stood by my instructions in the minutes, which I still stand by now, honourable members. 

As I stated above, my clear instructions were to the consultant and not to the contractor. There is a very big difference between a contractor and a consultant.  A consultant is a worker of the ministry and a representative of the engineer-in-chief at the site. We usually call them “resident engineers”. A contractor, on the other hand, is the one executing the work. 

My instructions were to the consultant. They were very clear that they work out the bills of quantities and cost implications and value the work accordingly and also process it for the final approval of the Ministry of Works and Transport. Implied in this instruction was that if there was to be a proper evaluation of the revised bill of quantities for additional work, the entire process leading to the approval by the appropriate organs of the Ministry of Works and Transport had to be followed. 

I was not involved in that process. The Auditor-General, in his report on page 43, acknowledges that the revision of the additional works were approved by the 319th Ministry of Works and Transport Contracts Committee meeting held on 8 November 2007 of which I am not a member. 

Findings of the Parliamentary Accounts Committee

The Parliamentary Accounts Committee in its report dated 11 May 2010, pages 92 and 93, found that I gave the above instructions outside the law and in total disregard of the accounting officer. The law I am accused to have flouted is not stated. I do not know of such a law that prohibits a minister from giving directives or instructions relevant to his duties as a minister to be implemented in accordance with the laid down procedures and laws.  That is what I precisely did, hon. Members. I still stand by it, as I did when I appeared before the committee, for reasons I have given in this brief and those I gave before PAC. 

Mr Speaker, the recommendation on page 94(i), from the top, that I be held responsible for flouting PPDA laws and causing a loss of Shs 1.7 billion because I unilaterally directed the contractor to do additional works is, therefore, without a basis. Moreover, there was no loss of Shs 1.7 billion as I have already stated above. The Auditor-General was satisfied with the work done. He received satisfactory responses from management in respect of this. 

Mr Speaker, I remember when I appeared before the committee, hon. Tom Kazibwe was reading from this minute. The first question they put to me was, “Why did you make a road going to a certain Dr Lubega’s residence?” There, I have to apologise to the committee that I lost my temper because I do not know Dr Lubega in Entebbe and I have never heard of Dr Lubega. The press was ready with photographs that I made a road going to a private residence. Later on when I went back to the ministry, I found out that actually this Dr Lubega died a long time ago – rest in peace - and was a very prominent man in Entebbe, whom they named a road after. 

Again, I do not know how a minister can be made to go on the site and tell the contractor, “do this and do that” and the contractor does the job. Contractors work on the instructions of consultants. Therefore, Mr Speaker, what is surprising is that the findings of the committee are that I instructed a consultant. In their recommendations, they say, I “unilaterally directed the contractor.” How can I direct the contractor, Mr Speaker?  A contractor is not even near me. The person who is near me is the consultant and he is my worker. It is the job of the consultant to scope the works on site and bring them to the ministry for the engineers to evaluate and approve. 

Moreover, there was no loss of Shs 1.7 billion. As I have stated, the Auditor-General was satisfied with the work done and it is stated on page 43 - fourth paragraph from the top – that he received satisfactory responses from the management in respect of these queries. Page 46, paragraph 4 from the top in respect to the Circular, Barkery, Dr Lubega and Tamale Ssali roads he recommended that reasons provided in the management responses needed to be further assessed and until that is done, no conclusive recommendation can be made. 

The Auditor-General also found that the payment process for the contract with Dott Services Ltd, which undertook these works, was properly handled. Internal controls and financial accounting regulations were observed and adhered to - this is on page 48, paragraph 4 from the top.  

Mr Speaker, in response to the observation which was made by PAC; first and foremost, I was not availed the chance to see this minute. When I got annoyed and I demanded for this minute, the answer I got from hon. Tom Kazibwe was that, “these are our working notes.” I think that this minute is not even attached to the report. However, I was surprised when I went back and I found this minute where I gave my instructions to the consultant. I was very careful to say, “Quantify the works and take them back to the Ministry of Works for approval.” I think that is where my job ends. I thank you very much for giving me this hearing, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, just a simple clarification. The minister has tendered a minute. So, you attended as who, because this is the consultant chairing? Now, you were in attendance giving instructions, do you see anything wrong with it? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, that was policy guidance.   

4.19
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I am glad that time for the debate and disposal of the PAC report on the Auditor-General’s special audit on CHOGM has come at last. This is important because as I said in my communication to PAC in writing, our legal system, and indeed natural justice, demands that a person shall not be dealt with to his or her material disadvantage without being given adequate notice of what is being alleged against him or her and being given an opportunity to defend himself or herself.  

It is very crucial, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of this august House, that the work of public tribunals or inquiries is characterised by openness, fairness and impartiality.  I am glad that in the report, at last I found what the PAC really accuses me of. 

In my correspondence with PAC, copied to you, Mr Speaker, I did raise a number of legal issues which I believe are pertinent to the business before this House and to the functions of parliamentary committees generally. These issues are contained in appendices 1(a) and 1(b). I hope Parliament will address this. I will make reference to some of them in my presentation. I, however, will respond to the accusations in the report, the legality of PAC’s actions notwithstanding. I will handle them politically because that is what the accusations against me truly are.

For clarity’s sake, let me first state my understanding of the functions of a Cabinet minister. Generally speaking, the functions of a minister are, through Cabinet, to determine, formulate and implement the policy of Government under Article 111 of our Constitution. It is the permanent secretary under Article 174 that is responsible for the organisation and operation of the ministry or department and for the proper expenditure of public funds by or in connection with the ministry or department.

As a Cabinet minister, therefore, I do not engage in the detailed process of expenditure of public funds in my ministry or department. In this case, I did not have all the details of what public servants were doing until this hearing when I asked for and got details.

The implementers of the procurement of TETRA equipment in this case were from four different ministries. Each has its own structure of management and accountability and I hold no supervisory responsibility over them in the management of their individual votes; certainly, not over procurement of goods under their budget.

When I appeared before PAC, I went with my accounting officer, Ms Tekla Kinalwa, because principally, the work of PAC is, in accordance with Rule 142(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Uganda Parliament, the examination of the audited accounts of monies appropriated by Parliament.

It is, therefore, under Article 164 of this Constitution, the duty of the permanent secretary to account and relay all issues connected with accountability of public funds under his or her vote. The political leader comes in only if, as clearly provided for by Article 164(2) he or she directed or concurred in the use of public funds contrary to instruction and such use led to a loss.

Unfortunately, PAC dismissed the permanent secretary from the sitting saying that they only wanted to meet me. I was not asked questions by PAC that one could say were queries arising out of an audit report, because there were and indeed are no such queries relating to my role in the procurement of the TETRA Communication System.

Even if there were such queries, the Auditor General would have invited me to answer them. I have never been invited simply because there is not a single query about my actions in the whole process of procuring TETRA communication equipment.

Flawed as the PAC process may be, I have, as I just said above, chosen to respond to the allegations contained in their report. My response covers those points raised in the report that touch on my actions and the detailed account of what others did, for the information of this House and the general public. The PAC allegations are printed in italicised format and my responses to them are in ordinary font.

The first accusation is that there was undisclosed expenditure on security equipment and it says as follows, “US$ 5 million was spent by Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology outside the CHOGM budget for a “walkie-talkie system” for use by security organisations during CHOGM. This money was diverted from an ICT loan for the National Backbone Infrastructure Project to the Security Ministry. Walkie-talkie systems had not been included in the loan request.”

This finding by the committee is unfortunately wrong. On 28 March 2007, Cabinet approved the terms for borrowing to finance the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project. The components of the first phase of this project included, “Enhanced communication facilities to support the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in November 2007”. Please, see the letter to that effect written by the then Minister of ICT, Dr Ham Mulira, and an extract of the Cabinet Paper by Dr Ezra Suruma, the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in appendix 1(c).

Clearly, in the US$ 30 million, there was a component of US$ 5 million for this. Please see appendix 2 outlining the breakdown of that amount. On 5 April 2007, the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Fred Omach wrote a letter to Parliament seeking to lay the loan terms before Parliament, to seek the approval of Parliament for the borrowing of that money from the Peoples’ Republic of China. In the written brief to Parliament seeking authority to borrow from the China Exim Bank to finance the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project, the minister clearly stated in the loan of US$ 30 million that there was a component of “Enhanced communication facilities to support the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in November 2007”. Please read appendix 3.

On 3 July 2007, this Parliament passed the resolution authorising Government to borrow that money from China. Please see appendix 4, which is the certificate signed by the Clerk to this House, Mr A.M. Tandekwire, confirming that indeed, Parliament passed that resolution.

So, Mr Speaker, the Cabinet discussed and passed the loan. Parliament by resolution authorised the loan. So, to whom was this expenditure not disclosed? What was wrong in all this and if there was something wrong, how am I, Amama Mbabazi connected with and to all this?

The PAC report obviously has no answer to those questions. And why not connect each Member of this House, which authorised that loan? It is also obvious that there was no diversion; there was no transfer of money to the Vote of the Office of the President where the budget for security falls. The US$ 5 million expenditure was incurred by the Ministry of ICT as the PAC report itself clearly states on page 35 of this PAC report. PAC says the US$ 5 million was spent by the Ministry of ICT. In the same breath, they say it was diverted to the Ministry of Security. So, which is which? 

I invite Members also to note that not all the expenditure that Government incurred even for the purpose of making CHOGM successful, was covered under the special CHOGM budget line.

“Money not declared to the Auditor-General during a special audit of CHOGM contrary to the National Audit Act”. I do not know whether it was declared to the Auditor General or not. Declared or not declared, who was supposed to declare it? Certainly, not me. What I know is that the Auditor-General did audit that expenditure and submitted his audit report to the parliamentary committee on ICT. Could that have happened if there was no declaration of that expenditure? And for the forensic audit, the Permanent Secretary of the ICT ministry, Dr Pat Samanya, in his statement to Parliament, which was distributed to all Members of Parliament, says that in fact, the Auditor-General and I, “…indeed audited the procurement of the TETRA Communication System and made observations thereto.” Please, read page 2 of the permanent secretary’s submission to Parliament. So, where does the PAC derive its allegation from? There is no evidence to support it. 

2.4 Procurement of TETRA Communication System for “the security” did not comply with the PPDA regulations. Approval of the procurement method for the National Transmission Backbone and E-Government was granted by PPDA on 5 October 2006. It should be noted that at this material time, the request for a waiver included the TETRA Communication System under the NBI/E-GI project. A copy of that clearance is attached as appendix 5. 

“2.5 - The Minister of Security introduced for the first time ever the idea of US$ 5 million to the President at the meeting held on 12 September 2006. He claimed that he was communicating the result of a procurement process. This is not true, because he was contradicted by Mr Ochieng, who stated that there was no procurement process by that time.” 

First, the PAC contradicts itself, because on page 34 in the first paragraph PAC says, “Indeed the committee has seen a technical evaluation committee report dated 28 August 2006 where the committee, chaired by one Ibrahim Kaliisa evaluated expressions of interest in which Balton was evaluated with a quote of US$ 3 to US$ 4 million against Harris at US$ 4 to US$ 5 million; Huawei itself US$ 4 to US$ 7 million, ZTE US$ 4 to US$ 7 million. 

In this report, there was no mention of the US$ 5 million at all. But excuse me, in all of them, expect Balton, they have US$ 5 million. You just need to look at the PAC report itself; US$ 5 million is everywhere except in the Balton report. I did not tell the PAC that the procurement process had been concluded. But expression of interest is part of the process. Indeed, the figure of US$ 5 million was a mean figure of all the figures that the PAC mentions above.  Mr Ochieng also denies that he said what the PAC claims was his testimony, and by the waym if I said this and Ochieng said the other, why did the committee chose to believe Ochieng and not me? Please find hereto attached as appendix 6 a copy of the statement Ochieng made on his testimony to the PAC and I would like to invite colleagues to read it. He tells you the experience he underwent under PAC in Jinja. 

When I mentioned the figure – US$ 5 million – at the meeting with the President, I was mentioning what we, as the security committee had been briefed by the technical sub-committee to be the possible estimated cost based on the quotations given during the expressions of interest by many companies. I did so in a formal meeting the committee had with the President. I was doing so in my capacity as chairman of that committee. If the committee chairman did not report to the President in the presence of the other members, who would?

“2.6 The technical team returned an evaluation of US$ 3.2 million from Balton, but the minister raised it to US$ 5 million. Consequently, the minister, having brought in the US$ 5 million, Balton quoted US$ 4.9 million on 14 November 2006.” The answer to this particular allegation is as given in the immediate preceding paragraph 2.5. It is an allegation that clearly has no basis and is in fact wrong. 

The following, Mr Speaker, was a chronology of the procurement of the TETRA Communication System: 

a) 	The need to acquire a modern communication system 

In the special Cabinet sub-committee meeting held on 12 June 2006, the issue of additional funding for communication was presented, but the President directed the security sub-committee of CHOGM to use the UPDF Harris Communication System. While briefing the Cabinet sub-committee on security and security chiefs, the security technical committee was tasked to come up with a presentation on the utilisation of the UPDF Harris Communication System for CHOGM. After a thorough study of the UPDF Harris Communication System, the security technical team found that the system was interoperable; portables were inadequate and expensive. The team again identified and proposed the TETRA Communication System as the solution for CHOGM. The funding available on the CHOGM budget was Shs 901 million for procuring communications and was, therefore, inadequate to procure the TETRA Communication System. 

Dr Jude Mwanje, a communications consultant with the UPDF, was tasked by the President to look into this and give his opinion. It is against his advice and opinion that the President was convinced that the UPDF Harris communication System would not fully serve the purpose. Note that there was no contract signed with any company at this material time.  

b) 	Call for expression of interest

Fifteen companies were invited to express their interest to supply a modern digital communication system that would be used by security during and after CHOGM. Some of the companies that responded were Huawei Technology Uganda Limited, ZTE Corporation, Wilken Telecoms, Roko Technical Services, Balton Uganda Limited, Express Automation, Harris Corporation, Emcom Africa (PTY) Limited, Edge Communication and Nokia. 

c) 	Design of the system user requirements by the technical team

After expression of interest by different companies, the security technical team came up with technical specifications and system user requirements. A TETRA licence to use 380 - 400 Mega Hertz band was obtained from the Uganda Communications Commission.

d) 	Evaluation of companies that expressed interest to provide security communication systems

On 28 August 2006, the surety technical team held a meeting at the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs to carry out an evaluation of four companies namely Huawei Technologies Limited, ZTE Corporation, Harris Communications and Balton Uganda Limited. During this stage, it was assumed that the security communication system would ride on Government fibre to be constructed under the EGI/NBI – this is the E-Government Infrastructure and National Backbone. By this time, the companies had not been given the opportunity to carry out a physical survey. Please, see appendix 7.

e) 	Presentation of the technical evaluation report to the Cabinet sub-committee on CHOGM, security and security chiefs:

A technical evaluation report was presented to the Cabinet sub-committee for security and security chiefs on 28 August 2008. It was adopted as a working document and a basis upon which the TETRA Communication System was procured. A memo was made to the President explaining the results of the evaluation and the following recommendations were made:

i)	That a new communication system be acquired and the UPDF Harris system be used as a backup;

ii)	That the use of fibre optic be integrated in the acquisition of the communication system;

iii)	The financing mechanism takes advantage of available Chinese resources; and

iv)	That in the draft contract for Hauwei Technology to install the EGI/NGI Project – the provision for a communication system for CHOGM be included.

Note that at this material time, the Minister for Security communicated these recommendations as Chairman of the Cabinet sub-committee on security and security chiefs. Please see appendix 8.

f) 	Implementation team’s visit to the People’s Republic of China. 

On 1 September 2006, a steering committee set up by the President to oversee the implementation of the NGI/EGI Project, held a meeting and decided that an implementation team visits Hauwei Technology Headquarters and the Exim Bank of China to expedite the procurement process, which was CHOGM-driven.

An implementation team led by the then Minister of ICT, Hon. Dr Ham Mulira visited Hauwei Technologies and Exim Bank on issues regarding the procurement of the project and TETRA Communication System. Please, see appendices 9 and 10, for details.

g) 	PPDA Waiver. The procurement method for the National Transmission backbone and e-Government as earlier indicated was approved by PPDA on 5 October 2006. See Appendix 5.

h) 	Signing of the contract

On 11 October 2006, the Government of Uganda represented by Dr Godfrey Kibuuka signed a contract with Hauwei Technology Company Ltd with the following components:

i)	Phase One of Uganda e-government project main plan of national infrastructure of Metro Access Network for 28 Government departments/ministries and three Kilometre Metro fibre in Kampala;

ii)	Phase One of Uganda National Backbone Transmission Project of 168.5 Kilometres – five sites transmission backbone network and;

iii)	A dedicated telecommunication system for CHOGM, all at a contractual price of US$ 30,139,658. 

This contract makes the accounting officer of this project, the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of ICT. It also makes the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of ICT, the contract manager. I refer you to appendix 11.

i) 	Authority and instruction to the Ministry of ICT to undertake the procurement of TETRA Communication System. 

A letter was written, on 13 October 2006, to the Minister of ICT, on behalf of the Security Committee, informing him that the President was satisfied with the need to procure a TETRA Communication System for security agencies and to utilize funds under the Ministry of ICT not exceeding US$ 5 million. Please see appendix 12.

j) 	Tripartite Purchasing Agreement

On 14 November 2005, Hauwei Technologies Ltd presented to the Minister of ICT, an invoice of US$ 4,980,500. The issues of the invoice from the Hauwei Technologies Ltd was brought to the attention of the security sub-committee of CHOGM meeting on 20 December 2006, which tasked the security technical team to re-scrutinise the costs forwarded and also to cross-check with the Tanzanian Police, which had earlier procured a similar system.

The acting Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of ICT wrote, on 16 January 2007, to the Executive Director, PPDA attaching two ministry officials to assist the security technical team in the negotiation process between Hauwei Technology Ltd and Balton (U) Ltd, the sub-contractor, under terms of the Turnkey Contract for the EGI/NGI Project. Please see appendix 13. After several negotiations, the costs were reviewed downwards to US$ 4.5 million. 

On 10 January 2005, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of ICT communicated to AWYS Technology Ltd to initiate the procurement process of the TETRA Communication System for security. On 11 April 2007, under the main Turnkey NGI/EGI Project, Hauwei Technologies Ltd sub-contracted Balton (U) Ltd to supply the TETRA Communication System for security under the tripartite purchase agreement. Please see appendix 14.

On 27 September 2007 Hauwei Technologies Ltd issued a local purchase order to Balton (U) Ltd to supply and install the TETRA Communication System for security. It should be noted that during the negotiations, there arose two key issues: physical sites surveys and the backbone for the TETRA Communication System, which had not been included during the expression of interest.

In this procurement process, Hauwei Technologies Ltd, the main contractor of the Turnkey Project, sub-contracted Balton (U) Ltd to supply the TETRA Communication System, which Hauwei Technologies Ltd does not manufacture. Hauwei Technologies Ltd had submitted a CDMA Communication System, which was to ride on the service provider network, which was not accepted by the security technical team.

Under clause 3.3 of the main Turnkey Project contract No. OOF8000610060A, sub-contracting is clearly spelled out with its terms and conditions. Please, see appendix 15.

According to the procurement cycle, security was the end-user, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of ICT was the accounting officer, the Ministry of ICT was the procurement entity and the technical evaluation committee was composed of the security technical team and the Ministry of ICT staff who had been approved by PPDA. The contract manager was the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of ICT. 

k) Value for money

The allegation made by PAC that the cost of TETRA communications equipment could not have exceeded US$ 2 million is baseless and unfounded. When the issue of an invoice from Hauwei Technologies Ltd was brought to the attention of the security sub-committee of CHOGM meeting on 20 December 2006, the committee tasked the security technical team to re-scrutinise the costs forwarded and also to cross-check with Tanzanian Police, which had earlier procured a similar system. 

(The proceedings were interrupted by a power transmission failure.)

What has Hon. Nandala-Mafabi done? The security team indeed carried out the due diligence and checked with the Tanzanian Police. Please find the comparison in appendix 16.

The difference of the total cost between Uganda and Tanzania is on account of the number of items and quantities acquired by either side. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Civil Aviations Authority only procured TETRA encrypted handsets excluding the TETRA communication infrastructure at Shs 1.6 billion.

These TETRA handsets used security infrastructure; the masts, the sites, the towers, the backbone, the control station, the main control system etc. The total number of handsets bought by CAA and MFA was 100; Security bought 600. Logically then, how could anyone expect the main system to cost US$ 2 million?

Existence of the System

Contrary to the allegations made by PAC, the system was supplied by Motorola TETRA. It is also not true that the system was never purchased. PAC was at liberty to go and visit our command and control centre at the Police Headquarters and verify whether the equipment bought were not TETRA instead of relying on Radio Katwe website. (Laughter)

Since PAC failed or refused to do so, I invite honourable Members of this Parliament to visit this facility today or tomorrow or anytime you wish. Confirmation about the capability of the TETRA Dimetra Communication System can easily be accessed at that site; that address there, and I refer you to appendix XVII for details.

Listing of Uganda on the Internet

That Uganda is not among the countries listed on the Web, which bought TETRA is not a serious issue. We did not want to be advertised or listed on the Web because we got a security communication system. For example, Tanzania is not listed among the countries which bought the system yet it got it before Uganda.

Secondly, this depends on the report given by the supplier to the International Telecommunications Union after verification of performance and certification by the International Standards Organisation.

The role of the Minister in Charge of Security and security chiefs

The role I played as Minister in Charge of Security was to guide the security sector on all issues related to CHOGM preparations. I did not participate in the procurement of the communication system as clearly indicated in the chronology of events presented above. I brought up to the Cabinet sub-committee the suggestion that Uganda Government request the Chinese Government to finance the communications project from the Chinese credit line, which had already been agreed upon by the two governments. The sub-committee agreed and submitted the idea to the President, to Cabinet and to this Parliament, and all of them agreed. I did not carry out any act as an individual.

The roles of key players in the procurement process are the following:

1. 	The end-user was the security technical team.
2. 	The procurement entity was the Ministry of ICT.
3. 	The accounting officer was the PS, Ministry of ICT.
4. 	The contractor was Huawei Technology Limited.
5. 	The sub-contractor was Balton (U) Ltd.
6. 	The contract manager was Permanent Secretary of ICT.

It is true that later, the security sub-committee of CHOGM i.e. headed by Police, complained that the figure appeared to be high. However, negotiations between the main contractor and the sub-contractor took place leading to special discounts leaving the final contract value at US$ 4.5 million. 

It is not true that the Minister for Security raised the value of the system from US$ 3.2 million to US$ 5 million. I was not involved in any of those negotiations at all.

Note that US$ 3.2 million was a figure presented at the time of expression of interest in 2004, when I was Minister of Defence. At that time, the Minister for Security was a different entity for information of —

After evaluation by the technical committee and having come with system user requirements, the engineers from Motorola came and made a survey. After carrying out a feasibility study of our system requirements, the cost actually moved from US$ 3.2 million to US$ 4.96 million.

Secondly, the initial offer of US$ 3.2million was based on the availability of the government optic fibre. It was hoped that the fibre optic cable would be in place, hence the proposals were made on the assumption that the optic fibre could be used, thus reducing the price. This was never the case, as the programme for rolling out the optic fibre delayed and is even ongoing now.

Thirdly, it was not known by that time, how many masts, sites, handheld units and so on were to be used. All these had to be factored in. It is, therefore, not true that the Minister in Charge of Security unilaterally increased the price. There is no evidence that I sat and negotiated or increased the cost of the system. In fact, I never participated in the negotiations with any of the parties involved at all.

The assertion that the Minister of Security introduced the idea of US$ 5 million to the President the first time ever, therefore, does not hold. What he said was that the cost could be in the region of US$ 5 million given that the expression of interest of the different companies was in the range of US$ 3 million to US$ 7 million. Simple arithmetic for hon. Nandala-Mafabi. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “You run away from circumcision. That is the only problem.”] Wanyala nabbi.

Conclusion

i) A well constituted procurement committee in the Ministry of ICT handled the procurement process after a joint technical evaluation committee had finished its work. PPDA procurement procedure formalities and guidelines were followed.

There was no deal between Dr Ham Mulira and hon. Amama Mbabazi and the allegation against the two gentlemen is outrageous, incorrect and has a lot of falsehoods, which cannot be substantiated.

The cost of the system was neither increased nor inflated by the Minister of Security, but went up after considering other factors like system specifications, architectural design, number of sites required, installing or leasing of masts, generators, area of coverage, number of handsets, technology used, services offered e.g. voice services, data services etc.

The security sector never participated in the procurement process and its works stopped at the technical evaluation stage. Procurement and payment was the work of the ICT Ministry. 

Amama Mbabazi did not have any role to play in the procurement process of the TETRA Communication System. Mbabazi did not at any one time negotiate for the price of the system because he was not part of the procuring entity.

The money used to procure the TETRA system was accommodated in the NBI/EGI project and was passed in a resolution of Parliament contrary to the assertion by PAC that money was diverted to the security sector.

The security sector was only a beneficiary of the system after acquisition, but issues regarding procurement were the mandate of the ICT Ministry.

The project of NBI and EGI, which includes the Turnkey project for the communication system is ongoing.

ii) Let me address two other points in the report. The first is that I denied connection with Balton. Yes, Mr Speaker, my good brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked me if I had any relationship with Balton, if I knew any shareholder or director. I said I did not. I only know some of the officials in Kampala. But why should this be of concern to PAC? 

3. In the report, PAC claims that they discovered that I was related to one Susan Katono. Firstly, they did not ask me about it when I appeared before PAC because I would have told them that she is related to me. 

Secondly, even if PAC thought that Susan Katono or Balton for that matter had committed a wrong, they should have been summoned to be heard. 

I understand that Balton even wrote to PAC seeking audience to be heard. PAC refused and without giving them a hearing, condemns them in their report. Mr Speaker, I hope this august House will not allow that to pass. If I was to condemn hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the basis of the many reports I hear about him –(Laughter)- without giving him a hearing, how would he feel? Our Constitution commands that no one shall be condemned without being heard.

4. Was there a loss in the purchase of TETRA communication equipment? PAC claims that the payment of US$ 500,000 was unexplained and I quote page 35 of their report, “This, therefore, led to a loss of that amount which cannot be accounted for.” In the same report by PAC, they give the explanation that this money was paid to Huawei. Please find hereto attached appendiCES 18 and 19 – the PS Ministry of ICT states in his response to Parliament that Huawei accounted for it. So, where does PAC get its story from?

5. On page 42 of the report, PAC claims that Mbabazi and I, quote, “Instructed the Decorations Committee to carry out the decoration activity immediately and later seek for retrospective authority.” PAC, therefore, recommends that Mbabazi should be condemned for instructing - and I quote, “Instructing the flaunting of procurement rules.” I invite Members to read the referred to letter; it is appendix 22 – Z(a) is not there, but it is the last document on this one. Can I read it, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: No – the last one? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, it is the very last one. It is addressed to Hilda Musibira, the Deputy Head of Public Service, Executive Director CHOGM 2007 Secretariat, and the heading is “Decoration of key CHOGM venues” and it is dated 22 November 2007; it says: 

“Following the inspection of the International Conference Centre, Serena where the CHOGM opening ceremony is to take place, the CHOGM activities inspection team has observed that the place is not yet appropriately decorated.

We have been informed that the problem is with the procurement process. Given the importance and urgency of the matter, we strongly recommend that you ensure that the decoration is done immediately and then explore the possibility of retrospective procurement undertaking.

Sincerely Yours,

Amama Mbabazi
Minister in charge of Security/Chairperson CHOGM Activities Inspection Team.”

I wrote this as head of the inspection team. 

In performing our duties, we found that the main venue for the CHOGM Summit on the eve of the meeting, i.e. on 22 November, 2007, when the summit was due to sit on 23 November, 2007 i.e. the next day at 9.00 a.m., had not been decorated. We did not instruct, but recommended that they should use the PPDA emergency procurement provisions and have the venue ready in time for the summit. We simply did our job and that place was beautifully decorated thanks to our effort. (Applause)  

In all the things I did, we worked as committees and I never performed any task as an individual. So, why pick on me? I think this is a dangerous precedent that may stifle work by committees and should be studied carefully. 

Individuals should be held accountable for their individual actions and not for the collective work of committees. When you look at the whole report regarding my actions; first, I did not instruct any accounting officer to spend money contrary to the law or to instructions. 

Secondly, there was no loss; and thirdly, there is no query. To the best of my knowledge, I have not heard a query from the Auditor-General or even from the accounting officers relating to my actions. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I pray that this House rejects the recommendations PAC made against me because they have no basis in fact or law. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Regional Co-operation) (Mr Isaac Musumba): My documents are ready for circulation and they are with the clerk.

On Friday, March 12th The Daily Monitor published a headline story on page 1 that said, “Ministers used CHOGM funds for own roads.”

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. Friday of which year?

MR MUSUMBA: 12 March 2010. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Then put it there.

MR MUSUMBA: My apologies. On Friday March 12 2010, The Daily Monitor published a headline story titled, “Ministers used CHOGM funds for own roads”. The story stated that I, Isaac Isanga Musumba, had requested Works Minister, hon. John Nasasira, to help me work on Sserunkuma Road, a private line leading to Enkombe Apartments in Mbuya. 

It further quoted hon. Mafabi to have said, “These heartless people took taxpayers’ money for roads to work on their own road that had nothing to do with CHOGM. This is stealing and they are going to be summoned to explain”. 

Mr Speaker, I want to reiterate what the committee later found out that the Enkombe Apartments that are the subject of this article do not belong to me, Isanga Musumba, not even by one share. Neither do they belong to anybody I have a relationship with. From the records available, I can state that three people who are part of the Busingye family own these apartments. 

Mr Speaker, I know that the committee later made its own investigations and made those findings. However, I still want to lay on Table copies of the Certificate of Incorporation, Memorandum of Association, Articles of Association, which indicate the ownership - actually they are four people. The people who own these apartments are Mr Jack Busingye – (Interjections) – He died? I did not even know that! Jenina Busingye, Arthur Busingye and Dinah Busingye. I think because Jack died, now it is the three who remain to own them.

THE SPEAKER: You mean these are certificates of title?

MR MUSUMBA: The certificate of incorporation is here and the articles and memos of association. It is evident therefore, that those properties do not belong to me and they have never belonged to me. 

I do not leave on Sserunkuma Road, I do not own a property there - by the way, I do not even know the people who stay along that road. I therefore could not have had a private personal interest in proposing that that road be repaired. 

Mr Speaker, it is true that on 11th June, I wrote an official letter to the Minister of Works proposing that he looks into the possibility of carrying out repairs of a 1km stretch of road. It is also true that subsequently, I wrote a chit to him asking whether he had received the official letter on the matter of the road to those apartments.

My request however was premised on the following. On Tuesday, 12 September 2006 at 5.30p.m. at State House Nakasero, a meeting was held. This meeting was chaired by H.E the President and the ministers present were: hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. John Nasasira, hon. Rukutana and several government officials. At that meeting, it was stated as follows: “A hotel inventory taken showed that 3,014 hotel rooms were available. 1,190 rooms were still under construction. 802 rooms would be available from houses and apartments. A total of 5,000 rooms were therefore expected to be available for CHOGM 2007.” I beg to lay these minutes on the Table and I have circulated copies of this meeting.

At a subsequent cabinet meeting held on 11 July 2006 at 11 a.m. to which the following ministers attended: “hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. John Nasasira, hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Richard Nduhuura, hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Chekamondo Lukia and several other officials of government under minute – 
THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, why do you call it “subsequent”? Because you said on Tuesday 12 September, 2006 and you are saying, “subsequently, on 11 July, 2006” - that cannot be subsequent!

MR MUSUMBA: Okay, I meant to say at another meeting or at an earlier meeting; my apologies, Sir. Those ministers were present and in that meeting, the following was recorded on page 3 of the minutes: 

1.	Main focus of the subcommittee on accommodation is to identify hotels that will be able to host delegates.

2.	There are several hotels undergoing renovation.

3.	The Akright Kakungulu Estate has shown interest in hosting the Youth Forum while H.L Investments has shown interest in accommodating delegates. The committee is compiling a data base of all hotel owners and individuals who have expressed interest to vacate their homes for guests.
 
Mr Speaker, the theme “To identify and rent private residences”, was an official CHOGM policy. In fact, a website was set up for this purpose. This website was administered by a one Dr William Kalema and a one Ms Alice Katiti. 

Many home owners notified the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the availabilities of their properties through various means including phones, Internet, physical visits to our offices and so on. It is in pursuance of this policy that I got to know of the existence of apartments called Enkombe Apartments among other properties. Subsequently, I visited a number of properties including Enkombe and I found Enkombe in an excellent condition. 

Mr Speaker, when I appeared before the committee they asked me, “Why Enkombe”, and I invited them, “Can you go to Mbuya and see these properties?” Anybody visiting these properties would see why I found them appropriate as a place where we could put our guests. Even today, they are apartments in the first class nature. 

Therefore, when I went there, I released that these excellent apartments had a rough road – the road was good but at a certain junction leading to those properties it was very bad. I came back to the ministry and wrote an official letter to the Minister of Works. 

The PAC report on page 195 states, “The committee finds hon. Isaac Musumba Isanga answerable for influencing the construction of a road to Enkombe Apartments and yet the road was not on the list of roads designated for CHOGM.” PAC further recommends that thorough investigations by the IGG and CID be conducted to rule out, “Beneficial influence peddling on my part based on which the appointment authority should take appropriate action.”

Mr Speaker, there was no benefit to me, as Musumba, in proposing to the Minister of Works to repair a public road. How can there be? 

As a Minister of Foreign Affairs, my interest was to ensure that CHOGM succeeds, well knowing that if CHOGM had been a disaster, we in the leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would be the first to be called upon to account. 

We had to go the extra mile to ensure that CHOGM, which was under our mandate, does succeed. It is for this reason that when I did not hear from the Ministry of Works, and yet time was fast closing in to the event of CHOGM, I wrote a chit at a meeting, which I sent to him, to inquire whether he had received my official letter.   

I pray that on the basis of this submission, this House exonerates me of any wrongdoing and sets aside the committee recommendation. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to seek clarification from the honourable minister on one matter based on his page 3 of the response, where in the third paragraph he says, “Public Accounts Committee states on page 195 that, “The committee finds hon. Isaac Musumba answerable for influencing the construction of the road to Enkombe Apartments and yet the road was not on the list of CHOGM roads”. That was in the main report; then later he says, “PAC further recommends that thorough investigations by the IGG and CID be concluded to rule out beneficial influence peddling.”

After the first report, we had a hearing and we gave you a hearing, and then you explained. PAC amended its first recommendation, which was first stated above. Now, that overrules that. Now, the new recommendation is that owing to the mystery surrounding the selection of the Enkombe Road - we did not understand how among several apartments and roads in town this particular one was zeroed on. 

My clarification is, having withdrawn the earlier recommendation that you be held responsible, do you have a problem with IGG and CID investigating and ruling out any beneficial interest in that project?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I know that CID investigates where there is suspicion of wrongdoing. I know that matters referred to IGG are matters that are believed to be done by a government officer, which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Leadership Code, none of which is the case here. 

For that reason, I pray that this House exonerates me because there was no wrongdoing. (Laughter and Applause)

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, the report of the Public Accounts Committee based on the special audit report of the Auditor-General on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, on page 69, with regard to the issue pertaining to J&M Airport Road Hotel, recommends: “Hon. Omach Fred should be cautioned on overzealousness.” (Laughter) 

While holding the portfolio of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I, among others, was summoned for a meeting in State House Nakasero on 15 October 2007. The meeting among others was attended by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Acting Solicitor General, and the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, who was then holding the portfolio of the PS and Secretary to the Treasury. 

In the said meeting chaired by His Excellency the President, a request to support J&M Airport Road Hotel with US$ 3 million was made. My immediate response at the meeting was that given the timing and nature of the request, it was not possible to advance the company money in view of the tight CHOGM budget already approved by Parliament. 

However, the meeting subsequently agreed to support the J&M Airport Road Hotel with US$ 1.5 million and we were directed to immediately implement the decision of the meeting as time was of essence. In particular, that CHOGM was to be held on November 23rd to 25th 2007. On return to my office, I immediately embarked on carrying out the directive of the meeting in compliance with Article 99 of the Constitution of Uganda. 

Article 99 of the Constitution says: “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda.” 

Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I was doing. (Laughter) Everything that ministers administer on behalf Government must first go through permanent secretaries and when the permanent secretaries have done their work then the minister will append his or her signature, in accordance with the Constitution and the law. And all that I undertook are done by these people.

The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury did write to the Solicitor-General asking him to prepare a contract for Government to invest in the company US$ 1.5 million and to be signed by the Minister responsible; Finance. These appendices are given and the Attorney-General, under Article 119 sub-section (3) is the principal legal advisor of Government, and under Article 4(b) he draws and peruses agreements and contracts on behalf of Government, and these were done. 

Mr Speaker, I briefed His Excellency the President, on 26 October 2007 on the actions I had taken to implement the decisions of the 15 October 2007 State House meeting and my request to the Auditor-General, which had hitherto not been granted.

Under item No.5 of my report in this submission, a letter dated 26 October 2007 from His Excellency the President, which directed the release of US$ 1.3 million with immediate effect, was received by my senior colleague, the hon. Dr Suruma, who was back in his chair on 6 November 2007 - and I give it as appendix 6 - and he proceeded on 7 November 2007 to request for the opinion of the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, following the view of the Auditor-General that he could not issue a warrant of expenditure to a private company without the authority of Parliament. It is under appendix 6. 

On 12 November 2007, the Attorney-General advised that Government could provide equity financing to private companies subject to the usual requirements other than parliamentary approval, and this is in appendix 8, following which, my senior colleague then, Dr Suruma, on 14 November 2007, requested the Auditor-General for supplementary funding of US$ 1.3 equivalent to Shs 2.21 billion, and that is in appendix 9. The Auditor-General then gave his approval as per the letter dated 14 October 2007 and it is in appendix 10. And under Article 163 sub-section (6) of the Constitution, the Auditor-General, in the performance of his function shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority and I have given that letter. 

Under item No.10, there was, therefore, no overzealousness on my part, in my view, for I was performing the duties of my office and carrying out directives as per Article 99. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable, what is your understanding of overzealousness? Could it be high dedication to work? What did you understand? You seemed to have been pained by this recommendation. What is your understanding?

MR OMACH: My understanding is as a good cadre -

THE SPEAKER: But from your account it seems like it is high dedication to work.  

MR OMACH: I implement with speed and accuracy and I have done this in this Parliament over and over again -(Laughter)- but if Parliament wants me now to – 

THE SPEAKER: It is okay. (Laughter)

5.35
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a quick one to the honourable minister just leaving the Floor. I have followed his explanation but, just briefly, the CHOGM meeting was starting on 23 November, but on 15th, just a week before, a warrant of Shs 2 billion meant for a CHOGM hotel was being released. 

Now, before coming from the minutes of that, suppose the President was to tell you to just hit that wall, would you madly dash to hit the wall? (Laughter) Couldn’t you really, in your wisdom and guidance tell the President how futile it was for you to build a CHOGM hotel within less than a week? (Laughter) Do you just implement it? If he tells you to bang your head on the table, do you bang your head? Isn’t that being overzealous, honourable minister, which you are attempting to run away from? (Laughter) Reckless overzealousness, if I may put it that way.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think we can proceed on other business. 

5.37
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, hon. Omach is the Minister of Finance. Under Cap. iii, “Acquisitions of shares by Government from private companies”, it is very clear how to acquire shares. The law is here. If I could tell you, it is on page 2571. For purpose of your ease, I will quote a few of them: “For the purpose of determining the value of shares acquired under this Act, the minister shall appoint such a number of valuers as he or she may deem necessary. Payment of shares acquired by Government or other public bodies under this Act shall be made on the basis of the evaluation made by the valuers appointed under this section.”

We were buying shares and that is why they say -(Interjections)- the problem is that you have a problem of understanding. The Government or any other public body shall pay for the shares acquired under this Act, if possible, from the share of profit received by the government or any other public body for the company which they share as, and shall not exceed 15 years. The method of payment of shares is under Cap. iii.

Mr Speaker, I also want to draw the attention of the minister to Article 154 of our Constitution which clearly says that there is no money which should be drawn from the Consolidated Fund without the approval of Parliament or as prescribed by Parliament. We want you to help us to understand; how did Parliament prescribe this money you drew for investing in J&M? Because it is very clear the whole Article talks about no money shall be -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, in view of the fact that you are reading provisions of the law, and he has said he consulted the Attorney-General, don’t you think this is a proper question to the Attorney-General rather than to the lay minister, hon. Omach? And isn’t it the case that even the Attorney-General was here the other day and answered all the matters as a professional man? Isn’t it fair that you address this to the Attorney-General?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But what about the three days? To release money for building 300 rooms within three days! Isn’t that overzealousness?

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t you heard that even the Auditor-General came in and things were done? I think then we are going to assess the response. We are going to answer rather than himself analysing the response. Leave it to us – no, these people are competent to analyse and then make a conclusion. I think it is fair that way.

Any other response? No. 

5.41
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Apolo Nsibambi): Hon. Kutesa and hon. Nasasira will answer from 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 

MR SEKIKUBO: I will go by the Prime Minister’s sequence of minister’s, but I think we can give a chance to the Minister of Foreign Affairs since we have some more time.

5.42
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): As a matter of fact, I am ready to present my defence, except that I had not come with all the copies to give to Members.

THE SPEAKER: In view of this, I think we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow 10.30 a.m. in the morning.

(House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 November 2010 at 10.30 a.m.) 


